 
 
 
          Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
    
  IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
 
 
 
 
          WP No.71556 of 2017     
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Imran Maqbool, President, MCB Bank Limited 
 
Versus 
 
 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Law, Justice and Human Rights 
 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
Petitioners By: 
Respondents By: 
 
 
 
Division, Islamabad etc. 
    J U D G M E N T  
6.9.2018 
Mr.  Farooq  Zaman  Qureshi  and  Mr.  Riaz  Hussain 
Haleem, Advocates in WP No.71556/2017. 
Mr. Parvez I. Mir, Advocate in WP Nos.54146 and 
60723 of 2017. 
Mr. Nasar Ahmad, DAG along with Naveed Ahmad 
Goraya,  Senior  Law  Officer  in  the  office  of 
Respondent No.1.  
Mrs.  Samia  Khalid,  Addl.  AG  and  Mr.  Anwaar 
Hussain, Addl. AG.  
Amna Tahir, Respondent No.5 in person.   
 
 
Ayesha A. Malik J:  This  Judgment  decides  upon the  issues  raised 
in  the  instant  Petition  along  with  connected  WP  Nos.  54146  and  60723  of 
2017 whereby the Petitioners have challenged the jurisdiction of the Federal 
Ombudsman  for  Protection  Against  Harassment  of  Woman  at  the  Work 
Place  (“Federal  Ombudsman”)  while  hearing  a  complaint  filed  by 
Respondent No.5, Amna Tahir under the Protection Against Harassment of 
Women at the Workplace Act, 2010 (“2010 Act”). 
Facts and arguments 
2. 
The common facts are that Respondent No.5 filed a complaint, before 
the Federal Ombudsman, against Saqib Rasheed, Petitioner in WP No.54146 
and  60723  of  2017  and  Imran  Maqbool,  Petitioner  in  WP  No.71556/2017 
along with five other officers of MCB Bank Limited on 23.6.2017 under the 
2010  Act.  The  Petitioners  along  with  others  filed  their  replies  before  the 
Federal Ombudsman and raised an objection with respect to the jurisdiction 
of  the  Federal  Ombudsman  on  two  grounds;  firstly,  that  the  matter  stood 
decided by the case cited at PLD 2016 Lahore 433 titled “Salim Javed and 
WP No.71556/2017 
2 
others v. Federal Ombudsman and others” (“Salim Javed Case”) in which 
it  was  stated  that  jurisdiction  in  such  cases  lies  with  the  Provincial 
Ombudsman  and  secondly  that  Respondent  No.5  had  also  invoked  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Provincial  Ombudsman  and  therefore,  could  not  seek 
remedy before both the Ombudsman at the same time.  
3. 
Learned counsel for the Petitioners argued that Respondent No.5  has 
never  filed  any  complaint  against  the  Petitioners  before  the  Bank  and  that 
the entire proceeding before the Federal Ombudsman was filed with a view 
to  damage  their  reputation  and  to  blackmail  and  harass  them.  Learned 
counsel also argued that the Federal Ombudsman does not have jurisdiction 
in the matter and despite various different restraining orders from this Court 
she proceeded with the matter having no regard whatsoever of the orders of 
this  Court.  In  another  WP  No.54146/2017  filed  by  Saqib  Rasheed,  an 
interim  order  was  passed  on  24.07.2017  in  which  the  Federal  Ombudsman 
was  restrained  from  proceeding  with  the  matter  yet  despite  issuance  of  the 
interim  order,  the  orders  of  4.8.2017  and  24.8.2017  were  passed  by  the 
Federal  Ombudsman.  Learned  counsel  further  argued  that  in  the  instant 
petition,  repeated  interim  orders  were  passed  by  this  Court,  however,  the 
Federal  Ombudsman  despite  the  warnings  continued  to  proceed  with  the 
matter  and  ultimately  passed  judgment  on  18.12.2017.  Learned  counsel 
argued that this is in total defiance of the orders of this Court which attitude 
was  also  displayed  earlier  by  the  same  Federal  Ombudsman  in  the  Salim 
Javed Case. While relying on the said judgment, learned counsel argued that 
the  question  of  jurisdiction  has  been  decided,  therefore  the  Federal 
Ombudsman could not proceed with the matter.  
4. 
Respondent No.5 in person argued her case. She stated that she filed a 
complaint before the Bank, however, they did not respond to her complaint. 
She  then  filed  a  complaint  before  the  Provincial  Ombudsman,  however, 
subsequently  withdrew  it  on  22.6.2017  believing  it  to  be  a  matter  for  the 
Federal  Ombudsman.  She  then  filed  a  complaint  before  the  Federal 
Ombudsman,  who  proceeded  with  the  matter  and  at  that  time  she  had  no 
knowledge  of  the  Salim  Javed  Case.  She  argued  that  the  Bank  is  a  trans-
WP No.71556/2017 
3 
provincial  entity  and  as  per  the  law  is  governed  by  Federal  law,  hence  the 
Federal Ombudsman  has jurisdiction in the matter. She also stated that this 
case  is  distinguishable  from  the  Salim  Javed  Case, which  was a  case  of  an 
advocate whose offices are in Lahore, hence the court concluded that in such 
cases jurisdiction vests with the Provincial Ombudsman.  
5. 
On behalf of the Federal Government Mr. Nasar Ahmad, DAG argued 
that  the  Federal  Ombudsman  has  jurisdiction  to  entertain  all  complaints 
which  have  a  federal  character  including  complaints  of  trans-provincial 
organizations. He explained that the Provincial Ombudsman cannot exercise 
jurisdiction  over  a  federal  organization  or  its  officers  as  they  transcend  the 
provincial boundaries and can be transferred out of the Province at any time 
rendering the claim before the Provincial Ombudsman as redundant.  Further 
explained  that  the  Salim  Javed  Case  did  not  take  these  factors  into 
consideration as the issue was with a local advocate. He further argued that 
the  Federal  Legislative  List, Item  No.13  provides  for  Federal  Ombudsman, 
meaning thereby that if the subject matter in which a Federal Ombudsman is 
to  be  created  falls  within  the  domain  of  the  Federal  Government  than  the 
Federal  Government  is  competent  to  make  a  Federal  Ombudsman.  In  this 
case, the subject  matter pertains  to  harassment  at the  work place  for  which 
the  Federal  Government  has  ratified  several  international  conventions  and 
treaties. Furthermore in terms of the dicta laid down by the august Supreme 
Court of  Pakistan  in Messrs Sui Southern Gas Company Ltd. and others v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (2018  SCMR  802)  (“NIRC  case”), 
jurisdiction lies with the Federal Ombudsman. 
6. 
The  stance  of  the  Province/Respondent  No.3  as  submitted  by  Mrs. 
Samia  Khalid,  Additional  Advocate  General  and  Mr.  Anwaar  Hussain, 
Additional Advocate General is that jurisdiction vests with the Provincial as 
well  as  the  Federal  Ombudsman.  It  is  argued  that  the  complainant  has  a 
choice  of  forum  based  on  convenience  as  well  as  cause  of  action.  In  the 
event  that  the  organization  is  a  federal  organization,  the  Provincial 
Ombudsman can still hear the matter and present its recommendations to the 
federal government. Reliance is placed on Article 141 of the Constitution of 
WP No.71556/2017 
4 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (“Constitution")  to  urge  the  point  that 
the Parliament can make laws for the whole or any part of Pakistan and that 
the  Provincial  Government  shall  ensure its  compliance.  Further  argued that 
even after the Province adopted the 2010 Act in the year 2012, the 2010 Act 
still  holds  the  field,  meaning  that  jurisdiction  continues  to  vest  with  both 
Ombudsman. It is also argued that both the Federal and Provincial laws are 
beneficial legislation, hence the doctrine of convenience is applicable and if 
considered  necessary  the  place  of  occurrence  can  be  the  place  where  the 
complaint is filed.  
The law and its purpose 
7. 
The 2010 Act was promulgated as Act No. IV of 2010 and notified in 
the  official  gazette  on  11.3.2010.  In  terms  of  its  preamble  it  is  an  Act  to 
make  provisions  for  the  protection  against  harassment  of  women  at  the 
workplace. Harassment is defined in Section 2(h) of the 2010 Act describing 
certain  kinds  of  behaviour  and  attitude  to  be  harassment  because  it  causes 
interference  with  work  performance  or  because  it  creates  an  intimidating, 
hostile  or  offensive  work  environment.  The  law  is  premised  on  the 
fundamental  right  of  equal  opportunity,  for  both  men  and  women,  to  earn 
their  livelihood  and  in  furtherance  of  this  right  an  obligation  has  been 
created  on  the  employer  at  the  workplace  to  create  a  safe  working 
environment  where  both  men  and  women  can  contribute  and  work 
efficiently and safely without discrimination and harassment.  
8. 
The 2010 Act was passed in pursuance of Pakistan‟s obligation under 
the  Universal  Declaration of  Human  Rights  (“UDHR”),  the  Convention  on 
the  Elimination  of  all 
forms  of  Discrimination  Against  Women 
(“CEDAW”), the International Labour Organization Convention 100 (“ILO 
100”) which is the Convention for Equal Remuneration for Men and Women 
for Work  and  Convention 111  (“ILO  111”). Pakistan  ratified all the  above 
mentioned  treaties  and  conventions  which  provide  equal  opportunity  at  the 
workplace  and necessitate  a  safe  work  environment. The  2010  Act  extends 
to  the  whole  of  Pakistan.  It  defines  the  term  „Employer‟  to  mean  an 
organization,  a  person  or  body  of  persons  whether  incorporated  or  not  and 
WP No.71556/2017 
5 
includes  an  authority,  office  bearer  or  proprietor  run  by  the  Federal 
Government or Provincial Government. The word „Organization‟ is defined 
to  mean  Federal  or  Provincial  Government  Ministry,  Division  or  a 
Department, a corporation or any autonomous or semi-autonomous body and 
medical  institutes  and  faculties  established  or  controlled  by  the  Federal  or 
Provincial Government or the District Government or privately managed and 
includes  private  sector  organization  and  institutions.  The  term  „workplace‟ 
defines  the  place  of  work  or  the  premises  where  the  activity  of  the 
organization  or  the  employer  are  carried  out  and  includes  work  at  the 
premises  or  official  activity  outside  the  office.  Hence  the  2010  Act  is 
applicable  over  the  entire  gambit  of  workplace,  employer  and  organization 
including  all  employees,  organization  and  workplace  in  the  public  and 
private sector. In terms of Section 7 of the 2010 Act, the respective Federal 
and Provincial Governments are to appoint an Ombudsperson at the Federal 
and  Provincial  level.  On  5.1.2013  the  Government  of  Punjab  adopted  this 
law which is called the Punjab Protection Against Harassment of Woman at 
the  Work  Place  (Amendment)  Act,  2012  (III  of  2013).  Effectively  the 
Provincial  Assembly  adopted  the  federal  law  with  some  changes  so  as  to 
make it functional at the provincial level. Hence there is a federal law and a 
provincial law on the subject of protection against harassment of women at 
the workplace.  
9. 
The basic issue in these petitions is with respect to the jurisdiction of 
the  Federal  Ombudsman  and  the  Provincial  Ombudsman  and  in  particular 
whether Respondent No.5, Amna Tahir was to file her complaint before the 
Provincial  Ombudsman  or  the  Federal  Ombudsman.  In  terms  of  the  Salim 
Javed  Case  the  Federal  Ombudsman  does  not  have  jurisdiction  to  hear  the 
complaint  of  Respondent  No.5  as  the  matter  falls  within  the  ambit  of  the 
Provincial Ombudsman. The facts of the Salim Javed Case are that a female 
advocate filed a complaint against  advocate Salim Javed before the Federal 
Ombudsman.  The  respondent  in  that  case  objected  to  the  assumption  of 
jurisdiction by the Federal Ombudsman as it was  his case that the cause of 
action arose in Lahore, hence the Provincial Ombudsman was competent to 
WP No.71556/2017 
6 
hear the complaint. The opinion of the Court is that the Federal Ombudsman 
exercises  jurisdiction  only  to  the  extent  of  the  federal  capital  area  and 
jurisdiction in all other situations vests with the Provincial Ombudsman. The 
Court  concluded  that  the  federal  law  lost  its  federal  character  and  stands 
converted  into  a  provincial  law  after  the  18th  Amendment.  For  ease  of 
reference relevant paragraphs are reproduced hereunder: 
8. 
 
9. 
10. 
I  have  considered  the  arguments  addressed  at  the  bar  and  have 
examined the law. The fundamental constitutional cum legal question 
that  requires  determination  by  this  Court  is  the  scope  of  Article 
270AA(6)  of  the  Constitution  and  the  effect  of  the  omission  of  the 
Concurrent List on the nature and character of the existing federal law. 
In  the  present  facts,  the  Court  has  to  determine  the  extent  of 
jurisdiction enjoyed by the Federal Ombudsman under the Federal Act. 
In  other  words,  whether  Federal  Ombudsman,  under  the  Protection 
Against  Harassment  of  Women  at  the  Workplace  Act,  2010  can 
assume  jurisdiction  over  a  complaint  in  which  the  cause  of  action 
arose in Punjab or whether, in such like matters, the jurisdiction vests 
with  the  Provincial  Ombudsperson  under  the  Punjab  Protection 
Against  Harassment  of  Women  at 
the  Workplace  Act,  2012 
(“Provincial Act”) post 18th constitutional amendment. 
The  Federal  Act  was  promulgated  on  11.3.2010  with  jurisdiction 
extending  to  the  whole  of  Pakistan  under  Section  1(2)  of  the  Federal 
Act.  Constitution (Eighteenth  Amendment) Act,  2010 was introduced 
on  20.4.2010.  The  said  amendment  omitted  the  Concurrent  List  from 
the  Fourth  Schedule  to  the  Constitution,  thereby  enlarging  and 
expanding  the  legislative  domain  of  the  provincial  legislature  and 
more importantly reinvigorating the constitutional theme of federalism 
and provincial autonomy. The preamble to the Amendment Act echoes 
the  promise  to  establish  “a  Federal  ...  State  wherein  ...  the  Provinces 
have  equitable  share  in  the  Federation.”  Admittedly,  the  Federal  Act 
drew its legislative competence form entry 25 i.e. social welfare, of the 
erstwhile  Concurrent  List.  Post  18th  Amendment,  this  area  stands 
devolved  onto  the  Provinces.  Under  Article  270AA(6)  of  the 
Constitution, the Federal Act remains in force ( as a Provincial Act, as 
discussed  later)  irrespective  of  the  omission  of  the  Concurrent  List 
until such time that the Federal Act is altered, repealed or amended by 
the  Competent  Authority  (legislature).  Any  such  alteration  or 
amendment in the law by the competent legislature does not affect its 
continuity and the law continues to be in force, albeit, as a provincial 
law,  not  because  of  the  alteration  or  amendment  but  because  of  the 
constitutional  declaration  under  the  18th  amendment.  It  is  only  on 
repeal that the law comes to an end. 
The  Punjab  Protection  Against  Harassment  of  Women  at  the 
Workplace  (Amendment)  Act,  2012  (Act  III  2013)  has  amended  and 
altered  the  Federal  Act  (interestingly  retaining  the  same  title).  It  is 
actually  the  constitutional  declaration  of  devolution,  the  underlying 
constitutional theme of federalism and provincial autonomy under the 
18th  Amendment  which  has  metamorphosed  the  Federal  Act  into  a 
Provincial Act. Alteration and amendment by the competent provincial 
legislature  is  a  legislative  exercise  to  align  the  law  according  to  the 
WP No.71556/2017 
7 
wishes of the provincial legislature and has no bearing on the character 
of the law which already stands transformed into provincial law by the 
constitutional declaration on the promulgation of the Amendment Act. 
Considering  it  from  another  angle,  if  the  federal  law  under  Article 
270AA (6) can only be subjected to alteration, amendment and repeal 
by the provincial legislature, it means that the Federal law has lost its 
federal character and stands transformed into a Provincial law. What if 
the  appropriate  legislature  does  not  carry  out  any  amendment  or 
alteration in the federal law, it still automatically stands converted into 
provincial law and remains in force as such. This is also because with 
the  omission  of  the  Concurrent  List,  the  federal  legislature  loses  its 
legislative  fiat  and command over the  areas in  the Concurrent  List to 
the  provincial  legislature  and  as  a  consequence  the  federal  law  is 
deprived of its federal character. It is important to underline, that with 
the legislative shift from federal to provincial, the executive authority, 
under  Article  97  also  gets  realigned  and  changes  hands  from  federal 
executive to the provincial executive. 
The  Amendment  Act,  as  well  as,  the  Punjab  Protection  Against 
Harassment  or  Women  at  the  Workplace  (Amendment)  Act,  2012 
constitutionally  trims  the  Federal  Act  and  restricts  its  jurisdiction  to 
territories of Pakistan that fall outside the Provinces in terms of Article 
1(2) of the Constitution. The continuance of the Federal Act in federal 
areas  finds  support  under  Article  142(d)  of  the  Constitution  that 
provides that the Federal Legislature has the exclusive power to make 
laws  with  respect  to  all  matters  pertaining  to  such  areas  in  the 
Federation  as  are  not  included  in  any  Province.  The  territorial 
jurisdiction of the Federal Act under Section 1(2) extends to the whole 
of Pakistan. This geographical extent has to be pruned according to the 
the  18th  amendment.  The  best 
constitutional  mandate  under 
interpretational  tool  to  apply  is  that  of  reading  down.  Reliance  is 
placed  on  Messrs  Chenone    Stores  Ltd.  through  Executive  Director 
(Finance Accounts) Federal Board of Revenue through Chairman and 
2 others (2012 PTD 1815) and Nadeem Asghar Nadeem and others v. 
Province  of  the  Punjab  and  others  (2015  CLC  1509).  Therefore,  in 
order to  align the  Federal  Act  with  the  constitutional  scheme, section 
1(2) of the Federal Act is read down thereby limiting the extent of the 
Federal Act to areas which do not form part of any province. Reliance 
is also placed on Syed Imran Ali Shah v. Government of Pakistan and 
2 others (2013 PLC 143). 
The  complaint  filed  by  respondent  No.2  on  14.9.2015  is  based  on 
cause  of  action  arising  in  Lahore,  the  alleged  accused  also  reside  in 
Lahore,  therefore,  the  jurisdiction  to  entertain  and  hear  the  complaint 
of  respondent  No.2  is  with  the  Provincial  Ombudsperson  under  the 
Provincial  Act  and  the  Federal  Ombudsman  has  no  jurisdiction  to 
entertain  the  said  complaint.  The  impugned  judgment  dated  4.1.2016 
passed  by  the  Federal  Ombudsman  along  with  all  the  prior  orders 
assuming  jurisdiction  in  the  matter  are  hereby    declared  to  be 
unconstitutional, illegal and without lawful authority and therefore set 
aside.  The  complaint  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  returned  to 
respondent  No.2,  who  may  file  the  same  before  the  Provincial 
Ombudsperson, 
the  Federal 
Ombudsman  has  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the  complaint,  other 
grounds agitated by the petitioners need not be gone into.   
if  so  advised.  Considering 
that 
11. 
12. 
13. 
 
 
WP No.71556/2017 
8 
10.  The  findings  of  the  Court  are  based  on  the  understanding  that  the 
subject  of  harassment  against  women  has  devolved  onto  the  Provincial 
Government post 18th Amendment. The Court considered the subject matter 
of  harassment  against  women  to  be  covered  under  Item  No.25  of  the 
Concurrent Legislative List (“CLL”) being Population, Planning and Social 
Welfare.  As  the  CLL  was  abolished  by  way  of  the  18th  Amendment  on 
20.4.2010  all  areas  provided  for  under  the  CLL  devolved  on  to  the 
Provinces. Consequently the Court concluded that jurisdiction vests with the 
Provincial Ombudsman and only to the extent of the federal capital territory, 
jurisdiction  vests  with  the  Federal  Ombudsman.  We  have  considered  the 
reasoning advanced in the Salim Javed Case, however we are not persuaded 
by  the  same.  Harassment,  whether  verbal  or  physical  is  a  behavioral  issue 
that  adversely  affects  the  work  environment.  It  manifests  itself  in  many 
different  forms  of  unethical  and  unwelcomed  behaviour  which  renders  the 
workplace  hostile  or  offensive.  Hence  it  violates  the  right  to  a  safe  and 
healthy work environment. The right to work is a multifaceted right which is 
recognized under different international treaties and conventions for creating 
a  safe  work  environment  especially  for  women.  Article  23  of  UDHR 
declares the right to work and the right to favourable conditions of work as a 
human  right.  Article  11  of  CEDAW  specifically  requires  States  to  ensure 
women  have  equal  work  opportunity  and  safe  working  conditions.  As 
Pakistan has ratified these treaties and conventions it is obligated to protect 
the  right  to  work  and  to  ensure  a  favourable  work  environment.  Since  the 
2010  Act  was  promulgated  pursuant  to  Pakistan  obligations  under  the 
international treaties and conventions, the subject matter of protection of the 
workplace  for  women  falls  under  Item  3  read  with  Item  32  of  the  Federal 
Legislative  List  of 
the  Constitution  which 
includes 
implementing 
international treaties and  conventions.  It  is  also noted  that  harassment  laws 
aim  to  regulate  behaviour  and  attitudes  which  can  be  subjected  to  criminal 
punishment as well as civil liability. Section 509 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 
1860  (“PPC”)  criminalizes  behaviour  conduced  with  the  intention  of 
unreasonably 
interfering  with  an 
individual‟s  work  performance  or 
WP No.71556/2017 
9 
behaviour  which  creates  an 
intimidating  hostile  or  offensive  work 
environment. Therefore the subject of harassment at the workplace being a 
crime  under  the  PPC  means  that  Parliament  and  the  Provinces  both  are 
competent  to  make  laws  with  respect  to  the  crime,  procedure  or  evidence. 
Hence we find that the subject of protection of women from harassment does 
not fall under „population, planning and welfare‟ of the CLL, rather it falls 
under  the  federal  domain  consequent  to  its  international  obligations  and  to 
the extent that the subject relates to criminal law.     
11.  We  also  find  that the  Salim  Javed  Case is  not  applicable to  this  case 
because  the  issue  of  trans-provincial  organization  was  not  taken  into 
consideration  by  the  Court  in  that  case.  This  issue  was  considered  by  the 
august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  NIRC  case  at  great  length.  The 
term „trans-provincial organization‟ means an organization which operates at 
a  trans-provincial  level,  that  is  they  operate  in  more  than  one  province.  In 
terms of the NIRC case the federal legislature  has extra territorial authority 
to  legislate  on  matters  which  pertain  to  trans-provincial  organizations.  The 
Court  relied on  Item  No.13  in  Part  II of  the  Federal  Legislative  List of  the 
Constitution  which  provides  for  inter-provincial  matters  and  coordination, 
meaning  that  the  Federation  has  to  make  laws  relating  to  inter-provincial 
matters. Therefore in the NIRC case, the august Supreme Court of Pakistan 
concluded  that  the  federal  legislature  has  extra  territorial  authority  to 
legislate,  however  the  same  authority  does  not  lie  with  the  provincial 
legislature. The august Supreme Court of Pakistan also held that in order to 
preserve  and  regulate  a  right  which  transcends  provincial  boundaries,  only 
the Federation is competent to legislate on such matters and Item No. 58 and 
59  of  the  Federal  Legislative  List  provide  the  relevant  entries to bring it  in 
the federal domain. The Provincial legislature does not have extra territorial 
legislative  competence,  therefore  it  cannot  legislate  with  regard  to  rights 
which transcend its provincial boundaries. In the NIRC judgment, the august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  held  that  the  federal  legislature  is  competent to 
legislate  on  all  matters  in  order  to  discharge  its  obligations  created  under 
international  treaties  and  conventions.  In  the  case,  the  matter  involved  was 
WP No.71556/2017 
10 
with  respect to  trade unions  and  labour  disputes, hence it  was found  that it 
was a federal obligation created under the International Labour Organization 
Convention,  hence  covered  under  Item  No.3  and  32  of  the  Federal 
Legislative  List.  In  the  case  of  a  trans-provincial  establishment,  the  august 
Supreme Court of Pakistan held that the Federation is competent to interfere 
in such matters because trans-provincial establishments transcend provincial 
boundaries. Therefore we are of the opinion that the wisdom enumerated in 
the  NIRC  case  is  applicable  to  the  instant  case.  Where  the  organization  is 
clearly  a  trans-provincial  organization,  as  in  this  case  as  it  is  a  bank  with 
branches  all  over  Pakistan,  the  Federal  Ombudsman  is  competent  to  look 
into  the  complaint  of  Respondent  No.5.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  Federal 
Ombudsman  is  not  limited  to  the  federal  capital  area,  rather  the  Federal 
Ombudsman  has  jurisdiction  in  relation  to  all  employers,  organizations, 
institutions and workplaces which have a federal character or are established 
under a federal law or are directly consequent to an international obligation 
under  an  international  treaty  or  convention.  The  Federal  Ombudsman 
jurisdiction cannot be limited to the federal capital area and can be exercised 
all  over  Pakistan  over  a  federal  employer,  institution,  organization  or 
workplace.  
12.  The  question  which  needs  consideration  is  whether  the  Provincial 
Ombudsman  has  concurrent  jurisdiction  with  the  Federal  Ombudsman  on 
account of the  fact that  the harassment  committed or  complainant  reside  in 
the  province  who  sought  to  complain  before  the  Provincial  Ombudsman. 
Although Mrs. Samia Khalid, Additional Advocate General and Mr. Anwaar 
Hussain,  Additional  Advocate  General  argued  that  being  beneficially  both 
the  Provincial  and  Federal  Ombudsman  have  jurisdiction,  however,  we  are 
of  the  opinion  that  the  intent  of  the  law  is  to  create  a  forum  where 
harassment  can  be  reported,  inquired  and  penalized.  If  both  the  Provincial 
and Federal Ombudsman are given jurisdiction then there may be instances 
where the Provincial Ombudsman will have to deal with a complaint against 
a trans-provincial organization, or where the employer or the organization is 
federal  in  character  making  it  difficult  for  the  Provincial  Ombudsman  to 
WP No.71556/2017 
11 
proceed  with  the  complaint  or  to  impose  penalty  on  the  employer  or 
organization  since 
it  falls  within 
the  federal  domain.  Under 
the 
circumstances,  we  hold  that  if  the  employer  or  organization  and  its 
workplace  falls  strictly  within  the  territorial  boundaries  of  the  Provincial 
Ombudsman,  then  jurisdiction  vests  with  the  Provincial  Ombudsman  and 
where the employer or organization transcends provincial boundaries such as 
in this case then jurisdiction vests with the Federal Ombudsman.  To clarify 
we add that for the reasons stated herein we disagree with the findings in the 
Salim Javed Case that the Federal Ombudsman jurisdiction is limited to the 
federal  capital  area  as  the  Federal  Ombudsman  is  competent  to  hear 
complaints  related  to  trans-provincial  organizations,  institutions,  employers 
and workplace.  
13.  So far as the proceedings conducted by the Federal Ombudsman, we 
find  that  they  were  done  in  utter  disregard  of  the  orders  of  this  Court.  On 
24.7.2017  an  order  was  passed  in  WP  No.54146/17  directing  that  the 
proceedings  before  the  Federal  Ombudsman  shall  remain  stayed.  She 
ignored  the  order  and  proceeded  with  the  matter.  In  another  order  dated 
9.10.2017 passed in WP No.71556/17 she was again restrained, however she 
proceeded  with  the  case.  Thereafter  a  series  of  orders  were  issued  by  the 
Federal  Ombudsman  including  the  final  order  on  18.12.2017  without  any 
consideration  of  the  orders  of  this  Court.  It  was  only  when  the  Court 
restrained Respondent No.5 from proceeding with the execution of the  final 
order that the proceedings were stopped. We note that the Salim Javed Case 
categorically addressed the issue with reference to the Federal Ombudsman 
obligation and to obey the orders of the High Court. However, displaying the 
same attitude as was discussed in that case, the Federal Ombudsman (Justice 
(R)  Yasmin  Abbasey)  showed  no  regard  whatsoever  to  the  orders  of  this 
Court.  Under  the  circumstances  all  orders  passed  after  4.8.2017  including 
the  final  order  dated  18.12.2017  are  illegal  and  void,  hence  set  aside.  The 
complaint  of  Amna  Tahir  shall  be  treated  as  pending  before  the  Federal 
Ombudsman  who  shall  decide 
the  same 
in  accordance  with 
law, 
expeditiously, after hearing all necessary parties.  
WP No.71556/2017 
12 
14. 
In  view  of  the  aforesaid,  WP  Nos.71556/2017,  54146  and  60723  of 
2017 are allowed to the extent that the impugned orders and the final order 
dated 18.12.2017 passed by the Federal Ombudsman are set aside. However, 
the  parties  are  directed  to  appear  before  the  Federal  Ombudsman  on 
4.10.2018 so as to proceed with the compliant on its merit. The Registrar of 
this  Court  is  directed  to  inform  the  Registrar  of  the  office  of  the  Federal 
Ombudsman of the orders of this Court.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allah Bakhsh* 
 
 
   (AYESHA A.MALIK) 
 
    JUDGE 
(MUZAMIL AKHTAR SHABIR) 
 
 
            JUDGE 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
          JUDGE 
 
 
                      JUDGE 
