Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
W. P. No.221907 of 2018 
 
Rao Muhammad Sarwar 
Versus 
Returning Officer, PP-77, Sargodha & another 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of hearing:     12.07.2018. 
Petitioners by:  M/s  Rao  Fazal-ur-Rehman, 
Imran  Raza 
Chadhhar, Rabia Javed, Hafiz Muhammad Asad 
Munir,  Shafqat  Mehmood  Chohan,  Mian 
Muhammad  Athar,  Abdul  Quddus  Mughal, 
Sarfraz  Hussain  Bhatti,  Ch.  Ishtiaq  Ahmad 
Khan,  Muhammad  Asghar  Nadeem,  Zahid 
Pervaiz  Kahloon,  Ch.  Ahmad  Masood  Gujjar, 
Rizwan Zaka Gill, Syed Muhammad Ghazenfur, 
Rana  Shakeel  Ahmad  Khan  and  Mian 
Muhammad Irfan, Advocates. 
Dr.  Suhrab  Aslam  Khan,  petitioner  in  person 
(W.P.No.223044 of 2018).  
 
Respondents by:  M/s  Ch.  Imtiaz  Illahi,  Assistant  Attorney 
General,  Ch.  Umar  Hayat,  Director  (Legal), 
ECP,  Imran  Arif  Ranjha,  Legal  Advisor,  ECP 
and Naeem Sarwar, Legal Advisor, ECP.  
 
MUHAMMAD  SAJID  MEHMOOD  SETHI,  J.-  This 
consolidated  judgment  shall  decide  instant  petition  along  with 
following  connected  cases,  as  common  questions  of  law  and  facts 
are involved in these cases:- 
i.  W.P.  No.221518  of  2018  titled  Mian  Muhammad 
Akram  Usman  v.  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan 
through Secretary, Election Commission, Islamabad & 
others 
ii.  W.P.  No.221576  of  2018  titled  Muhammad  Ilyas  v. 
The Appellate Election Tribunal, Punjab, Lahore High 
Court, Lahore & others 
iii.  W.P.  No.223044  of  2018  titled  Dr.  Suhrab  Aslam 
Khan v. Appellate Election Tribunal. 
2 
W.P. No.221907 of 2018 & connected cases 
 
 
 
iv.  W.P.  No.222849  of  2018  titled  Zaiba  Ehsan  v. 
Returning Officer, NA-131, Lahore-IX 
v.  W.P.  No.223564  of  2018  titled  Muhammad  Sabir  v. 
/  Senior  Civil  Judge,  PP-246, 
Returning  Officer 
Bahawalpur-II, Bahawalpur & others. 
vi.  W.P. No.223312 of 2018 titled Syed Atta Ullah Shah 
Bukhari  v.  Election  Appellate  Tribunal  NA-158, 
Multan-V & others. 
vii.  W.P.  No.223482  of  2018 
titled  Sabtain  Ali  v. 
Appellate Election Tribunal, Lahore & another. 
viii.  W.P. No.221894 of 2018 titled Mian Ameer Hamza v. 
The  Learned  Returning  Officer,  PP-159,  Lahore  & 
another 
ix.  W.P.  No.223304  of  2018  titled  Muhammad  Shahzad 
v.  Election  Commissioner  of  Pakistan  through  the 
Secretary, Election Commission & others. 
x.  W.P.  No.223305  of  2018  titled  Muhammad  Shahzad 
v.  Election  Commissioner  of  Pakistan  through  the 
Secretary, Election Commission & others. 
xi.  W.P.  No.223281  of  2018  titled  Tariq  Mehboob  v. 
Appellate Election Tribunal, Punjab, Lahore & others. 
xii.  W.P.  No.223502  of  2018  titled  Ijaz  v.  Returning 
Officer, PP-115, Faisalabad & another. 
xiii.  W.P.  No.223699  of  2018  titled  Malik  Asghar  Ali  v. 
Returning Officer, PP-147, Lahore. 
xiv.  W.P.  No.222867  of  2018  titled  Syed  Ghulam  Nabi 
through  Election 
Shah  v.  Govt.  of  Pakistan 
`Commission of Pakistan, Islamabad & others. 
2. 
In  the  instant  as  well  as  connected  petitions,  petitioners  are 
candidates  from  different  constituencies.  Their  nomination  papers 
were rejected by the concerned Returning Officers inter alia on the 
ground  that  their  proposers  and  seconders  were  not  voters  of  the 
same constituencies, from where the candidates intended to contest 
the  General  Elections,  2018.  Feeling  aggrieved,  the  candidates 
assailed  orders  of  rejection  of  their  nomination  papers  before 
learned  Appellate  Tribunal,  but  remained  unsuccessful.  Hence, 
these petitions.  
3 
W.P. No.221907 of 2018 & connected cases 
 
 
 
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  petitioners  submit  that  the  certificates 
issued  by  the  respondent  /  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan 
(“ECP”)  to  the  proposers  /  seconders  regarding  their  antecedents 
are silent qua the constituencies, therefore, petitioners cannot suffer 
on account of negligence committed by the  respondent-ECP. They 
further submit that the Electoral Rolls were also not available at the 
time  of  filing  of  nomination  papers  on  account  of  unresolved 
dispute  of  delimitation  and  this  aspect  of  the  matter  has  not  been 
adverted to by the concerned Returning Officers as well as learned 
Appellate  Tribunal  while  passing  impugned  orders,  thus,  same  are 
not sustainable in the eye of law.  
4. 
Conversely,  learned  Law  Officer  as  well  as  learned  Legal 
Advisors  for  respondent-ECP  defend  the  impugned  orders  and 
reiterate the submissions made by them in the reply.  
5. 
Arguments heard. Available record perused. 
6. 
The  learned  Division  Bench,  after  hearing  the  preliminary 
arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  parties,  formulated  the 
following questions emerging from the lis in hand:- 
1)    Whether  it  was  not  the  essential  duty  of  Election 
Commission  to  provide  the  detailed  particulars  of 
proposer,  seconder  and  the  candidate  including  the 
number  of  constituency.  Apparently,  the  receipt  / 
certificate issued by the Election Commission is silent 
about the number of constituency and on the basis of 
this  deficient  information  provided  by  the  Election 
Commission,  the  petitioner  /  candidate  could  be 
considered  at 
rejection  of  his 
nomination papers? 
fault  entailing 
2)    Whether 
the  Election  Commission 
though  has 
completed the delimitation process on 03.05.2018 but 
had  it  provided  the  information  to  the  public  at  large 
through all the sources as required by law? 
The  matter  was  referred  to  the  Larger  Bench  by  making 
following observations:- 
“4. 
… Whereas on account of fresh delimitation many 
constituencies  have  been  bifurcated-shuffled  due  to  which 
4 
W.P. No.221907 of 2018 & connected cases 
 
 
 
into 
to  a  candidate 
even  the  voters-people  living  the  same  street(s)  according 
to  new  delimitation  have  been  divided 
two 
constituencies. This Court in such situation feels itself under 
legal obligation to answer, „whether any concession can be 
granted 
the  error-mistake 
committed  by  him  by  submitting  the  nomination  papers 
entering 
the  names  of  proposer  and  seconder,  not 
belonging  to  his  newly  created  constituency  on  account  of 
fresh  delimitation  whereas  in  the  previous  election,  they 
were  in  the  same  constituency  for  which  the  candidate  is 
now contesting the election.‟” 
rectify 
to 
7. 
Learned  Legal  Advisors  for  respondent-ECP,  in  order  to 
satisfy the Court that respondent-ECP was not at fault or negligent 
in discharging its duties within contemplation of the Elections Act, 
2017  and  the  Rules  framed  thereunder,  explain  that  the  final 
delimitation was published on 03.05.2018 in the gazette of Pakistan 
which  was  also  uploaded  on  the  website  of  respondent-ECP;  the 
area assigned to each N.A. and P.P. constituency was also described 
in  detail;  the  name  of  electoral  area,  Mauza  /  Deh,  Census  Block 
Code  and  Patwar  Circle  was  also  mentioned  in  the  electoral  rolls 
for the  rural  areas  while in  the  urban  areas, name  of  electoral  area 
and  Circle  number  are  clearly  mentioned;  the  relevant  maps  of 
extent  of  constituencies  and  relevant  electoral  rolls  guide  a 
candidate  about  the  relevant  constituency  for  filing  nomination 
papers; and it was the duty of concerned candidate to ensure about 
his proposer and seconder before filing his nomination papers, after 
checking  their  Census  Block  Code  and  Circle,  whether  they  are 
enrolled voters of his constituency.  
8. 
In  response,  learned  counsel  for  petitioners  contended  that 
due to fresh delimitation, many constituencies were bifurcated due 
to  which  voters  living  in  the  same  street(s)  were  divided  into  two 
constituencies  and  dispute  in  this  regard  remained  pending  before 
Courts  of  law  till  03.06.2018  when  Hon’ble  Apex  Court  finally 
intervened  and  directed  respondent-ECP  to  hold  the  elections  on 
scheduled date on the basis of existing delimitation already notified 
in  the  official  Gazette,  thus,  lapse  is  on  part  of  respondent-ECP. 
5 
W.P. No.221907 of 2018 & connected cases 
 
 
 
When asked, whether any dispute of delimitation pertaining to any 
of the constituencies of present petitioners was pending before any 
Court  of  law,  their  reply  was  in  negative,  therefore,  this  argument 
carries no weight. 
9. 
The  provisions  of  Section  60  (1)  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017 
lay  down  that  any  voter  of  a  constituency,  may  propose  or  second 
the name of any qualified person to be a candidate for Member for 
that  constituency.  As  per  the  provisions  of  Section  62  (9)(d)(ii)  of 
the  Act  ibid,  it  is  stipulated  that  as  regards  the  defect  in  the 
nomination papers, being not of a  material nature, such as error in 
the name, serial number in the Electoral Roll or other particulars of 
the  candidate  or  his  proposer  or  seconder,  same  can  be  remedied 
forthwith.  However,  no  substitution  of  proposer  or  seconder  is 
permissible.  Such  an  omission  /  defect  is  treated  as  substantial  in 
nature, hence, incurable as per the well settled principles of law laid 
down  by  the  Hon’ble  Apex  Court  in  Rana  Muhammad  Tajammal 
Hussain  v.  Rana  Shaukat  Mahmood  (PLD  2007  Supreme  Court 
277),  Sheikh  Muhammad  Akram  v.  Abdul  Ghafoor  and  19  others, 
Nadeem Shafi v. Tariq Shuja Butt and others (PLD 2016 Supreme 
Court 944), and Hon’ble Full Bench of this Court in Barkhurdar v. 
Appellate  Tribunal  / Additional  District and  Sessions  Judge  and 3 
others (PLD 2016 Lahore 101).  
 
In  the  case  of  Nadeem  Shafi  supra,  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 
Court has ruled as under:- 
“7.  …  Therefore,  there  can  be  no  valid  appellate  orders 
allowing  substitution  or  rectification  of  a  defective  nomination 
paper.  In  the  case  reported  as  Mudassar  Qayyum  Nahra  Vs. 
Election Tribunal, Punjab, Lahore (2003 MLD 1089)(full bench 
of the Lahore High Court), it has been held:- 
“The  unqualified  proposer  or  seconder  leads  to  the 
rejection  of  nomination  papers  as  provided  in  section 
14(3)(b) and, therefore, such a defect cannot be held to 
be not of substantial nature because such a defect can 
be removed only by the substitution of the proposers or 
the seconders and the safety valve has been provided 
6 
W.P. No.221907 of 2018 & connected cases 
 
 
 
to the candidates by permitting them by filing up to five 
nomination papers”. 
Whilst  the  aforesaid  finding  is  with  respect  to  the  equivalent 
provision  of  the  Representation  of  the  People  Act,  1976  we 
see no reason to differ from an eminently logical interpretation 
of the same. The same finding is therefore upheld with respect 
to Rule 14(7) ibid; it does not allow substitution of proposer or 
seconder  who  is  found  to  be  unqualified  to  subscribe  to  a 
nomination paper.” 
10.  Since it has not been shown that respondent-ECP was at fault 
in  performing  its  statutory  obligations  qua  provision  of  requisite 
information for public at large or defect in question had occurred on 
account  of  changed  circumstances,  which  were  beyond  control  of 
petitioners,  thus  the  omission  being  substantial  in  nature,  no 
concession can be granted to a candidate to rectify it by substituting 
the names of proposer and seconder in nomination papers. Needless 
to  say  that  where  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  with  the  intention  of 
settling  the  law, pronounces upon a question,  such pronouncement 
is  the  law  declared  by  Hon’ble  Apex  Court  within  the  meaning  of 
Article  189  of  the  Constitution,  and  is  binding  on  all  Courts  in 
Pakistan.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  Muhammad  Tariq  Badr  and 
another  v.  National  Bank  of  Pakistan  and  others  (2013  SCMR 
314),  Commissioner  Income  Tax  v.  Habib  Bank  Limited  and  ANZ 
Grindlays  Bank  PLC  (2014  SCMR  1557)  and  Shahid  Pervaiz  v. 
Ejaz Ahmad and others (2017 SCMR 206).  
11. 
In  view  of  the  above  discussion, instant  petition,  along  with 
connected petitions, being devoid of any merit, is hereby dismissed 
with no order as to costs.  
 
(Mamoon Rashid Sheikh) 
        Judge   
 
(Muhammad Sajid Mehmood Sethi) 
 
      Judge 
 
 
(Shams Mehmood Mirza) 
        Judge 
*A.H.S.*  
