Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.14030 /2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   JUDGMENT 
Malik Muhammad Bashir Lakhesar, Assistant Advocate-General 
Punjab   
vs. 
Government of Punjab etc. 
 
 
 
 
Date of Decision:   
Petitioner by:  
Respondents by: 
 
Assisted by: 
 
 
   
 12.11.2018 
Mr.  Muhammad  Ramzan  Khalid  Joiya  & 
Barrister M. Rehan Khalid Joiya, Advocates. 
Mirza Muhammad Saleem Baig, Additional 
Advocate-General. 
Mr.  Khalid  Masood  Ghani,  Assistant 
Advocate-General.  
Mr.  Wajid  Ali  Bhatti,  Assistant  Attorney-
General.  
 
Rana  Shaher  Yar,  Civil  Judge/Research 
Officer,  Research  Centre  Lahore  High 
Court, Lahore. 
   
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J:-  Through  the  instant  petition,  filed 
under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan, 1973 (the “Constitution”), the Petitioner has challenged the 
impugned  order  dated  11.09.2018,  whereby  his  services  were 
dispensed  with  and  was  removed  from  the  Office  of  Assistant 
Advocate-General. He has also prayed for release of his salary from 
May-2018 to onwards.  
 
A. BRIEF FACTS 
2. 
 
The  facts  tersely  revealed  from  the  petition  are  that  the 
Petitioner‟s  services  were  notified  by  the  Respondent  No.1  on 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            2 
23.06.2009; in pursuance thereof the Petitioner assumed his duties as 
Assistant  Advocate-General  at  Lahore  High  Court,  Multan  Bench, 
Multan  on  24.06.2009.  On  24.10.2017  while  arguing  a  case,  the 
Petitioner  suffered  severe  heart  problem,  therefore,  through  docket 
issued  by  the  Respondent  No.6,  the  Petitioner  was  shifted  to  Ch. 
Pervaiz  Elahi  Institute  of  Cardiology,  Multan  (now  Multan  Institute 
of  Cardiology).  He  remained  in  hospital  for  a  long  time.  He 
submitted repeated applications for medical leave to the Respondent 
No.5 alongwith the prescription slips from 07.12.2017 to 02.07.2018 
and  again  submitted  his  joining  report  to  the  Respondent  No.5 
through  the  Respondent  No.6.  Despite  that  he  received  order  dated 
11.09.2018  whereby  his  services  were  dispensed  with  w.e.f. 
07.12.2017. Hence, this petition.   
3. 
In  reply  to  this  petition,  the  Respondents  filed  report  and 
parawise comments denying all the allegations leveled in the petition 
and  praying  for  dismissal  of  the  same.  The  Respondents  have 
specifically  stated  in  the  report  and  parawise  comments  that  the 
Petitioner  has  never  taken  any  medical  leave  which  was  even 
sanctioned or approved by the competent authority.    
B. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PETITIONER  
4. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner,  Mr.  Muhammad  Ramzan 
Khalid Joiya, Advocate inter alia submitted that the Impugned Order 
is illegal and against the law and facts; that the same is not a speaking 
order;  that  the  Petitioner  has  not  been  afforded  opportunity  of 
personal  hearing,  as  such  there  is  clear  violation  of  principle  of 
natural  justice  and  Article  10-A  of  the  Constitution;  that  prior  to 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            3 
passing  the  Impugned  Order  neither  any  show  cause  notice  was 
issued  to  the  Petitioner  nor  any  information  was  given;  that  the 
Impugned  Order  has  been  passed  with  retrospective  effect  which  is 
illegal; that the Petitioner has been paid salary up-till May 2018 and 
the dispensation of his  services  was  made  w.e.f. 07.12.2017  as  such 
the  Impugned  Order  is  self-contradictory;  that  the  absence  of  the 
Petitioner  was  not  willful  rather  due  to  his  severe  health  condition; 
that  the  Petitioner‟s  applications  for  medical  leave  have  not  been 
considered  rather  the  Impugned  Order  has  been  passed  straightway. 
Learned counsel also contended that the absence of the Petitioner was 
not  willful  rather  due  to  unavoidable  circumstances,  as  such  severe 
penalty  as  has  been  imposed  vide  the  impugned  order  cannot  be 
made;  that  the  Petitioner  has  served  the  Department  with  due 
diligence,  therefore,  keeping  in  view  the  exigency  of  circumstances 
and demand of propriety, the  impugned order may be set aside; that 
the  Petitioner  has  appended  all  the  relevant  record  i.e.  medical 
prescription slips and history etc. which shows that the circumstances 
were  beyond  his  control.  In  support  of  his  contentions,  learned 
counsel  for  the  Petitioner  has  not  relied  upon  any  case  law  rather 
argued the case on the basis of available record only.  
C. SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENTS 
5. 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  Additional  Advocate-General, 
Mirza  Muhammad  Saleem  Baig  vehemently  controverted 
the 
arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  and 
prayed for dismissal of the petition on the grounds that the Impugned 
Order is result of continuous absence of the Petitioner from duty; that 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            4 
the  Petitioner  was  heard  personally  by  the  Headquarter  of  the 
Advocate-General at Lahroe but even then he did not bother to attend 
the  Office;  that  the  Impugned  Order  has  aptly  been  passed  with 
retrospective effect because the Petitioner was absent from duty since 
07.12.2017;  that  the  Petitioner  has  no  locus  standi  to  file  instant 
petition; that no vested right of the Petitioner was ever created in his 
favour  as  the  post  of  the  Petitioner  i.e.  Assistant  Advocate-General 
was  purely  a  pleasure  post  as  such  there  is  no  violation  of  any 
fundamental  or  vested  right;  that  this  petition is  not  maintainable  as 
the same cannot be filed to enforce his right; that the dispensation of 
service  of  the  Petitioner is solely  dependent upon the  prerogative of 
the  Respondents; that  the conduct of the Petitioner to  remain absent 
from  his  duty  for  such  a  long  period  and  that  too  after  affording 
opportunity  of  hearing  in  the  Head  Office  at  Lahore,  shows 
unwillingness  towards  performance  of  his  duties,  as  such  the 
Impugned  Order  has  rightly  been  passed  and  is  not  required  to  be 
interfered by this Court.  
6.  Mr.  Khalid  Masood  Ghani,  Assistant  Advocate-General  also 
laid  much  stress  on  the  point  that  the  Doctrine  of  Pleasure  is  a 
common  law  rule  and  has  been  adopted  in  Pakistan  through  its 
Constitution;  that  this  doctrine  has  its  origin  in  England;  that  the 
Doctrine of Pleasure is a special prerogative of the British Crown. He 
stated that in England, a servant of the Crown holds office during the 
pleasure  of  the  Crown  and  he  can  be  dismissed  from  the  service  of 
the  Crown at pleasure.  Hence, the tenure of office of a  civil  servant 
can  be  terminated  at  any  time  without  assigning  any  cause.  Even  if 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            5 
there  exists  any  special  contract  between  the  Crown  and  the  civil 
servant  concerned,  the  Crown  is  not  bound  by  it,  therefore,  under 
Article 140 of the Constitution of Pakistan, the post of the Petitioner 
is  a  pleasure  post  and  is  liable  to  be  dispensed  with  without  notice 
and he cannot claim reinstatement as a matter of vested right; that the 
justification for the rule is that the competent authority should not be 
bound to let any person continue in public service whose conduct is 
not  satisfactory;  that  this  common  law  Doctrine  is  based  on  Public 
Policy;  that  the  public  policy  is  that  a  public  servant  whose 
continuance  in  office  is  not  or  is  against  the  public  interest  must  be 
relieved of it. To strengthen his contentions, the learned Law Officer 
has  placed  reliance  on  the  case  titled  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Law, 
Parliamentary  Affairs  and  Human  rights,  Government  of  Punjab 
and  others  v.  Muhammad  Ashraf  Khan  and  others  (PLD  2011 
Supreme  Court  7)  and  M.  Salman  Faruqui  v.  Javed  Burki, 
Authorized  Officer,  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Water  and  Power, 
Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and another (2000 PLC (C.S.) 
717).   
7. 
Both  the  learned    Law  Officers  also  argued  the  case  on  the 
point  that  the  Petitioner  services  does  not  fall  within  the  domain  of 
„Service  of  Pakistan‟;  that  under  the  Constitution  the  service  in 
Pakistan  is  regulated  under  Article  240  of  the  Constitution;  that 
already  the  Hon‟ble  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  in  case  titled 
Shahzad  Niazi  v.  The  Election  Appellate  Tribunal    (PLD  2018 
Lahore 748) has held as under: 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            6 
“Furthermore, the „Service of Pakistan‟ has been 
defined in Article 240 of the Constitution which is 
reproduced below and is as follows: 
“Article:  240  Appointments  to  service  of 
Pakistan and conditions of service” 
240.  Appointments  to  service  of  Pakistan 
and  conditions  of  service.-  Subject  to  the 
Constitution, the appointments to and the 
conditions  of  service  of  persons  in  the 
service of Pakistan shall be determined- 
(a) in the case of the services of the 
Federation,  posts 
in  connection 
with  the  affairs  of  the  Federation 
and  All-Pakistan  Services,  by  or 
under  Act  of  [Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament)]; and 
(b)  in  the  case  of  the  services  of  a 
Province  and  posts  in  connection 
with the affairs of a Province, by or 
under  Act  of 
the  Provincial 
Assembly. 
From  the  above,  it  is  crystal  clear  that  “All-Pakistan 
Service”  means  a  service  common  to  the  Federation 
and  the  Provinces.  The  appointment  letter  of  the 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            7 
Petitioner  was  issued  by  the  Government  of  the 
Punjab,  Health  Department, 
so  obviously 
the 
Petitioner  was  serving  in  the  Provincial  Government. 
In  Article  260  of  the  Constitution  the  „Service  of 
Pakistan‟ 
is 
clearly 
defined 
that 
“Service 
of Pakistan” means  any  service,  post  or  office  in 
connection  with  the  affairs  of  the  Federation  or  of  a 
Province,  and 
includes  an  All-Pakistan  Service, 
service  in  the  Armed  Forces  and  any  other  service 
declared  to  be  a  service  of  Pakistan  by  or  under  Act 
of [Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)]  or  of  a  Provincial 
Assembly.”. In view of the same, as in the appointment 
letter  of 
the  Petitioner  it  has  specifically  been 
mentioned  that  her  services  shall  be  governed  by  the 
Act,  and  that  too  was  issued  by  the  Provincial 
Government,  therefore,  we  feel  no  hesitation  to  hold 
that the Petitioner was in „Service of Pakistan‟.” 
8. 
 
I have heard the arguments of both the sides and perused 
the record.  
 
D. MOOT POINT 
9. 
 
The  basic  point  needs  to  be  determined  in  this  case  is 
whether appointment of the Petitioner as Assistant Advocate-General 
is a „pleasure post‟ and can be terminated by the competent authority 
without any notice if he is absent from his duty. In order to thrash out 
the point and to proceed further with the matter, this Court intends to 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            8 
first examine the word „pleasure post‟ from the Constitution and the 
relevant laws. 
 
E. PLEASURE POST 
(i) 
Constitution of Pakistan  
10.  Under  the Doctrine of  Pleasure,  which  has  been  recognized 
under  our  Constitutional framework,  all  the  posts of  the  Advocate-
General  Office  are  held  at  the pleasure of  the  Government  and  are 
terminable at its will. However, the Pleasure Doctrine is a part of the 
special prerogative of the Crown in the United Kingdom and has also 
received the Constitutional sanction in Pakistan. Firstly;  
(a) Government of India Act, 1935,  
Under  the  Government  of  India  Act,  1935,  under  which  the 
Law  Departmental  Manual,  1938  was  made,  for  the  post  of 
Advocate-General  the  terms  „pleasure  post‟  was  introduced  in  the 
subcontinent;  the  relevant  Section  thereof  is  Section  55  (3)  which 
reads as follows: 
“(3)  The  Advocate-General  shall  hold  office  during  the 
pleasure  of  the  Governor,  and  shall  receive  such 
remuneration as the Governor may determine.” 
(b)  The Constitution of Pakistan, 1956 
Thereafter,  under  Article  72  of  the  Constitution  of  Pakistan, 
1956  the  post  of  Advocate-General  was  also  made  part  of  the 
Constitution as a pleasure post which reads as follows:    
“Article 72(1) The Governor shall appoint an Advocate-
General for the Province, who shall hold office Article 72 
(1) The Governor shall appoint an Advocate-General for 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            9 
the Province, who shall hold office during the pleasure of 
the Governor, shall receive such remuneration as may be 
determined  by  the  Governor,  and  shall  perform  such 
duties as may be assigned to him by the Governor during 
the  pleasure  of  the  Governor,  shall  receive  such 
remuneration  as  may  be  determined  by  the  Governor, 
and shall perform such duties as may be assigned to him 
by the Governor.” 
(c)  The Constitution of Pakistan, 1962 
However,  under  the  Constitution  of  Pakistan,  1962  although 
the post of Advocate-General was inserted yet the word pleasure for 
the post of Advocate-General has not been used. The relevant Article 
(Article 85) of the Constitution is as follows: 
“(1) The Governor of a Province shall appoint a person 
who  is  qualified  to  be  appointed  as  a  Judge  of  a  High 
Court to be Advocate General for the Province. 
(2)  The  Advocate-General  shall  perform  such  duties  as 
the Governor may direct.” 
        
(d)  Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973  
At  the  latest,  under  Article  140  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  the  Office  of  the  Advocate-
General is envisaged and the Governor appoints a qualified person as 
an  Advocate-General  who  serves  during  the  pleasure  of  the 
Governor/Government. The said Article reads as follows: 
“140.  Advocate-General 
for  a  Province.  (1)  The 
Governor of each Province shall appoint a person, being 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            10 
a  person  qualified  to  be  appointed  a  Judge  of  the  High 
Court, to be the Advocate-General for the Province. 
(2) 
It shall be the duty of the Advocate-General to give 
advice  to  the  Provincial  Government  upon  such  legal 
matters,  and  to  perform  such  other  duties  of  a  legal 
character,  as  may be referred or assigned to him by the 
Provincial Government.  
(3) 
The Advocate-General shall hold office during the 
pleasure  of  the  Governor  [and  shall  not  engage  in 
private  practice  so  long  as  he  holds  the  office  of  the 
Advocate-General] 
(4) 
The  Advocate-General  may,  by  writing  under  his 
hand addressed to the Governor resign his office.”    
From the above, it is apparent that the post of Advocate-General was 
always remained a „pleasure post‟ except the Constitution of Pakistan, 
1962.  The  work  „Governor‟  is  also  defined  under  Article  260  of  the 
Constitution as the "Governor" means the Governor of a Province and 
includes  any  person  for  the  time  being  acting  as  the  Governor  of  a 
Province. 
 
(ii)  The Law Department Manual, 1938 
11.  The Law Department Manual, 1938 envisages the appointment 
of as many Additional and Assistant Advocate-Generals as may from 
time  to  time  be  determined  to  assist  the  Advocate-General.  The 
Advocate-General under the said Article serves during the pleasure of 
the Government, and in line with that provision, sub-para (4) of para 
1.18  of  Law  Department  Manual  explicitly  mandates  that  an 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            11 
Additional  or  Assistant  Advocate-General  shall  hold  the  Office 
during the pleasure of the Governor/Chief Minister and may liable to 
be removed from the Office at any time without notice. 
 
(iii)  The Punjab Government Rules of Business, 2011 
12.  The  appointments  of  the  Additional  and  Assistant  Advocate-
General are made by the Chief Minister at his option and pleasure in 
terms  of  item  16  of  Part-I  of  Seventh  Schedule  of  the  Punjab 
Government Rules of Business, 2011.   
 
F. DOCTRINE OF PLEASURE  
13.  Under the Doctrine of Pleasure, all public officers and servants 
of the  Crown in the United  Kingdom  hold their appointments at the 
pleasure  of  the  Crown  and  their  services  can  be  terminated  at  will 
without assigning any cause. The pleasure doctrine is not based upon 
any  special  prerogative  of  the  Crown  but  is  based  on  public  policy 
and is in public interest and for public good. The basis of the pleasure 
doctrine  is  that  the  public  is  vitally  interested  in  the  efficiency  and 
integrity  of  civil  services  and,  therefore,  public  policy  requires, 
public  interest  needs  and  public  good  demands  that  civil  servants 
who  are  inefficient,  dishonest  or  corrupt  or  have  become  a  security 
risk should not continue in service.  
15. 
As  the  appointment  letter  of  the  Petitioner  in  this  case 
vividly  reflects  that  appointment  of  the  Petitioner  alongwith  other 
incumbents was made especially in the „Public Interest‟, therefore, if 
for  some  reason,  such  service  is  dispensed  with  by  the  competent 
authority, the same would also be considered to be done in the public 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            12 
interest as well. The notification dated 23.06.2009 for the appointment 
of  the  Petitioner  alongwith  other  Assistant  Advocate-General  clearly 
states  that  “The  Governor  of  the  Punjab  is  pleased  to  appoint  the 
following Assistant Advocates General, Punjab with immediate effect 
in  the  public  interest  on  the  terms  and  conditions  applicable  to  the 
post  of    Assistant  Advocate  General,  Punjab.”  Consequently,  when 
the  Impugned  Order  has  been  passed  in  the  public  interest  hence, 
where the public interest conflicts with private interest, the latter must 
yield  to  the  former.  It  is  next  added  that  under  Section  16  of  the 
General  Clauses  Act,  1897,  the  authority  which  has  the  power  to 
appoint a person shall have the power to remove him. For the sake of 
brevity, the said Section is reproduced below: 
16.  Power  to  appoint  to  include  power  to  suspend  or 
dismiss  -  Where,  by  any  (Central  Act)  or  Regulation,  a 
power to make any appointment is conferred, then, unless 
a different intention appears, the authority having (for the 
time  being)  power  to  make  the  appointment  shall  also 
have  power  to  suspend  or  dismiss  any  person  appointed 
(whether  by  itself  or  any  other  authority)  in  exercise  of 
that power.”   
 
G.  DISPENSATION  OF  PLEASURE  POST  WITHOUT 
NOTICE 
16. 
 
The  Advocate-General  as  well  as 
the  Additional 
Advocate-General  and  Assistant  Advocate-General  have  no  fixed 
tenure.  The  Advocate-General  and  other  Law  Officers  in  his  Office 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            13 
constitute lawyers-client relationship with the Government. The said 
relationship  is  wholly  different  from  the  relationship  of  the 
Government with Government servants inter alia because, they may 
serve in their positions so long as the Government reposes confidence 
in them and may be removed without any procedural formalities. By 
nature  of  his  appointment  and  functions,  an  Assistant  Advocate-
General has no vested right to force continuation of his appointment 
against  the  wishes  of  the  Government,  particularly,  when  he  no 
longer inspires confidence of the Government due to his long absence 
from service.  
17. 
 
It is pertinent to mention here that the appointment letter 
of  the  Petitioner  as  well  as  the  terms  and  conditions  of  his  service, 
appended by the Petitioner with the petition, vividly reflect that there 
are  no  specific  terms  and  conditions  relating  to  his  removal  from 
service etc., rather the terms and conditions mentioned therein relate 
to  his  privileges/remuneration.  As  discussed  above,  Clause  1.18  (4) 
of the Law Department Manual, 1938 states that an Additional or an 
Assistant Advocate-General shall hold the Office during the pleasure 
of the Government and shall be liable to be removed from the Office 
at any time without notice. As the post of the Petitioner is a pleasure 
post and his services were dispensed with on the basis of displeasure 
of  the  competent  authority  and  the  Petitioner  has  failed  to  point  out 
that  the  Respondents  have  violated  any  terms  and  conditions  of  his 
service, the appointment of Petitioner as Assistant Advocate General 
does  not  bestow  him  any  vested  right.  As  such,  in  absence  of 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            14 
violation  of  any  vested  or  fundamental  right,  the  Petitioner  has  no 
locus-standi to file this petition.  
18. 
 
Even  there  was  no  need  to  issue  any  notice  to  the 
Petitioner  by  the  competent  authority  before  his  services  were 
dispensed  with  vide  the  Impugned  Order  because  he  had  no  vested 
right  to  such  post  at  first  place.  Despite  that  he  was  given  personal 
hearing  at  the  office  of  Advocate  General  Punjab,  Lahore;  but  after 
that  he  again  remained  absent  from  office.  Careful  scanning  of  the 
Impugned  Order  also  shows  that  the  services  of  the  Petitioner  were 
dispensed  with  and  he  was  removed  from  the  post  of  Assistant 
Advocate-General without any stigma. Reliance in this regard can be 
placed  on  the  judgment  of  this  Court  passed  in  the  case  titled 
Muhammad  Yousaf  Javaid  Phapra  and  others  v.  Ombudsman 
Punjab and 121 others (PLD 2018 Lahore 269) wherein it was held 
as under: 
24.  From  the  above,  it  can  safely  be  held  that  there 
was no need to afford personal hearing before removing 
the  Petitioners  for  the  reason  that  they  had  no  vested 
rights to defend. Reliance in this regard can be placed on 
the case titled Nazir Ahmed Panhwar v. Government of 
Sindh through Chief Secretary Sindh and others (2009 
PLC  (C.S.)  161)  and  Abdul  Haq  Indhar  and  others  v. 
Province  of  Sindh  through  Secretary,  Forest,  Fishries 
and  Livestock  Department  Karachi  and  3  others  (2000 
SCMR  907)  wherein  the  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan has held as under: 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            15 
“The  principle  of  natural  justice  enshrined  in 
maxim "audi alteram partem" is always deemed to 
be embedded in the statute and even if there is no 
such  specific  or  express  provisions,  it  would  be 
deemed to be one of the parts of the State because 
no  adverse  action  can  be  taken  against  a  person 
without  providing  right  of  hearing  to  him.  But  at 
the  same  time  this  principle  cannot  be  deemed  to 
be 
of 
universal 
nature 
because 
before 
invoking/applying this principle one has to specify 
that 
the  person  against  whom  action 
is 
contemplated to be taken prima facie has a vested 
right to defend the action and in those cases where 
the  claimant  has  no  basis  or  entitlement,  in  his 
favour  he  would  not  be  entitled  for  protection  of 
the principles of natural justice. 
Principle  of  "audi  alteram  partem"  is  to  be  read 
into the relevant provision if the action is to affect 
any  vested  right  of  a  person.  If  this  rider  is  not 
placed for applying the principle of "audi alteram 
partem"  then  in  certain  cases  where  the  law 
demands that action must be taken promptly shall 
defeat  the  ends  of  justice  and  there  is  very 
likelihood  that  the  object  is  required  to  be 
achieved  by  an  immediate  action  shall  not  be 
accomplished and in the meanwhile a person who 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            16 
has  no  vested  right  shall  continue  to  enjoy  the 
benefits of the deeds without any legal entitlement. 
It  is  high  time  to  ensure  that  transaction  between 
the  individuals  vis-a-vis  the  State  are  just,  fair, 
open, honest and transparent. Therefore, action of 
individuals which is not honest and based on mala 
fides  may  not  be  allowed  to  exist  merely  for  the 
reason  that  the  principle  of  natural  justice  was 
violated.” 
25. 
 
Furthermore,  from  the  bare  examination  of 
the Impugned Orders, it is reveals that the same has been 
passed  on  the  basis  that  the  services  of  the  Petitioners 
are  no  more  required.  The  Petitioners  services  were 
removed  similicitor  and  there  is  no  stigma  on  their 
career/character. Therefore, the Petitioners have nothing 
to agitate before this Court through availing the remedy 
under Article 199 of the Constitution.” (emphasis added) 
 
19. 
 
Moreover, the  contention  of the  learned  counsel  for the 
Petitioner  that  the  Petitioner  has  been  condemned  unheard  is  not 
instructive. The letter dated 18.08.2018 reveals that when the pay of 
the  Petitioner  was  stopped  and  he  moved  various  applications  for 
medical  leave,  he  was  called  and  he  attended  the  Office  of  the 
Advocate-General, Punjab at Lahore and was given different options 
which the Petitioner promised to consider but despite that he did not 
attend the Office till date (18.08.2018) and remained absent from the 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            17 
Office. As such, the Petitioner cannot say that he has not been given 
any opportunity of hearing. Even otherwise reliance can be placed on 
the  case  titled  Justice  Khurshid  Anwar  Bhinder  and  others  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  and  another  (PLD  2010  Supreme  Court 
483) wherein it has been held as under: 
“Principle  of  audi  alteram  partem,  at  the  same  time, 
could  not  be  treated  to  be  of  universal  nature  because 
before  invoking/applying  the  said  principle  one  had  to 
specify  that  the  person  against  whom  action  was 
contemplated to be taken prima facie had a vested right 
to  defend  the  action  and  in  those  cases  where  the 
claimant  had  no  basis  or  entitlement  in  his  favour  he 
would  not  be  entitled  to  protection  of  the  principles  of 
natural justice  
No  stricture  was  passed  qua  their  eligibility,  integrity, 
entitlement, qualifications and besides that their removal 
from the office of Judges does not amount to be a stigma 
and  therefore,  the  doctrine  of  `audi  alteram  partem' 
argued  with  vehemence  cannot  be  pressed  into  service 
which  otherwise  is  not  universally  recognized  due  to 
certain limitations.” 
 
Further reliance is also made on the case titled Abdul Haque Indhar 
and  others.  V.  Province  of  Sindh  through  Secretary  Forest, 
Fisheries  and  Livestock  Department,  Karachi  and  3  others  (2000 
SCMR  907)  and  Nazir  Ahmad  Panhwar  v.  Government  of  Sindh 
through Chief Secretary, Sindh and others (2009 PLC (C.S.) 161). 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            18 
20. 
 
Furthermore,  admittedly  the  Petitioner  was  absent  from 
24.10.2017  when  allegedly  he  suffered  severe  heart  problem  and  he 
remained  absent  till  the  Impugned  Order  was  issued.  The  Petitioner 
has  appended  with  the  Petition  copies  of  the  medical  leave 
applications  alongwith  prescription  slips  which  do  not  bear  any 
endorsement  of  the  Respondents.  This  factum  further  bolsters  the 
stance of the Respondents that Petitioner filed aforesaid applications 
after stoppage of his pay vide order dated 23.05.2018. In addition to 
that  the  Petitioner  asserts  that  he  filed  aforesaid  applications  within 
time  but  on  the  other  hand  the  Respondents‟  stance  is  otherwise,  as 
such  a  factual  controversy  arises  which  this  Court  under  its 
constitutional jurisdiction cannot resolve.  
21. 
 
Moreover,  there  is  chain  of  judgments  of  Honorable 
Supreme Court of Pakistan wherein, long absence from duty without 
intimation  was  treated  as  gross  misconduct  which  entails  dismissal 
from  service.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Director-General,  Pakistan 
Rangers  vs.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  3  others  (2013  SCMR 
887), relevant Para is reproduced for ready reference as under: 
“4.         We have considered the relevant facts of the case and 
examined the material placed on record, which reveals that the 
guilt of respondent No.3 was proved from his own admission as 
well  as  from  record  and  it  was  in  these  circumstances  that  he 
was awarded  major punishment of dismissal from service  vide 
order  dated  3-2-2008.  The  Tribunal,  while  setting  aside  order 
of  his  dismissal  from  service  and  awarding  him  lesser 
punishment  of  three  years'  stoppage  of  increments  without 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            19 
cumulative  effect,  has  not  assigned  any  cogent  reason  for  this 
purpose.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  Tribunal  failed  to  notice  that 
earthquake had  occurred in the northern areas of the Country 
in  the  month  of  October,  2005,  while  respondent  No.3  had 
taken  leave  from  28-1-2006  to  27-3-2006,  therefore,  for 
remaining absent for a long period thereafter, no such ground 
was  available  to  him  and  exercise  of  such  discretion  by  the 
Tribunal is, thus, arbitrary, fanciful and not sustainable in law. 
5.         For  the  foregoing  reasons,  this  appeal  is  allowed, 
impugned judgment of the Tribunal dated 7-5-2010 is set aside 
and  order  of  the  competent  authority  dated  3-2-2008  of 
dismissal from service of respondent No.3 is restored.” 
 
22.        As  for  as  argument  of  learned  Law  Officer  that  office  of 
Assistant  Advocate  General  is  not  included  in  service  of  Pakistan  is 
concerned;  I  find  it  not  tenable.  The  Honorable  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  in  case  titled  Muhammad  Khursheed  Khan  v.  Returning 
Officer  and  4  others (1998  S  C  M  R  425)  has  dealt  with  similar 
question  and  has  answered 
in  negative,  with 
the  following 
observations: 
 
“5.  Thus,  pivotal  question  requiring  consideration  would  be, 
whether or not the petitioner during his appointment as Assistant 
Advocate-General was holding office of profit connecting with the 
affairs  of  State.  Undisputedly,  petitioner  throughout  his tenure of 
office had received salary and other benefits attached to the post of 
Assistant  Advocate-General,  Peshawar.  Learned 
counsel 
attempted  to  argue  that  payment  of  salary  etc.,  was  comparable 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            20 
to  retainership 
from  performing  professional  obligation, 
therefore, would not debar petitioner from contesting election. We 
do not find any force in this contention. Appointment of petitioner 
was  against  existing  vacancy,  of  a  permanent  post  having 
monetary benefits in the shape of salary and privileges of BPS-20. 
This is clearly an office of profit connected with affairs of Province. 
The  post  of  Assistant  Advocate  General  cannot  be  equated  with 
Advocate-General  which  is  a  Constitutional  appointment  under 
Article  140  of  the  Constitution.  Besides,  Article  260  of  the 
Constitution specifically grants protection by excluding said office 
from  service  of  Pakistan.  It  is  pertinent  to  mention  that  omission 
in  the  Constitution  provisions  cannot  be  supplied  by  drawing 
analogies as rightly held in the impugned judgment. With respect, 
it  is  observed  that  actually  precedent  cases  relied  upon  by  the 
petitioner do not help his cause, rather the ratio decidendi in both 
these  reported  judgments  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  a  person 
holding  office  of  profit  attached  to  the  affairs  of  Federation  or 
Province  even  on  contractual  basis  unless  expressly  exempted  by 
the specific provisions of the Constitution stands disqualified from 
election  under  the  provisions  of  Article  63  of  the  Constitution. 
Election  Tribunal  and  Peshawar  High  Court  through  the 
impugned  judgment  have  arrived  at  sound  and  proper  findings. 
We  find  no  infirmity  in  the  judgment  of  the  learned  High  Court. 
Leave to appeal is, therefore, refused and petition dismissed.” 
  
 
 Further  reliance  is  placed  on  M.  Ashraf  Khan,  Advocate  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  v.  Secretary  Law  &  Parliamentary 
Affairs and  Human  Rights,  Government  of  the  Punjab, Lahore 
and 19 others (P L D 2008 Lahore 312) for ready reference relevant 
para is reproduced as under:  
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            21 
“11.  According  to  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan,  office  of 
the Assistant Advocate-General is an office of profit and is included 
in  the  expression  of  Service  of  Pakistan.  According  to  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court,  office  of  the  Advocate-General  is  different  in  the 
eyes  of  the  law  than  the  office  of  the  Assistant  Advocate-General. 
The  appointment  of  the  Advocate-General  is  a  constitutional 
appointment,  whereas,  the  appointment  of  an  Assistant  Advocate-
General  is  made  under  the  statute/rules.  In  our  view,  the  same 
applies to the office of the Additional Advocate-General……” 
 
 
 
H. NO WORK NO PAY 
23.  So far as the second claim of the Petitioner that a direction be 
issued  to  the  Respondents  to  release  the  remuneration  of  the 
Petitioner  from  May-2018  to  onwards,  is  concerned;  in  this  regard 
the  specific  stance  of  the  Respondents  is  that  as  the  Petitioner 
remained  absent  from  07.12.2017  till  the  Impugned  Order  dated 
11.09.2018 is issued, therefore, his services were dispensed with and 
he  was  removed  from  07.12.2017,  as  such  he  is  not  entitled  to  the 
salaries and the salaries drawn by the Petitioner after 07.12.2017 are 
liable  to  be  recovered.  Learned  Law  Officer  also  relied  upon  the 
principle of „No Work No Pay‟. On the other hand the contention of 
the  Petitioner  is  that  once  a  benefit  has  been  given  that  cannot  be 
rescinded  at  belated  stage.  In  light  of  prevailing  circumstances, 
admittedly  the  Petitioner  did  not  attend  the  Office  and  remained 
absent, therefore, the principle of „No Work No Pay‟ duly applies to 
him  and  he  is  no  more  entitled  to  draw  his  salary.  However,  to  the 
extent  of  recovery  of  salaries  drawn  by  the  Petitioner  during  the 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            22 
intervening  period  from  his  absence  till  the  date  of  the  Impugned 
Order,  the  Respondents  are  at  liberty  to  proceed  in  accordance  with 
law.     
 
I. ANALYSIS 
24.  A  discreet  analysis  of  above  stated  circumstances  reveals  that 
the  Petitioner  has  no  locus  standi  to  file  instant  petition;  that  no 
vested  right  of  the  Petitioner  was  ever  created  in  his  favour  as  the 
post  of  the  Petitioner  i.e.  Assistant  Advocate-General  was  purely  a 
pleasure  post  as  such  there  is  no  violation  of  any  fundamental  or 
vested  right.  The  doctrine  of  pleasure  post  is  not  based  upon  any 
special prerogative of the Crown but is based on public policy and is 
in public interest and for public good.  
 25. 
As  the  appointment  letter  of  the  Petitioner  vividly  reflects 
that  appointment  of  the  Petitioner  along  with  other  incumbents  was 
made especially in the „Public Interest‟, therefore, if for some reason, 
such  service  is  dispensed  with  by  the  competent  authority,  the  same 
would  also  be  considered  to  be  done  in  the  public  interest  as  well. 
Consequently,  when  the  Impugned  Order  has  been  passed  in  the 
public interest and if public interest conflicts with private interest, the 
latter  must  yield  to  the  former.  By  nature  of  his  appointment  and 
functions, an Assistant Advocate-General has no vested right to force 
continuation  of  his  appointment  against 
the  wishes  of 
the 
Government,  particularly,  when  he  no  longer  inspires  confidence  of 
the Government due to his long absence from service.  
 
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            23 
26.  The Impugned Order dated 11.09.2018 is the result of long and 
continuous  absence  of  the  Petitioner  from  duty;  that  the  Petitioner 
was  heard  personally  by  the  Headquarter  but  even  then  he  did  not 
bother  to  attend  the  Office.  Even  there  was  no  need  to  issue  any 
notice to the Petitioner by the competent authority before his services 
were  dispensed  with  as  stated  in  sub-para  (4)  of  para  1.18  of  Law 
Department Manual; which explicitly mandates that an Additional or 
Assistant Advocate-General shall hold the Office during the pleasure 
of  the  Governor/Chief  Minister  and  may  liable  to  be  removed  from 
the  Office  at  any  time  without  notice.  Despite  that  he  was  given 
personal hearing at the office of Advocate General Punjab, Lahore. I 
am  of  the  view  that  long  and  continuous  absence  of  Petitioner  from 
duty is to be treated as gross misconduct which entails removal from 
service.  
27.  A  careful  scanning  of  the  Impugned  Order  dated  11.09.2018 
also  reveals  that  the  services  of  the  Petitioner  were  dispensed  with 
and  he  was  removed  from  the  post  of  Assistant  Advocate-General 
without  any  stigma;  therefore,  the  doctrine  of  `audi  alteram  partem' 
argued  by  the  Petitioner  with  vehemence  cannot  be  pressed  into 
service.       
 
28.  As  far  as 
the  Petitioner‟s  claim  regarding  release  of 
remuneration from  May-2018 to onwards, is concerned; suffice  it to 
say  that  since  Petitioner  remained  absent  from  07.12.2017  till  the 
Impugned Order dated 11.09.2018; therefore he is neither entitled to 
the  future  salaries  nor  to  the  salaries  drawn  by  the  Petitioner  after 
07.12.2017 based upon the principle of „No Work No Pay‟.     
W.P. No.14030 of 2018   
 
            24 
 
29. 
In  view  of  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the  Petitioner  has 
failed  to  make  out  a  case  calling  for  interference  by  this  Court  in 
Constitutional  jurisdiction.  Consequently,  this  petition,  being  bereft 
of any force, is hereby dismissed.  
 
 
                                  (JAWAD HASSAN) 
                               JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*M.NAVEED* 
 
 
 
 
 
