                    
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
RAWALPINDI BENCH 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 
JUDGMENT: 
R.F.A. No.153 of 2015. 
  Malik Muhammad Ijaz 
VERSUS 
     Pakistan through Secretary Defense  
Islamabad etc. 
 
        Date of hearing…18.01.2018. 
               Shams  Mehmood  Mirza,  J:-This 
appeal  is  filed  under  section  54  of  the  Land 
Acquisition  Act,  1894  (the  Act)  challenges 
judgment  and  decree  dated  27.06.2015  passed  by 
the  trial  court  whereby  the  reference  filed  by  the 
appellant  for  enhancement  of  compensation  was 
dismissed. 
2. 
Facts  of  the  case  in  brief  are  that  the 
Collector  through  Notification  dated  21.10.1990 
issued  under  section  4  of  the  Act  acquired  land 
measuring  169  Kanals  10  Marlas  for  the  purpose 
of  extension  of 
technical  area,  PAC  Kamra 
Cantonment,  which  included  land  measuring  22 
Kanal  4  Marla  owned  by  the  appellant.  After 
completing  the  process  requirements,  award  dated 
22.01.1994 was announced granting compensation 
to the  appellant  as per  the  following  classification 
of land: 
(i)  Rs.18664/- per Kanal for Chahi 
(ii)  Rs.6730.77 per Kanal for Maira/Rakkar 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~2~ 
(iii)  Rs.1862.69 per Kanal for Ghair Mumkin 
 
Feeling  dissatisfied  by 
the  amount  of 
compensation, the appellant along with other persons 
filed reference application before the trial court under 
section  18  of  the  Act  claiming  enhancement  in  the 
amount of compensation in the following manner: 
a.  Chahi Rs.80,000/- per Kanal 
b.  Maira/Rakkar Rs.60,000/- per Kanal 
c.  Ghair Mumkin Rs.13,000 per Kanal 
 
3. 
In  the  first  round  of  litigation,  the  referee 
court  through  its  consolidated  judgment  and  decree 
dated 21.10.1997 after evaluating the evidence of the 
parties  found  in  favour  of  the  appellant  and  other 
petitioners by declaring them entitled to receive, inter 
alia,  Rs.33,000/- 
for  Maira/Rakkar 
land.  The 
respondents  filed  appeals  against  the  judgment  and 
decree  which  were  accepted  and  the  matter  was 
remanded to the  referee  court  for decision  afresh. In 
the  second  round  of  litigation,  the  referee  court 
dismissed  all  the  reference  applications  though 
consolidated  judgment  and  decree  dated  21.12.2002 
by  holding  that  the  petitioners  did  not  adduce  any 
evidence including one year average sale price of the 
land in question. This judgment and decree was once 
again challenged by the appellant by filing an appeal 
before  this  Court  (RFA  No.50  of  2004)  which  was 
allowed on 20.05.2015 and the matter was remanded 
by this Court on the ground that the referee court did 
not  discuss  the  evidence  of  the  parties,  oral  or 
documentary.  
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~3~ 
4. 
The following issues were framed by the trial 
court: 
ISSUES: 
1.  Whether the suit is time barred? 
2.  Whether  the  plaintiff  is  estopped  by 
his  words  and  conduct  to  file  the 
present petition? 
3.  Whether  the  petition  is  bad  for  non- 
joinder of necessary parties? 
4.  Whether the compensation of the suit 
property  as  assessed  by  the  Land 
Acquisition  Collector 
is  wrong, 
illegal,  incorrect,  if  so  what  is  the 
correct compensation? 
5.  Relief 
 
The trial court after evaluating the evidence of 
the  parties  once  again  dismissed  the  reference 
application, hence this appeal. 
5. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  frankly 
conceded  that  the  evidence  was  led  by  the  appellant 
only in respect of Maira Rakkar land in the shape of 
three  mutations  (Exh.P-21,  No.22  and  Exh.P-25) 
which  show  land  of  identical  nature  in  the  village 
Sulman  Makhan  was 
sold 
for  Rs.30,000/-, 
Rs.35,000/- and Rs.28,000/- per Kanal in the months 
of June  and July  1990. He  also referred  to  an  award 
in respect of land acquired in village was stated in the 
award  that  village  Suleman  Makhan  and  village 
Shamsabad  were  at  the  similar  tract.  It  was  thus 
argued  that  this  vital  piece  of  evidence  was  once 
again ignored by the trial court while dismissing the 
reference application filed by the appellant.  
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~4~ 
6. 
Learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of 
respondents,  on  the  other  hand,  supported  the 
judgment and decree passed by the trial court. 
7. 
8. 
Arguments heard and record perused.  
The  most  relevant  issue  is  issue  No.4  on 
which  the  impugned  findings  were  rendered  by  trial 
court. 
9. 
The relevant portion of the judgment dealing 
with the exhibits in question reads as under: 
The  appellant  did  not  produce  AKS  Shajra 
pertaining  to  the  acquired  Khasras  and 
pertaining  to  khasras  mentioned  in  the 
above  mentioned  mutations  in  order  to 
prove  that  whether  acquired  khasras  and 
khasras  mentioned 
in  above  mentioned 
mutations were situated near to each other 
or  adjacent  with  each  other.  Naturally  in  a 
Mouza  different  properties  situate  at 
difference  places.  Some  properties  have 
less value and some properties situate near 
town, market, commercial area have higher 
value,  so  it  was  the  responsibility  and  duty 
of  the  appellant  to  prove  that  acquired 
property  was  situated  near  the  places 
where  properties  of  the  relied  mutations 
were  situated.  So  mere  production  of  said 
mutations  does  not  prove  that  property  of 
the 
properly 
compensated by the L.A.C. 
 
appellant  was 
not 
10. 
In  our  opinion,  the  trial  court  completely 
misdirected  itself  in  arriving  at  the  aforementioned 
conclusion  by  excluding  from  its  consideration  the 
evidence  led  by  the  appellant.  It  is  established  law 
that  onus  to  prove  the  issue  shifts  once  prima  facie 
evidence  is  led  by  the  plaintiff.  In  this  case,  the 
appellant  tendered  in  evidence  Exh.P-21,  No.22  and 
Exh.P-25  which  were  mutations  of  the  comparable 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~5~ 
land  in  the  same  village.  The  respondents,  on  the 
other  hand,  did  not  produce  in  evidence  the  Halqa 
Patwari and also did not establish the basis on which 
average  price  of  land  was  determined  by  the  Land 
Acquisition Collector. This aspect of the matter shall 
be dealt with in the later part of this judgment as also 
the  question  of  framing  of  issue  with  regard  to  the 
determining  the  fair  market  value  of  the  acquired 
land. 
11. 
The  trial  court  only  looked  at  the  evidence 
led  by  the  appellant  and  decided  issue  No.4  without 
adverting to the fact that the appellant had led prima 
facie  evidence  in  support  of  the  averments  made  in 
the  reference  application  which  was  enough  to  shift 
the  onus  on  the  respondents.  It  was  not  appreciated 
by  the  trial  court  that  the  respondents  did  not  lead 
any  evidence  to  prove  those  circumstances,  if  any, 
which  would  disentitle  the  plaintiff  to  the  relief  he 
was claiming.  
12. 
It  is  often  observed  that  the  trial  court 
approaches  the  issue  of  compensation  raised  in  a 
reference  application  filed  under  section  18  of  the 
Act as if the applicant whose land had been acquired 
is the one who is charged with the duty to prove the 
enhancement in the quantum of compensation. What 
is often overlooked by the trial court in dealing with 
such matters is that award of fair market value is the 
fundamental  right  of  a  party  whose  land  has  been 
acquired. Article 24 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (the  Constitution) 
guarantees  property  rights  to  the  citizens  and,  inter 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~6~ 
alia, stipulates that no property shall be compulsorily 
acquired save by the authority of law which provides 
for  compensation.  The  relevant  portions  of  the  said 
Article read as under: 
24.  Protection  of  property  rights.−  (1)  No 
person shall be compulsorily deprived of 
his property save in accordance with law.  
(2)  No  property  shall  be  compulsorily 
acquired or taken possession of save for 
a  public  purpose,  and  save  by  the 
authority  of 
law  which  provides  for 
compensation  therefore  and  either  fixes 
the amount of compensation or specifies 
the  principles  on  and  the  manner  in 
which compensation is to be determined 
and given. (emphasis supplied) 
 
 
The  reading  of  the  afore-mentioned  provision 
makes it clear that the law under which compensation 
is 
to  be  paid  must  (a)  fix 
the  amount  of 
compensation;  or  (b)  specify  the  principles  or  the 
manner  in  which  compensation  is  to  be  determined 
and given. 
13. 
Compensation  is  at  the  heart  of  compulsory 
acquisition for making up the loss to the owner of the 
land  and  market  value  of  the  acquired  asset  is  the 
yardstick for calculation of such compensation. Since 
the  acquisition  takes  place  without  the  willing 
consent  of  the  owner,  its  exercise  has  always 
generated  controversy.  This  is  so  because  loss  of 
homes  and  land,  community  cohesion,  livelihood 
patterns,  means  of  livelihood  are  the  most  likely 
victims  when  people,  individually  and  collectively, 
are  displaced  from  their  communities,  economic, 
social  and  cultural  settings.  Financial  compensation 
in relation to the loss of land only rarely compensates 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~7~ 
the  affected  parties  as  the  money  paid  cannot  fully 
replace what is lost. It is often felt that the value for 
compensation should  include  more than  the value of 
the  land  and  improvements.  In  most  countries, 
therefore,  laws  are  enacted  which  strive  to  achieve 
this aim through a variety of tools.  
14. 
 The  Act  deals  with  the  acquisition  of  land 
and gives broad principles for grant of compensation. 
The  assessment  of  compensation  for  the  acquisition 
of  land  is  controlled  by  section  23  of  the  Act.  This 
provision, therefore, must be the starting point in any 
consideration  of  the  issue  dividing  the  parties.  It, 
however, does not specify any principle for the grant 
of  compensation  by  the  acquiring  agency  rather 
section  23  of  the  Act  stipulates  the  principles  for 
guiding  the  courts  to  determine  the  compensation  in 
case  the  person  whose  land  is  acquired  is  aggrieved 
of  the  compensation  determined  by  the  acquiring 
agency. The said provision reads as under 
 
 
23. Matters to be considered in determining 
compensation.–  (1)  In  determining  the 
amount  of  compensation  to  be  awarded 
for land acquired under this Act, the Court 
shall take into consideration– 
first,  the  market-value  of  the  land  at  the 
date of the publication of the notification 
under section 4, sub-section (1). 
Explanation– For the purpose of determining 
the  market-value,  the  Court  shall  take  into 
account  transfer  of  land  similarly  situated 
and in similar use. The potential-value of the 
land to be acquired if put to a different use 
shall only be taken into consideration if it is 
proved  that 
land  similarly  situated  and 
previously in similar use has, before the date 
of  the  notification  under  sub-section  (1)  of 
section  4,  been  transferred  with  a  view  to 
being put to the use relied upon as affecting 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~8~ 
land  to  be 
the  potential  value  of  the 
acquired: 
Provided that– 
 
(i)  if the market-value has been increased in 
consequence  of  the  land  being  put  to  a 
use which is unlawful or contrary to public 
policy  that  use  shall  be  disregarded  and 
the  market-value  shall  be  deemed  to  be 
the market-value of the land if it were put 
to ordinary use; and 
 
 
(ii)  if the market-value of any building has been 
increased  in  consequence  of  the  building 
being  so  overcrowded  as  to  be  dangerous 
to  the  health  of  the 
inmates,  such 
overcrowding  shall  be  disregarded  and  the 
market-value  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the 
market-value of the building if occupied by 
such  number  of  persons  only  as  can  be 
accommodated in it without risk of danger 
to health from overcrowding]. 
secondly,  the  damage  sustained  by  the 
person interested, by reason of the taking 
of any standing crops or trees which may 
be  on  the 
land  at  the  time  of  the 
Collector’s taking possession thereof; 
thirdly,  the  damage  (if  any)  sustained  by 
the  person  interested,  at  the  time  of  the 
Collector’s  taking  possession  of  the  land, 
by  reason  of  severing  such  land  from  his 
other land; 
fourthly, the damage (if any) sustained by 
the  person  interested,  at  the  time  of  the 
Collector’s  taking  possession  of  the  land, 
by  reason  of  the  acquisition  injuriously 
affecting  his  other  property,  movable  or 
immovable,  in  any  other  manner,  or  his 
earnings; 
fifthly, if, in consequence of the acquisition 
of  the  land  by  the  Collector,  the  person 
is  compelled  to  change  his 
interested 
residence  or  place  of  business, 
the 
reasonable  expenses  (if  any)  incidental  to 
such change; and 
sixthly,  the  damage  (if  any)  bona  fide 
resulting from diminution of the profits of the 
land  between  the time of  the publication  of 
the declaration under section 6 and the time 
of  the  Collector’s  taking  possession  of  the 
land. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~9~ 
(2)  In addition to the market-value of the land 
as above provided, the Court shall award a 
sum of fifteen per centum on such market-
value,  in  consideration  of  the  compulsory 
nature  of  the  acquisition,  if  the  acquisition 
has been made for a public purpose and a 
sum  of  twenty-five  per  centum  on  such 
market-value  if  the  acquisition  has  been 
made for a Company. 
 
 
Two  extremely  important  points  emerge  from 
the text of section 23 of the Act. The first is that the 
acquiring  agency  is required  to pay  compensation  to 
the  landowner  and  that  market  value  of  the  land  is 
distinct and separate from damage caused by what is 
often  termed  as  severance or  injurious  affection  and 
disturbance  costs.  The  latter  does  not  constitute  the 
elements of the value of the land under the Act. The 
second  point  is  that,  unlike  compensation  for  the 
value  of 
the 
land  acquired,  compensation  for 
severance,  injurious  affection  and  disturbance  is  not 
explicitly  required  to  be  assessed  with  reference  to 
the date of issuance of notification under section 4 of 
the  Act.  It  is,  however,  sufficient  to  observe  that 
compensation  for  severance,  injurious  affection  and 
disturbance  is  awarded  in  respect  of  matters  which 
often  will  arise  or be  quantified  after  the  acquisition 
of  the  land.  Be  that  as  it  may,  section  23  of  the  Act 
achieves the aim of putting those affected in the same 
position  as  they  were  before  the  acquisition  by 
granting them market value of the land and additional 
compensation  for  severance,  injurious  affection  and 
disturbance.   
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~10~ 
15. 
A  cursory  perusal  of  the  scheme  of  the  Act 
shows  that  publication  of  preliminary  notification 
and  inviting  objections  is  dealt  with  by  section  4  of 
the  Act.  The  hearing  is  granted  on  the  objections,  if 
any,  raised  under  section  5A  of  the  Act  whereas  the 
determination  that  the  land  is  required  for  public 
purpose  is  done  by  issuing  declaration  in  the 
notification in terms of section 6 of the Act. Section 
11 postulates the enquiry and passing of the award by 
the  Collector  and  while  doing  so,  it  requires  the 
Collector  to  determine    (a)  the  true  area  of  the  land 
(ii) the compensation which in his opinion should be 
allowed  for  the  land  and  (iii)  the  apportionment  of 
the said compensation amongst all the persons known 
or believed to be interested in the land, of whom, or 
of  whose  claim,  he  has  information,  whether  or  not 
they  have  respectively  appeared  before  him.  Section 
12  of  the  Act  states  that  the  award  of  the  Collector 
shall be final and conclusive evidence as between the 
Collector  and  the  person  interested  in  respect  of  the 
amount of  compensation. It has, however,  been  held 
that  the  award  is  merely  an  offer  to  tender  the 
compensation  to  the  owner  of  the  property.  If  the 
offer is not accepted, section 18 of the Act grants the 
owner  of  the  land  a  statutory  remedy  for  seeking 
determination  of  the  amount  of  compensation  from 
the Court. Sections 4, 5A, 6, 11, 12, 18 and 23 of the 
Act have been enacted to discharge the constitutional 
obligation  of  the  State  under  Article  23  of  the 
Constitution 
for  providing  payment  of 
the 
compensation 
for  acquisition  of 
land,  which 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~11~ 
according  to  section  23  of  the  Act  shall  not  be  less 
than  the  market  value  of  the  land.  If  the  Collector 
wanted  to  put  forth  the  defense  that  the  procedure 
prescribed under Sections 4, 5A, 6, 11, 12, 18 and 23 
of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act  has  been  followed  in 
letter  and  spirit  and  that  the  person  whose  land  has 
been acquired is not entitled to seek enhancement in 
the amount of compensation in terms of section 23 of 
the  Act,  the  burden  of  proof  shall  be  upon  the 
Collector  to  justify  his  stand  by  necessary  pleading 
and proof.  
16. 
The  award  of 
fair  market  value  as 
compensation  for  the  acquired  land  is,  therefore,  as 
much  the  duty  and  responsibility  of  the  acquiring 
agency  as  it  is  the  right  of  the  landowner  to  receive 
the same. In our experience, the trial court, however, 
almost always put the onus to receive the fair market 
value  of  the  land  on  the  landowners  who  move  the 
court  by  filing  the  reference  under  section  18  of  the 
Act.  This,  in  our  opinion,  is  a  wrong  practice.  The 
necessary issue which is required to be framed in all 
reference  applications  under  section  18  of  the  Act 
should  be  as  to  what  is  the  fair  market  value  of  the 
acquired land and/or the compensation to be awarded 
to the land owner and the onus to prove the said issue 
primarily should be on the Collector. 
17. 
Section 18 of the Act provides an opportunity 
to a person to raise grounds on which the objection to 
the  compensation  made  in  the  award  is  taken  and  it 
confers  a  power  upon 
the 
referee  court 
to 
determine  the  market  value  of  the  land  which  is 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~12~ 
subject matter of the acquisition.  This opportunity to 
raise  objection 
is  not  a  formality,  but 
it 
is 
for  effectively  exercising  the  fundamental  right 
guaranteed  under  Article 24  of the  Constitution  read 
with  section  18  of  the  Act  for  determination  by  the 
referee court of the true fair market value of the land 
under acquisition. 
18. 
The next issue with which the trial courts are 
often  confronted  is  the  determination  of  the  market 
value  of  the  acquired  land.  Market  value  is  not 
defined  in  the  Act  and  the  standard  for  evaluation 
thereof is also not provided therein. It has, however, 
come  to  represent  as  the  amount  that  would  have 
been paid for the land if it had been sold at the date 
of acquisition by a willing but not anxious seller to a 
willing  but  not  anxious  buyer.  In  the  process  of 
evaluating the market value, any increase or decrease 
in the value of the land caused by the carrying out of, 
or  the  proposal  to  carry  out,  the  public  purpose  for 
which  the  land  was  acquired  is  disregarded.  The 
concept  of  market  value  was  extensively  considered 
in Spencer v Commonwealth [1907] HCA 82, (1907) 
5 CLR 418. Griffith CJ said: 
In my judgment the test of value of land is 
to  be  determined,  not  by  inquiring  what 
price a man desiring to sell could actually 
have  obtained  for  it  on  a  given  day,  i.e., 
whether  there  was  in  fact  on  that  day  a 
willing  buyer,  but  by 
‘What 
would a man desiring to buy the land have 
had  to  pay  for  it  on  that  day  to  a  vendor 
willing  to  sell  it  for  a  fair  price  but  not 
desirous  to  sell?‘  It  is,  no  doubt,  very 
difficult  to  answer  such  a  question,  and 
any  answer  must  be  to  some  extent 
inquiring 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~13~ 
conjectural. The necessary mental process 
is to put yourself as far as possible in the 
position  of  persons  conversant  with  the 
subject  at  the  relevant  time,  and  from 
that  point  of  view  to  ascertain  what, 
according  to  the  then  current  opinion  of 
land  values,  a  purchaser  would  have  had 
to  offer  for  the  land  to  induce  such  a 
willing vendor to sell it, or, in other words, 
to 
inquire  at  what  point  a  desirous 
purchaser  and  a  not  unwilling  vendor 
would come together. 
 
Similarly Isaacs J said: 
 
All 
1905? 
In the first place the ultimate question is, 
what  was  the  value  of  the  land  on  1st 
January 
circumstances 
subsequently  arising  are  to  be  ignored. 
Whether the land becomes more valuable 
or  less  valuable  afterwards  is  immaterial. 
Its value is fixed by Statute as on that day. 
Prosperity  unexpected,  or  depression 
which  no  man  would  ever  have 
anticipated,  if  happening  after  the  date 
named,  must  be  alike  disregarded.  The 
facts existing on 1st January 1905 are the 
only  relevant  facts,  and  the  all  important 
fact  on  that  day  is  the  opinion  regarding 
the  fair  price  of  the 
land,  which  a 
hypothetical  prudent  purchaser  would 
entertain,  if  he  desired  to  purchase  it  for 
the most advantageous purpose for which 
it  was  adapted.  The  plaintiff  is  to  be 
compensated;  therefore  he  is  to  receive 
the  money  equivalent  to  the  loss  he  has 
sustained  by  deprivation  of  his  land,  and 
that  loss,  apart  from  special  damage  not 
here claimed, cannot exceed what such a 
prudent  purchaser  would  be  prepared  to 
give him. To arrive at the value of the land 
at  that  date,  we  have,  as  I  conceive,  to 
suppose  it  sold  then,  not  by  means  of  a 
forced  sale,  but  by  voluntary  bargaining 
between  the  plaintiff  and  a  purchaser, 
willing  to  trade,  but  neither  of  them  so 
anxious  to  do  so  that  he  would  overlook 
any  ordinary  business  consideration.  We 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~14~ 
its 
either 
proximity 
advantageously 
inconveniences, 
including 
quality, 
must further suppose both to be perfectly 
acquainted  with  the  land,  and  cognizant 
of all circumstances which might affect its 
or 
value, 
prejudicially, 
situation, 
to 
character, 
conveniences  or 
its 
surrounding  features,  the  then  present 
demand  for  land,  and  the  likelihood,  as 
then appearing to persons best capable of 
forming  an  opinion,  of  a  rise  or  fall  for 
what  reason  soever  in  the  amount  which 
one  would  otherwise  be  willing  to  fix  as 
the value of the property. 
 
In  our  jurisdiction,  two  extremely  influential 
19. 
judgments rendered by the Supreme Court (Province 
of  Punjab  through  Land  Acquisition  Collector  and 
another  vs.  Begum  Aziza  2014  SCMR  75  and  Land 
Acquisition  Collector,  G.S.C,  N.T.D.C  (WAPDA), 
Lahore  and  another  vs.  Mst.  Surraya  Mehmood  Jan 
2015 SCMR 28), after taking into account the entire 
case  law  on  the  subject,  have  laid  down  all  the 
essential principles for determining the market value 
of  the acquired  land.  These  principles  may  be  stated 
as under: 
a.  In 
the 
quantum 
determining 
of 
compensation  the  exercise  may  not  be 
restricted  to  the  time  of  the  aforesaid 
notification  but  its  future  value  may  be 
taken into account.  
b.  An entry in the Revenue Record as to the 
nature of the land may not be conclusive, 
for  example, 
land  may  be  shown  in 
Girdawari  as  Maira,  but  because  of  the 
existence  of  a  well  near  the  land,  makes 
it capable of becoming Chahi land;  
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~15~ 
c.  While  determining  the  potentials  of  the 
land, the use of which the land is capable 
of being put, ought to be considered;  
d.  The best method to work out the market 
value 
is  the  practical  method  of  a 
prudent  man  laid  down  in  section  3  of 
the Evidence Act to examine and analyse 
all the material and evidence available on 
the  point  and  to  determine  the  price 
which  a  willing  purchaser  would  pay  to 
willing seller of the acquired land.  
land, 
acquisition 
e.  Subsection  (1)  of  section  23  of  the  Act 
provides that in determining the amount 
of compensation the Court shall take into 
consideration  the  market  value,  loss  by 
reason  of  severing  such  land  from  his 
other 
injuriously 
affecting  his  other  property  or  his 
earning  in  consequence  of  change  of 
residence  or  place  of  business  and 
damage, if any, resulting from diminution 
of  the  profits  of  the  land  between  the 
time of the publication of the declaration 
under  section  6  and  the  time  of  the 
Collector's taking possession of the land. 
This, however, is not exhaustive of other 
injuries or loss which may be suffered by 
an  owner  on  account  of  compulsory 
acquisition. 
f.  When 
is 
the  market  value 
to  be 
determined on the basis of the instances 
of sale of land in the neighboring locality, 
the  potential  value  of  the  land  need  not 
be  separately  awarded  because  such 
sales cover the potential value. 
g.  It 
is  obvious  that  the 
law  provides 
determination of compensation not with 
reference  to  classification  or  nature  of 
land but its market value at the relevant 
time.  No  doubt,  for  determining  the 
market value, classification or the nature 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~16~ 
of 
land  may  be  taken  as  relevant 
consideration  but  that  is  not  the  whole 
truth. An area may be Banjar Qadeem or 
Barani  as  in  the  present  case  but  its 
market  value  may  be  tremendously  high 
because  of  its  location,  neighborhood, 
potentiality or other benefits.  
i. 
h.  Consideration  should  be  had  to  all  the 
potential  uses  to  which  the  land  can  be 
put, as well as all the advantages, present 
or future, which the land possesses in the 
hands of the owners. 
In  determining  the  quantum  of  fair 
compensation  the,  main  criterion  is  the 
price which a buyer would pay to a seller 
for  the  property 
if  they  voluntarily 
entered 
transaction.  The 
assumption being that sale is being taken 
place in open market as if notification of 
acquisition did not exist. 
into 
the 
j.  While  determining  the  value  of  the  land 
acquired  by  the  Government  and  the 
price  which  a  willing  purchaser  would 
give  to  the  willing  seller,  only  the  past 
sales'  should  not  be  taken  into  account 
but  the  value  of  the  land  with  all  its 
potentialities may also be determined by 
examining (if necessary as Court witness) 
local  property  dealers  or  other  persons 
who are likely to know the price that the 
property  in  question  is  likely  to  fetch  in 
the  open  market.  In  appropriate  cases 
there  should  be  no  compunction  even 
relying  upon  the  oral  testimony  with 
respect  to  market  value  of  the  property 
intended  to  be  acquired,  because  even 
while  deciding  cases  involving  question 
of life and death, the Courts rely on oral 
testimony alone and do not insist on the 
production  of  documentary  evidence. 
The  credibility  of  such  witnesses  would, 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~17~ 
to  examine 
however, have to be kept in mind and it 
would  be  for  the  Court  in  each  case  to 
determine  the  weight  to  be  attached  to 
their  testimony.  It  would  be  useful  and 
even  necessary, 
such 
witnesses  while  determining  the  market 
prices of the land in questions because of 
the  prevalent  tendency  that  in  order  to 
save  money  on  the  purchases  of  stamp 
papers  and  to  avoid  the  imposition  of 
heavy gain tax levied on sale of property, 
people  declare  or  show  a  much  smaller 
amount  as 
land 
purchased  by  them  than  the  price 
actually  paid.  The  previous  sales  of  the 
land,  cannot,  therefore,  be  always  taken 
to  be  an  accurate  measure  for  the 
determining the price of land intended to 
be acquired. 
the  price  of 
the 
l. 
k.  The  sale-deed  and  mutation  entries  do 
serve  as  an  aid  to  the  prevailing  market 
value. 
It  is  a  well-settled  law  that  in  cases  of 
compulsory  acquisition  effort  has  to  be 
made  to  find  out  what  the  market  value 
of  the  acquired  land  was  or  could  be  on 
the material date. While so venturing the 
most important factor to be kept in mind 
would  be  the  complexion  and  character 
of  the  acquired  land  on  the  material 
date.  The  potentialities  it  possessed  on 
that  date  are  also  to  be  kept  in  view  in 
determining  a  fair  compensation  to  be 
awarded to the owner who is deprived of 
his 
land  as  a  result  of  compulsory 
acquisition under the Act. 
m. The  value  of  the  land  of  the  adjoining 
area  which  was  simultaneously  acquired 
and 
formula  of 
compensation  has  been  adopted,  should 
be taken into consideration. 
for  which  different 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~18~ 
be 
the 
basis 
n.  The phrase "market value of the land" as 
used  in  section  23(1),  of  the  Act  means 
"value to the owner" and, therefore, such 
value  must 
for 
determination  of  compensation.  The 
standard must be no subjective standard 
but  an  objective  one.  Ordinarily,  the 
objective  standard  would  be  the  price 
that owner willing and not obliged to sell 
might reasonably expect to obtain from a 
willing  purchaser.  The  property  must  be 
valued  not  only  with  reference  to  its 
condition 
the 
determination  but 
its  potential  value 
must be taken into consideration. 
time 
the 
of 
at 
 
 
20. 
The  potential  value  of  the  land  is  some 
instances  might 
pose 
some 
problems 
for 
determination  by  the  courts.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme 
Court  in  judgment  reported  as  Province  of  Sindh 
through  Collector  of  District  Dadu  and  others  Vs. 
Ramzan  and  others  PLD  2004  Supreme  Court  512 
has  attempted  to  explain  and  distinguish  between 
‘market  value’  and  ‘potential  value’  with  specific 
reference to section 23 of the Act. It was held thus:  
is 
that 
acquired 
7. The most important aspect qua the lands 
compulsorily 
the 
mandatory  returns  proposed  to  be  given 
to the landowner is the compensation and 
not  the  market  value.  Very  section  23 
provides 
to  be 
consideration  while 
brought 
determining  compensation.  Market  value 
is  only  one  of  such  matters  to  be 
considered  by  the  Collector  or  Courts. 
Compensation 
is  a  very  wider  term 
indicating that the landowners, for various 
reasons,  is  to  be  compensated  and  not 
for  various  matters 
under 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~19~ 
merely paid the price of land which is just 
an interaction of supply and demand fixed 
between  the  willing  buyer  and  willing 
seller.  
8. Section  23  was  subsequently  amended 
through  West  Pakistan  Ordinance  49  of 
1969 whereby the ambit of matters to be 
considered was widened and it was in this 
background that the Courts in the country 
emphasized the phenomenon of potential 
value  of  the  land.  This  term  potential 
value  is  only  a  one  word  used  for  the 
future uses which the land can be put to. 
In  Malik  Aman’s  case  (PLD  1988  SC  32) 
this  Court  had  explained  the  feature  of 
potential value and had differentiated the 
same  from  the  term  “market  value”.  It 
was  held  that  market  value  was  normally 
to be taken as one existing on the date of 
Notification under section 4(1) of the Land 
Acquisition  Act  under  the  principle  of 
willing  buyer  and  willing  seller  while  the 
potential value was explained to be one to 
which  the  similar  lands  could  be  put  to 
any use in future. Factors for determining 
compensation  of  land  are  not  restricted 
only 
the  aforesaid 
Notification  but  can  also  relate  to  period 
in  future  and  that  is  why  in  a  large 
number of cases the “potential value” has 
been held to be a relevant factor. 
time  of 
the 
to 
 
21. 
The  Act  contains  express  provision  for 
compensation 
for  disturbance, 
severance  and 
injurious  affection  and,  therefore,  these  heads  of 
damages should be excluded from the notion of value 
to 
the  owner  (see  Boland  v  Yates  Property 
Corporation Pty Ltd [1999] HCA 64). In Minister of 
State  for  the  Army  v  Parbury  Henty  and  Company 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~20~ 
Pty Ltd (1945) 70 CLR 459, however, the provisions 
of  Lands  Acquisition  Act  1906-1934  were  in  issue 
which  contained  no  express  provision  for  damage 
caused  by  disturbance.  Justice  Williams  in  the  said 
judgment stated:  
into  premises  at 
The  amount  of  compensation,  being  a 
matter of assessment, can, like damages, be 
calculated  in  the  light  of  any  subsequent 
facts to the extent to which they throw light 
upon the items of value which can properly 
be  taken  into  account  in  the  calculation, 
having regard to the circumstances existing 
at the date of acquisition (Australian Apple 
and Pear Marketing Board v Tonking  (105); 
McCathie  v.  Federal  Commissioner  of 
Taxation (106)). In the present case it would 
have been reasonable for the companies, as 
willing  sellers  of  the  proprietary  interests 
acquired  by  the  Minister,  to  have  claimed, 
not  only  for  the  value  of  the  proprietary 
interests so acquired, but also for what can 
be  compendiously  called  the  expenses  of 
removal 
least  as 
commodious  and  congenial,  taking  a  broad 
view  of  the  matter,  as  those  of  which  they 
were  dispossessed.  …  A  prudent  purchaser 
must have expected that he would have to 
provide a sum to meet these expenses as a 
part of the purchase money sooner than fail 
to  obtain  the  premises  (Pastoral  Finance 
Association  Ltd.  V  .The  Minister  (107)).  In 
other  words, 
in  the  circumstances,  the 
companies  as  reasonably  willing  vendors 
would have been entitled to demand a price 
which  would  enable  them  to  reinstate 
themselves  in  equally  suitable  premises. 
Another  method  of 
the 
compensation  which  leads  in  this  instance 
to the same result is to ascertain what sum 
required 
is 
the  person 
dispossessed 
convenient 
buildings on an equally convenient site. 
reinstate 
equally 
calculating 
to 
in 
 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~21~ 
The  principle  set  out  in  the  above  judgment 
was  impliedly  affirmed  in  the  judgment  rendered  in 
The  Commonwealth  v  Milledge  (1953)  90  CLR  157 
in which it was stated as under: 
There  remains  the  item  of  the  plaintiff's 
claim  described  as  business  disturbance. 
Though it was considered convenient in this 
case, as it often is, to deal with this topic as 
a  separate  matter, 
it  must  always  be 
is  not  a 
remembered  that  disturbance 
separate  subject  of  compensation. 
Its 
relevance to the assessment of the amount 
which  will  compensate  the  former  owner 
for  the  loss  of  his  land  lies  in  the  fact  that 
the compensation must include not only the 
amount  which  any  prudent  purchaser 
would find it worth his while to give for the 
land, but also any additional amount which 
a  prudent  purchaser  in  the  position  of  the 
owner, that is to say with a business such as 
the owner's already established on the land, 
would find it worth his while to pay sooner 
than  fail  to  obtain  the  land.  But  a  prudent 
purchaser  in  the  position  of  the  owner 
would  not  increase  his  price  on  account  of 
the  special  advantage  he  would  get  by  not 
having  to  move  his  business,  unless  the 
amount  he  would  have  been  prepared  to 
pay  apart  from  that  special  advantage  was 
the value of the land considered as a site for 
that kind of business. Disturbance, in other 
words, is relevant only to the assessment of 
the  difference  between,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  value  of  the  land  to  a  hypothetical 
purchaser  for  the  kind  of  use  to  which  the 
owner  was  putting 
it  at  the  date  of 
resumption  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
value  of  the  land  to  the  actual  owner 
himself for the precise use to which he was 
putting it at that date. 
 
22. 
In BHP Billiton Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd v Isdale 
& Ors [2015] QSC 107, it was stated as under 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~22~ 
The  primary  question  to  be  determined  is 
the value of the land taken. The parties are 
agreed  that  the  appropriate  methodology 
to  be  applied  is  the  before  and  after 
method of valuation. Such an approach has 
the advantage that it takes into account all 
elements  of  severance,  injurious  affection 
and enhancement.  
 
23. 
In Bwllfa and Merthyr Dare Steam Collieries 
(1891)  v  Pontypridd  Waterworks  Company  [1903] 
AC 426, it was held as follows:  
If  the  question  goes  to  arbitration,  the 
arbitrator’s  duty 
is  to  determine  the 
amount  of  compensation  payable. 
In 
order to enable him to come to a just and 
true  conclusion  it  is  his  duty,  I  think,  to 
avail himself of all information at hand  at 
the  time  of  making  his  award  which  may 
be  laid  before  him.  Why  should  he  listen 
to  conjecture  on  a  matter  which  has 
become  an  accomplished 
fact?  Why 
should  he  guess  when  he  can  calculate? 
With the light before him, why should he 
shut his eyes and grope in the dark? 
 
24. 
In  reference  applications,  evidence  is  often 
recorded by the trial court at a stage when much time 
has lapsed from the date of issuance of notice under 
section  4  of  the  Act  or  from  the  date  of  the  award. 
The  trial  court  can,  therefore,  reasonably  rely  on 
events that have since taken place in order to at least 
make  a  determination  regarding  the  severance  or 
injurious affection and disturbance costs incurred by 
the  landowner.  Similarly,  nothing  stops  the  referee 
court  from  calling  as  court  witness  all  the  persons 
who are acquainted with the market value of the land 
including the revenue officials and land registrar who 
are  custodians  of  the  record  of  sales.  If  need  be, the 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~23~ 
referee  court should  not  shy  from  appointing  a  local 
commission  for  holding  an  inquiry  into  the  market 
value  of  the  land.  For  this  purpose,  professional 
evaluators  on 
the  panel  of  Pakistan  Banking 
Association  can  be  appointed  at  the  expense  of  the 
parties. 
25. 
At this juncture, it may also be noted that the 
Act and the Land Acquisition Rules, 1983 require the 
Collector to hold an inquiry on the objections filed by 
the 
interested  persons 
for  determining 
the 
compensation  to  be  awarded.  The  Collector  in 
holding  the  inquiry  and  passing  the  award  is  not 
constrained  to  adopt  any  particular  procedure  or 
mode  of  inquiry.  Although  the  detailed  rules  of  this 
inquiry  to  be  conducted  by  the  Collector  and  the 
guidelines for arriving at the amount of compensation 
have not been framed, it is obvious that it not meant 
to  be  a  summary  inquiry  as  the  Collector  is 
empowered  by  virtue  of  section  14  of  the  Act  to 
summon  and  enforce  the  attendance  of  witnesses, 
including  the  parties  interested  or  any  of  them,  and  to 
compel  the  production  of  documents  by  the  same 
means, and, so far as may be, in the same manner, as is 
provided in the case of a civil court under the Code of 
Civil  Procedure,  1908.  It  is  thus  clear  that  the  inquiry 
envisaged by section 11 requires opportunity of hearing 
to  the  affected  persons  for  adducing  evidence  and  that 
the  Collector  ought  also  to  make  local  enquiries  by 
summoning  the  revenue  officials  and  the  land 
registrar for ascertaining the market value of the land. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  Act  that  shows  that  the 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~24~ 
functions  of  the  Collector  can  be  delegated  to  other 
persons. The scheme of Act as it stands today shows 
that  the  Collector  shall  cause  public  notice  to  be 
given  for  inviting  objections  as  well  as  claims  to 
compensation  from  all  interested  persons  who  shall 
appear personally or through agent before him at the 
given  date  and  time  for  the  purposes  of  holding 
inquiry under section 11 of the Act for determination 
of claims and objections. This notice is also required 
to  be  served  on  the  Government  department,  local 
authority or Company, as the case may be, for whose 
benefit  land  is  being  acquired,  who  are  expected  to 
attend  the  enquiry  proceedings  through  a  duly 
authorized  representative  for  the  purpose  of  making 
objections,  if  any,  to  the  measurement  of  the  land, 
claims  to  any  interest  in  the  land  or  the  amount  of 
any  compensation.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  inquiry 
under  section  11  of  the  Act  is  with  regard  to  the 
ascertaining  the  amount  of  compensation  and  not 
determination  of  market  value  of  the  land  alone, 
which,  as  mentioned  earlier,  are  two  separate  facets 
of payment to be made by the acquiring agency under 
section  23  of  the  Act  to  the  interested  persons. 
Although  the  Act  is  silent  in  this  regard, Rule  10  of 
the Land Acquisition Rules, 1983 lays down that the 
Commissioner  while  issuing  the  Notification  under 
section 5 of the Act shall mention therein, apart from 
others,  the  fact  that  the  Collector  has  carefully  and 
prudently  calculated  the  estimated  price  of  the  land 
sought to be acquired keeping in view  
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~25~ 
(a)  the  factors  laid  down  in  sections  23  and  24  of 
the Act;  
(b)  the classification of the land to be acquired and 
its location; and  
(c) 
the average market price of similar kind of land 
similarly  located,  on  the  basis  of  the  price 
prevalent  during  the  period  of  twelve  months 
preceding the date of publication of Notification 
under section 4.  
 
Section 11 of the Act read with Rule 10 thus 
illustrates that the compensation to be awarded by the 
Collector should be calculated and determined on the 
same  standards  and  guiding  principles  as  laid  down 
in  section  23  of  the  Act  by  proper  application  of 
mind.  It  is,  however,  observed  that  the  Collector 
innumerably  delegates  his  function  of  determination 
of fixing the market value of the land to the Board of 
Revenue which in turn constitutes a price assessment 
committee  for  arriving  at  the  average  price  of  the 
land in the area where the acquisition is taking place. 
The Collector then mechanically fixes the amount of 
compensation  on  the  basis  of  such  average  price 
regardless  of 
the  vastness  of 
the  area  under 
acquisition.  It  is  often  held  that  the  doctrine  of 
equality  in  determination  and  payment  of  same 
compensation  for  all  claimants  involved  in  the  same 
notification is not a good principle. Be that as it may, 
the  proceedings  undertaken  by  the  Collector  under 
section 11 of the Act have judicially been held to be 
administrative or quasi judicial in nature although he 
decides upon the objections of the interested persons 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~26~ 
regarding  the  market  value  of  the  land  and/or 
compensation.  Another  distinction  that  needs  to  be 
kept in mind by the referee court is that the reference 
application initiated under section 18 of the Act is an 
independent, original proceeding for determination of 
the  compensation  afresh on the  basis  of the  material 
produced  and  proved  before  it  by  the  parties. 
Notwithstanding  the  determination  by  the  Collector 
on the market value of the land and compensation to 
be  allowed,  the  award  is  merely  an  offer  to  the 
interested  person.  Section  19  of  the  Act  furthermore 
stipulates  that  the  Collector  in  making  the  reference 
application shall state for the information of the court 
in  writing, 
inter  alia,  grounds  on  which 
the 
compensation  was  determined.  The  material  taken 
into  account  by  the  Collector  for  making  his 
determination  about  the  compensation,  however, 
cannot  be  considered  by  the  referee  court  till  such 
time  it  is  duly  proved  before  it.  In  this  respect,  the 
referee  court  does  not  act  as  an  appellate  court 
charged  with  the  function  of  affirming  or  reversing 
the findings of the Collector which form the basis of 
the award rather it has to apply its independent mind 
in  arriving  at  the  amount  of  compensation  to  be 
awarded to the complaining party. 
26. 
Coming  back  to  the  merits  of  the  case,  the 
appellant  tendered  in  evidence,  amongst  others, 
mutations  (Exh.P-21,  No.22  and  Exh.P-25)  which 
showed  that  land  of  identical  nature  in  the  village 
Suleman  Makhan  was 
sold 
for  Rs.30,000/-, 
Rs.35,000/- and Rs.28,000/- per Kanal in the months 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~27~ 
of June and July 1990. The respondents, on the other 
hand,  only  examined  Halqa  Patwari  as  DW-1  who 
simply produced award dated 22.01.1994 as Exh.R-1. 
The  award  in  question  shows  that  after  the  issuance 
of  Notification  under  section  4  of  the  Act,  the  Land 
Acquisition Collector sought report from the revenue 
field  staff  of 
the  mutations  executed  during 
22.10.1989  to  21.10.1990.  The  Land  Acquisition 
Collector keeping in view of the report of the revenue 
staff  and  the  previous  approval  of  the  Board  of 
Revenue  proposed  the  estimated  cost  of  the  land 
under  acquisition  and  sent  it  to  the  Commissioner 
which was in turn submitted to the Board of Revenue 
for  approval.  The  estimated  cost  of  land  was 
accorded approval by the Board of Revenue through 
its  letter  dated  22.08.1991.  It  was  this  price  which 
was  approved  in  the  award  by  the  Land  Acquisition 
Collector.  
27. 
The respondents did not produce in evidence 
any document to prove the average price fixed by the 
revenue  staff.  Any  official  of  the  Board  of  Revenue 
associated with the fixation of the average price was 
also  not  produced  in  evidence.  Similarly,  the  Land 
Acquisition  Collector  also  chose  not  to  enter  the 
witness  box.  DW-1  accepted  the  fact  that  all  the 
affected  persons  filed  the  objections  on  the  average 
price  of  the  land  fixed  by  the  Board  of  Revenue 
before the Land Acquisition Collector as was indeed 
mentioned  in  the  award  itself.  The  award  stated  that 
the  affected  persons  raised  the  objection  that  the 
average price fixed by the Board of Revenue was less 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~28~ 
than 
the  market  price.  The  Land  Acquisition 
Collector, as per the contents of the award, dealt with 
the objection by stating as follows 
The prices of the land were assessed according 
to  the  rules/instructions  and  there 
is  no 
justification in the objection raised by the land 
owners,  with  regard  to  the  assessment  of  the 
average price. 
 
Now  this  finding  of  the  Collector  had  no 
basis in law. He did not meet with the objections that 
the  objectors  took  in  writing  before  him  in  any 
meaningful  way  rather  he  accepted  as  ipse  dixit  the 
determination made by the Board of Revenue without 
realizing that the law enjoined upon him to make his 
independent  decision  regarding  the  market  value  of 
the  land  in  question.  These  glaring  omissions  were 
not  appreciated  by  the  referee  court  in  its  judgment 
while  rejecting  the  claim  put  forward  by 
the 
appellant. 
28. 
The  mutations  relied  on  by  the  appellant 
were  ignored  by  the  referee  court.  The  reason  put 
forward  by  the  referee  court  in  excluding  these 
mutations  does  not  appeal  to  reason.  As  stated 
earlier,  the  respondents  did  not  lead  any  evidence 
worth  its name  to  demonstrate  that  the  market  value 
of the land in question was validly and lawfully fixed 
by  the  Collector  or  that  the  land  comprising  in  the 
mutations  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  was  different 
to and distinct from the appellant’s land that was the 
subject matter of the acquisition. The referee court in 
arriving at the conclusion that “……mere production 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~29~ 
of said mutations does not prove that property of the 
appellant  was  not  properly  compensated  by  the 
L.A.C.”  entered  into  the  realm  of  speculation.  The 
findings  of  the  referee  court  were  not  warranted  by 
law and facts of the case.  
29. 
After  going  through  the  record  and  the  ratio 
laid  down  in  judgments  reported  as  Province  of 
Punjab  through  Land  Acquisition  Collector  and 
another vs. Begum  Aziza 2014  SCMR  75 and  Land 
Acquisition  Collector,  G.S.C,  N.T.D.C  (WAPDA), 
Lahore  and  another  vs.  Mst.  Surraya  Mehmood  Jan                       
2015  SCMR  28,  we  are  of  the  opinion  that  the 
referee  court  did  not  proceed  on  correct  premise  in 
rejecting  the  claim  of  the  appellant.  It  appears  that 
many persons preferred reference applications which 
were  joined  together  and  consolidated  evidence  was 
recorded. There are a number of documents including 
mutations and awards that were tendered in evidence 
by  the  parties  which  also  include  Aks  Shjra,  which 
were not discussed by the referee court. Be that as it 
may,  in  view  of  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court  in  the  afore-mentioned  judgments, 
the referee court is not denuded of its powers to itself 
call  in  evidence  the  revenue  authorities  to  ascertain 
the true location of the land comprising in mutations 
relied on by the appellant, which mutations otherwise 
pertained  to  the  period  recognized  as  relevant  by 
section 23 of the Act.  
30. 
In  view  of  what  has  been  stated  above,  we 
partially  allow this  appeal  by  setting  aside  judgment 
and  decree  dated  27.06.2015  to  the  extent  of  fixing 
 
 
 
RFA No.153 of 2015 
 
 
~30~ 
Rs.6730.77  as 
the  price 
for  per  kanal 
land 
Maira/Rakkar  with  the  result  that  the  reference 
application shall be deemed to be pending before the 
referee  court  which  shall  pass  a  fresh  decision 
thereon  only  in  respect  of  claim  preferred  by  the 
appellant  to  the  extent  of  Maira/Rakkar  land.  The 
referee  court  shall  either  itself  or  on  the  application 
of 
the  appellant  call  additional  evidence  by 
summoning  the  concerned  revenue  official  together 
with  official  record  for  determining  the  location  of 
the  mutations relied on by  the appellant. The  parties 
are  directed  to  appear  before  the  referee  court  on 
23.04.2018.  The  referee  court  is  directed  to  pass  a 
decision within a period of two months from the date 
of  appearance  of  the  parties.  To  the  extent  that  this 
judgment  sets  aside  judgment  and  decree  dated 
27.06.2015, all the other terms and conditions thereof 
shall remain intact. 
 
 
  (Khalid Mehmood Malik)     (Shams Mehmood Mirza) 
                    Judge 
 
 
 
  APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 Judge. 
 
 
 
 
 
                    Judge 
 
 
 
 Judge. 
Awais! / Ihsan* 
 
