 
 
 
 
 
Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT MULTAN BENCH, 
MULTAN 
            (JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
 
Case No.  W.P. No.17013-Q/2016 
Mumtaz Hussain  
Versus  
The State, etc. 
 
Sr.No.of order/ 
Proceedings 
Date of order/ 
Proceedings 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, 
where necessary. 
 
  
24.01.2017.  Mr. James Joseph, Advocate for the petitioner.  
 
Malik  Riaz  Ahmed  Saghla,  Deputy  Prosecutor  General 
along-with  Shabbir A.S.I.  
 
Through  this  Constitutional  Petition  Under 
Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973,  Mumtaz Hussain, the petitioner 
seeks quashing of FIR No.602, dated 12.11.2016 in 
respect  of  offence  under  Section  14(I)  of  Punjab 
Security  Vulnerable  Establishment  Ordinance, 
2015  registered  at  Police  Station  Jatoi,  District 
Muzaffargarh. 
2. 
Brief  contents  of  the  FIR  are  that  on 
12.11.2016 at about 10:50 a.m., Muhammad Arshad 
Munir  Ahmed  Sub  Inspector  along-with  other 
police  contingents  checked  petrol  pump  of  the 
petitioner  and  found  that  close  circuit  Camera 
(CCTV)  were  not  functioning,  gunman  was  not 
available  at  the  petrol  pump  and  no  proper 
arrangements  were  seen  for  keeping  the  sale 
proceed in safe custody.  Hence, the impugned FIR 
was registered.   
 
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends 
that the Station House Officer/complainant was not 
authorized  under  Punjab  Security  Vulnerable 
Establishment Ordinance, 2015 to register a 
W.P. No.17013/2016                                                                                       | 2 
 
criminal  case  against  the  petitioner;  that  complainant  was 
authorized    only  to  inspect  any  Vulnerable  Establishment  and 
submit  his  report  to  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  under 
intimation to the head of District Police Officer but in the case in 
hand, he had failed to follow the procedure prescribed under the 
Act; that law is very clear that in case of any default, it was only 
the Committee, who may issue written warning under Section 10 
& 11 of the Act ibid to the Manager of the petrol pump and the 
Manager was bound to implement the advice of the Committee 
within a stipulated period; that the registration of FIR is without 
jurisdiction,  illegal  and  void  ab-initio.  Lastly,  learned  counsel 
has prayed for acceptance of instant petition and quashing of the 
impugned FIR.  
4. 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General 
appearing  for  the  State,  in  all  fairness,  did  not  controvert  the 
arguments  on  legal  side  advanced  by  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner however, he added that the challan of above said case 
has been submitted before the trial Court.    
5. 
6. 
Arguments heard.  Record perused.  
The  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has 
much force with regard to the legality and propriety of the case 
registered against the petitioner.  The procedure prescribed under 
the Punjab Security Vulnerable Establishment Ordinance, 2015, 
necessary for invoking the penal provisions of the Act ibid, was 
not  adopted  by  the  Incharge  of  the  Police  Station.    Before 
discussing further, it is appropriate to re-produce Sections 9, 10 
&  11  of  the  Punjab  Security  Vulnerable  Establishment 
Ordinance, 2015 for ready reference as under:- 
“9. 
Inspection by Station House Officer:-  
The Station House Officer may, at any time, inspect 
any vulnerable establishment and submit his report 
to  the  Chairperson  of  the  Committee  under 
intimation to the Head of District Police.  
 
10.  Warning. 
If the Committee is satisfied on the basis of 
(1). 
information received  from  any source  or from  the 
W.P. No.17013/2016                                                                                       | 3 
 
the 
that 
inspection  report  of  the  sub-committee  or  the 
Station  House  Officer 
security 
arrangements as per advice of the Committee have 
not been carried out at a vulnerable establishment, 
the Committee may issue a written warning to the 
manager of the vulnerable establishment specifying 
specific violation of its advice.   
(2).  The manager of the vulnerable establishment 
shall, within such time as is mentioned in the letter 
of warning, implement the advice of the Committee.  
 
 
 
 
11.  Sealing of the vulnerable establishment. 
 
(1). 
If the manager of a vulnerable establishment 
fails  to  implement  the  advice  of  the  Committee 
within the stipulated time, the Committee may direct 
complete  or  partial  sealing  of  the  vulnerable 
establishment or suspension of its operations till the 
time of advice is fully implemented and satisfactory 
security  arrangements  are  made  or  the  manager 
undertakes in writing to do so within such further 
time as the Committee may allow.  
(2).  The  Station  House  Officer  shall  implement 
the  direction  of  the  Committee  under  this  section 
and,  for  the  purpose,  use  such  force  as  may  be 
necessary.”  
 
7. 
Bare reading of the aforementioned provisions/procedure, 
the  Station  House  Officer  /  complainant  was  not  competent  to 
register the impugned FIR against the petitioner.  He was under 
legal obligation to report the matter to the Committee, who after 
verifying  and  satisfying  with  the  inspection  reports  received 
from  any  source  or  inspection  report  of  the  Station  House 
Officer, may issue a written warning to the Manager of the petrol 
pump and in case of non-compliance of the direction within the 
stipulated period, the Committee may direct complete or partial 
sealing  of  the  vulnerable  establishment.  Furthermore,  the 
Manager of the petrol pump, in case of any grievance, may file 
an  appeal  under  Section  12  of  the  Act  ibid  before  District 
Intelligence Committee and then, if he intentionally contravenes 
the aforementioned provisions or fails to furnish evidence under 
Section 13 of the Act ibid, the penal provision of Section 14 of 
the Act ibid shall be imposed.  The law is very much clear on the 
subject right from inspection of the vulnerable establishment by 
 
 
   
W.P. No.17013/2016                                                                                       | 4 
the Station House Officer up to the initiation of summary trial of 
an  accused  wherein  it  has  nowhere  been  mentioned  that  the 
Station  House  Officer  was  authorized  to  straightaway  lodge  a 
criminal case against the petitioner.  The act committed by the 
Station House Officer for registration the impugned FIR against 
the petitioner is totally illegal, unwarranted and void ab-initio.  It 
has been brought to the notice of the Court that the challan has 
been  submitted  before  the  Court.  Though  normally  when  the 
Challan is reportedly submitted before the trial Court, the Courts 
while exercising Constitutional jurisdiction, hesitate to quash the 
FIR as an alternate remedy is available to an accused by filing 
application  under  Section  249-A/265-K  Cr.P.C.  yet  the  fact 
remains that where an illegal act committed by an officer of the 
Law Enforcing Agency is clearly in violation of the statute, the 
interference by this Court is not circumvent.     
8. 
Considering  the  afore-noted  legal  proposition,  the  writ 
petition  in  hand  is  allowed  and  the  impugned  FIR  is  hereby 
quashed being non-existent under the law.  
  
                             (Asjad Javaid Ghural) 
                                           Judge 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
 
                                          JUDGE 
 
 
Rashid Ali* 
 
 
