JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE.  
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
R.S.A.No.135360 of 2018.  
 
MUHAMMAD NAWAZ  
 Vs.          
MIAN KHAN ETC  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
15.11.2018.  
Mian 
Advocate.  
Malik 
Advocate.  
Muhammad 
Sirbuland 
Raza, 
Khan, 
DATE OF HEARING:  
APPELLANT BY:   
 
RESPONDENTS BY:   
 
 
 
AMIN-UD-DIN KHAN, J.     Through 
this 
second 
appeal  the  appellant  has  challenged  the  judgment  and  decree 
dated  17.12.2015  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Judge  1st  Class, 
Chiniot whereby an application moved by respondent No.1 Mian 
Khan  for  making  the  award  dated  24.03.2012  rule  of  the  court 
was accepted and the award was  made rule of  the court, and the 
judgment  and  decree  dated  16.10.2017  passed  by  the  learned 
Additional  District  Judge,  Chiniot  whereby  the  appeal  filed  by 
the present appellant was dismissed, whereas the appeal of Mian 
Khan against the order of levy of penalty and stamp duty passed 
by the learned trial court was accepted.  
R.S.A.No.135360 of 2018.  
2 
2. 
 
I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  at 
full  length  and  also  gone  through  the  record  minutely  with  their 
able assistance.  
3. 
 
When  confronted  with  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
appellant  that  how  the  second  appeal  is  competent;  he  is  unable 
to assist this Court. In this context, I have to consider Section 39 
of the Arbitration Act, 1940 which deals with the appeal, same is 
reproduced as under:- 
“39.  Appealable  orders---  An  appeal  shall  lie  from  the 
following  orders  passed  under  this  Act  (and  from  no 
others)  to  the  Court  authorized  by  law  to  hear  appeals 
from original decrees of the Court passing the order:- 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  modifying or correcting an award;  
(iv) 
(v) 
filing or refusing to file an arbitration agreement;  
staying  or  refusing  to  stay  legal  proceedings  where 
there is an arbitration agreement;  
superseding an arbitration;  
on an award stated in the form of a special case;  
(vi)  Setting aside or refusing to set aside an award; 
Provided  that  the  provisionos  of  this  section  shall  not 
apply to any order passed by a Small Cause Court.  
 
(2)  No  second  appeal  shall  lie  from  an  order  passed  in 
appeal  under  this  section,  but  nothing  in  this  section  shall 
affect  or  take  away  any  right  to  appeal  to  [the  Supreme 
Court].” 
 
 
It is clear that no second appeal is competent against 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 
a  judgment  passed  by  the  learned  first  appellate  court  as  one 
remedy  of  appeal  is  provided  under  the  Act,  which  has  been 
exhausted before the learned first appellate court. I am further of 
the  view  that  even  a  revision  petition  against  the  judgment 
passed by the learned Additional District Judge is not competent. 
A revision being a substantial right can only be exercised if same 
R.S.A.No.135360 of 2018.  
3 
is provided under the statute. If no power of revision is provided 
under  the  statute  i.e.  Arbitration  Act,  1940,  same  forum  is  not 
available  against  the  appellate  judgment  rendered  in  accordance 
with Section 39 of the Arbitration Act, 1940. In this eventuality, 
at  the  most  the  orders  impugned  through  this  second  appeal 
could have been challenged through a constitution petition if the 
same are without jurisdiction. Even it is not the case of appellant 
that the orders impugned are without jurisdiction. Further I am of 
the view that even this Court or the learned trial court as well as 
first  appellate  court  cannot  sit  as  an  appellate  court  on  an 
arbitration  award  unless  misconduct  on  the  part  of  Arbitrator  is 
pleaded, even the court cannot scrutinize the reasons for grant of 
an award as the parties agree to refer the matter to the Arbitrator 
for  its  decision  and  the  Arbitrator  cannot  be  presumed  to  be  a 
Court having all the laws on its sleeves, therefore, conducting the 
proceedings  relating  to  the  procedure  and  determination  of 
question referred to, arbitrator cannot be adjudged on the basis of 
standard  of  adjudication  before  the  Court.  In  this  view  of  the 
matter,  when  an  appeal  or  revision  is  not  competent,  the  instant 
second  appeal  being  not  competent  stands  dismissed  with  no 
order as to costs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             (Amin-ud-Din Khan) 
 
               Judge 
Qurban* 
 
 
 
Approved for Reporting  
 
 
       Judge  
