Writ Petition No. 18134 of 2018.  
1 
    Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
MULTAN BENCH MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Writ Petition No. 18134 of  2018. 
Shakoor Ahmad   vs.   District Judge Okara & others 
Sr. No. of 
order/ 
proceedings 
Date of order/ 
proceedings 
 
Order with Signature of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where necessary. 
 
12.12.2018.  Mr.  Shameem  Riaz  Ahmad  Langrial,  Advocate  for  the 
petitioner. 
The petitioner by invoking constitutional jurisdiction of this 
Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan,  1973,  has  assailed  the  legality  and  propriety  of  orders 
dated  18.09.2018  and  01.10.2018  passed  by  the  learned  District 
Judge,  Okara  mainly  on  the  grounds  of  against  facts,  law  and  as 
such not sustainable. 
2. 
The brief facts of family litigation culminating into this writ 
petition  and  necessary  for  its  fair  adjudication  are  that  Mst. 
Hamida  Bibi/respondent  No.7,  wife  of  present  petitioner 
alongwith  her  two  minor  daughters  in  year  2015,  filed  suit  for 
maintenance  allowance,  recovery  of  dowry  articles  and  dower, 
which  was  ex-parte  decreed  on  04.04.2016  by  the  learned  Judge 
Family  Court, Depalpur, District  Okara. Mst. Hamida/respondent 
No.7  alongwith  other  decree  holders  moved  application  for 
execution  of  decree,  but  the  decretal  amount  Rs.3,25,500/-  could 
not  be  recovered  and  at  the  instance  of  decree  holders,  learned 
Judge  Family  Court,  Depalpur  transferred  the  decree  to  the 
learned  Senior  Civil  Judge,  Sahiwal  as  present  petitioner  was 
residing  in  District  Sahiwal  and  had  landed  property  in  that 
District.  At  the  instance  of  the  petitioner,  vide  order  dated 
Writ Petition No. 18134 of 2018.  
2 
11.09.2018  passed  by  this  Court  in  W.P.No.1251/2018,  order  of 
the  learned  executing  Court,  Depalpur  and  the  learned  District 
Judge, Okara were set-aside and the learned District Judge, Okara 
was  directed  to  pass  appropriate  order  on  the  reference,  remitted 
by the learned executing Court/transferor Court. 
3. 
In pursuance of that order, learned District Judge, Okara, on 
01.10.2018 passed the impugned order, which reads as under:- 
“6.  Admittedly,  learned  Judge  Family  Court  Depalpur 
was  not  competent  to  transmit/transfer  the  decree  of 
maintenance  allowance  etc  to  the  learned  Senior  Civil 
Judge Sahiwal, directly, without adopting proper channel of 
this Office, therefore, execution petition titled above is sent 
to the learned Senior Civil Judge Sahiwal, in compliance of 
order  of  Hon’ble  High  Court,  Multan  Bench,  for  further 
proceedings, in accordance the law”. 
By approaching this Court, the petitioner has assailed the legality 
and  property  of  above  orders  mainly  on  the  grounds  of  against 
facts, law and as such not sustainable. 
4. 
The main contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is 
that  the  decretal  amount  can  be  recovered  by  the  learned  Judge 
Family Court, Depalpur under Section 13(3) of the West Pakistan 
Family  Courts  Act,  1964  as  arrears  of  land  revenue  and  as  such 
there  was  no  need  to  transfer  the  decree  to  the  Civil  Court, 
Sahiwal.  In  support  of  this  contention,  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  has  relied  on  case  Muhammad  Sadiq  vs.  Dr.  Sabira 
Sultana  (2002  SCMR  1950),  Amjad  Iqbal  vs.  Mst.  Nida  Sohail 
and  others  (2015  S.C.M.R.  128),  Muhammad  Pervez  vs.  Mst. 
Nabila Yasmeen and 2 others (2004 SCMR 1352), Farooq Ahmed 
&  another  vs.  Additional  District  Judge,  Samundari,  District 
Faisalabad and 5 others (PLJ 2015 Lahore 774), Abdul Matloob 
vs.  Zarqa  Kalsoom  and  others  (2003  CLC  1458  Lahore),  Nasir 
Khan  vs.  Tahira  Rashida  (1986  CLC  2381  Lahore),  Lal 
Writ Petition No. 18134 of 2018.  
3 
Muhammad  and  another  vs.  Mst.  Niaz  Parwara  (PLD  1970 
Peshawar 52), Syed Maqsood Ali vs. Mt. Soofia Noushaba and 2 
others  (1986  CLC  620  Karachi)  and  Muhammad  Ramzan  and 
others vs. Civil Judge and others (2003 YLR 2767 Lahore). 
5. 
Contention heard. 
6. 
The  petitioner  is  judgment  debtor  of  a  family  decree  for 
maintenance,  dowry,  dower  etc.  passed  in  favour  of  petitioner’s 
wife  and  two  daughters.  It  is  legal  and  moral  obligation  of  the 
petitioner to pay maintenance to them, but neither from averments 
in  the  writ  petition  nor  from  submissions  of  learned  counsel  for 
the petitioner, it is established that till date, the petitioner has paid 
even a penny to satisfy that decree. As per petitioner’s own case, 
he  is  resident  of  Tehsil  &  District,  Sahiwal,  whereas,  at  the 
instance  of  respondent-Mst.  Hamida  Bibi,  the  decree  has  been 
transferred  to  the  Civil  Court/Family  Court,  Sahiwal  so  as  to 
ensure  execution  of  decree  as  per  law  against  the  person  and 
property of present petitioner (judgment debtor in that decree). Of 
course, it will be difficult for the respondent/mother of two minor 
kids, residing in Tehsil Depalpur to pursue her execution petition 
at  District  headquarter,  Sahiwal,  whereas,  it  is  quite  convenient 
and  feasible  for  the  petitioner  to  join  proceedings  before  the 
learned executing Court and to make payment of decretal amount 
or contest the execution petition in accordance with law. As such, 
by  the  impugned  orders,  no  right  whatsoever  of  the  petitioner 
stood  infringed.  Rather  it  may  be  observed  that  the  cause  and 
apprehensions if any of the petitioner are pre-mature and so far the 
learned  executing  court  has  not  passed  any  orders  towards  mode 
and manner of recovery of decretal amount.   
7. 
The petitioner by invoking constitutional jurisdiction of this 
Court  has  approached  this  Court  for  equitable  relief.  It  is  well 
settled  that  he,  who  seeks  equity,  must  do  equity.  In  case  Abdul 
Writ Petition No. 18134 of 2018.  
4 
Rashid Khan and 8 others vs. President, Services Institute P.A.F. 
Base,  Lahore,  through  its  Incharge  and  2  others  (1999  MLD 
1870), this Court has laid down following principle:- 
“Constitutional 
jurisdiction  of  High  Court  being 
discretionary,  could  only  be  pressed  into  service  to  foster 
cause  of  justice  and  public  good  and  was  not  to  be 
exercised to perpetuate injustice or would refuse to exercise 
its  Constitutional  jurisdiction  if  by  doing  so,  instead  of 
advancing ends of justice, same would be defeated”. 
In another case Secretary to the Government of the Punjab, Forest 
Department, Punjab, Lahore through Divisional Forest Officer vs. 
Ghulam  Nabi  and  3  others  (PLD  2001  Supreme  Court  415), 
while  discussing 
the  scope  of  exercise  of  constitutional 
jurisdiction  by  this  Court,  following  principle  has  been  laid 
down:- 
“Superior Courts have ample jurisdiction to refuse a relief 
where granting it would tantamount to injustice”. 
In case Muhammad Abdullah vs. Yatim Khana Khalqia, Sargodha 
through  its  Manager  and  others  (2004  SCMR  471),  the 
difficulties of the decree holder have been noted as under:- 
“This is sorry state of affairs. In spite of all these facts, he 
succeeded  in  an  illegal  manner  to  thwart  the  execution 
proceedings  for  more  than  two  decades.  Even  the  learned 
Executing  Court  had  not  taken  notice  of  all  these  aspects 
and  dragged  the  execution  proceedings  for  such  a  long 
period. This is unfortunate state of situation of litigation in 
this  country.  At  this  juncture  it  would  be  appropriate  to 
reproduce  the  observations  of  the  Judicial  Committee  of 
Privy Council made as far back as in the year 1872 in the 
case  titled  The  General  Manager  of  the  Raj  Durbhunga, 
under  the  Court of Wards v.  Maharajah  Coomar  Ramaput 
Singh  14  MIA  605=  17  WR  459=10  BLRPC  294=2  Suth. 
PCJ 117 respecting the plight of litigants in this part of the 
world which are as under:-- 
“The  Right  Hon.  Sir  James  Colvile:--These 
proceedings  certainly  illustrate  what  was  said 
Writ Petition No. 18134 of 2018.  
5 
by  Mr.  Doyne  and  what  has  been  often  stated 
before,  that the difficulties of a litigant  in India 
begin  when  he  has  obtained  a  decree.  When, 
whoever,  the  actual  question  which  is  at  issue 
between  the  appellant  and  the  respondent  on 
this  appeal  is  eliminated  from  the  rest  of  the 
record. It does not  appear to their Lordships to 
present  any  very  great  difficulty.”  (underline  is 
mine) 
The  process  of  execution  as  in  vogue  in  our  system  has 
totally  shattered  the  confidence  reposed  by  the  general 
public  in  our  judicial  system.  Firstly,  it  takes  years  for  a 
suit of any kind to reach  its logical conclusion. Thereafter, 
the  decree-holder  has  to  file  execution  proceedings,  which 
more or less is contested like a suit. Sufficient time is spent 
before  the  Executing  Court  and  the  matter  is  contested  by 
the  judgment-debtor  like  a  suit  by  filing  number  of 
applications  just  to  prolong  the  matter.  It  takes  years  to 
finalize the same”. 
8. 
In Muhammad Pervez’ case supra relied by learned counsel 
for  the  petitioner,  the  apex  Court  observed  that  the  Courts  were 
aware  of  their  authority  and  obligation  to  implement  the  decrees 
passed by them. Judgment-debtor was bound to satisfy the decree 
either himself or through the attorney. 
9. 
In Farooq Ahmed’s case referred above, this Court has held 
as under:- 
“5.    Scanning the above case law I am convinced to hold 
that the judgment debtor, his attorney as well as his surety 
cannot  frustrate  the  execution  of  the decree  for  the reason 
that  the  Family Court’s  proceedings  are special  in nature, 
therefore, the Executing Court will try and put in all efforts 
to execute the decree. In my humble opinion, the Courts are 
well aware of their powers to ensure the execution of their 
judgments and decrees which are not passed in vacuum and 
have  full  support  of  the  law  and  the  procedure  of  the 
country.” 
10.  Worth-mentioning that in this petition, the petitioner has not 
even impleaded his minor daughters so as to camouflage his case 
Writ Petition No. 18134 of 2018.  
6 
only  against  Mst.  Hamida  Bibi/respondent  No.7.  This  fact  also 
indicates petitioner’s mala-fide. 
11.  When  confronted  with  the  well-reasoned  orders  passed  by 
the  learned  District  Judge,  Okara,  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  has  failed  to  point  out  any  illegality,  perversity  or  any 
jurisdictional  defect  and,  as  such,  no  valid  ground  exists  for 
interference in the orders impugned herein. 
12.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  I  am  of  the  view  that 
the petitioner has not approached this Court with clean hands and 
his  main  object  by  filing  this  constitutional  petition  is  to  deprive 
the  decree  holders  from  the  fruits  of  the  decree.  As  such,  instant 
petition being devoid of merits is dismissed in limine. 
 
 
(Mujahid Mustaqeem Ahmed) 
Judge 
Approved for Reporting: 
 
   Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*M.AYYUB* 
 
