Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
W.P. No. 218242-2018 
 
Sahibzada Muhammad Hussain Raza  
Vs.  
Provincial Election Commission etc.. 
 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Sr. No. of 
order/ 
Proceeding 
 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where 
necessary. 
08.06.2018,  Ch. Shah Nawaz Dhillon, advocate for the petitioner. 
Mr. Amjad Ali Chattha, Additional Advocate General Punajb 
with Ali Abdullah Khalid District Election Commissioner-I 
Faisalabad. 
 
Through  this  constitutional  petition,  a  direction  is  sought  to 
the respondents to incorporate the name of the petitioner in voter list 
with  a  further  prayer  to  direct  the  respondents  to  issue  the 
nomination papers enabling him to contest the forthcoming elections 
as  a  candidate  for  the  seat  of  MPA  in  his  Constituency  No.PP-113, 
Faisalabad. 
 
2. 
Brief  facts  giving  rise  to  the  filing  of  this  petition  are  that 
petitioner  is  the  resident  of  Mohallah  Nishtarabad,  Tehsil  and 
District Faisalabad, and was issued a renewed CNIC with No.33100-
8655201-9.  He  belongs  to  a  strong  political  family  as  his  father, 
namely,  Haji  Muhammad  Fazal  Karim  Hamid  remained  former 
Minister  and  his  brother,  namely,  Sahibzada  Muhammad  Hamid 
Raza is the leader of Sunni Ittehad Council. He is a twin brother of 
said  Sahibzada  Muhammad  Hamid  Raza,  therefore,  he  had  been 
facing some problems and one such problem is that his name  could 
not be included in the  voter list of the constituency. However,  after 
realizing his national responsibility to caste vote in the forthcoming 
election  and  also  to  contest  the  election,  he  contacted  respondent 
No.2  on  26.04.2018  and  was  informed  that  he  has  the  vote  in  the 
voter list. He did not bother much until recently when he was shown 
the  voter  list  in  which  the  name  of  the  petitioner  was  not  included 
W.P.No.218242-2018 
2 
perhaps  due  to  some  typographical  mistake  or  with  bonafide  act  of 
the  respondent  whereas  the  votes  of  his  brother  and  other  family 
members  were  mentioned  in  the  said  list.  He  immediately  filed  an 
application  on  05.06.2018  before 
the  Provincial  Election 
Commissioner/respondent  No.1  requesting  him  to  incorporate  his 
vote  on  the  basis  of  his  CNIC,  domicile  certificate  and  family 
registration certificate which application has not been decided, hence 
this writ petition. 
 
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  it  is  the 
primarily  responsibility  of  the  respondents  to  incorporate  the  name 
of  the  petitioner  in  the  voter  list  as  admittedly,  his  other  family 
members  were  already  enrolled  voters  in  the  said  constituency. 
Submits  that  the  petitioner  and  his  brother  Sahibzada  Muhammad 
Hamid Raza are twin brothers and due to this reason his vote could 
not be enrolled though he was informed that he had an enlisted vote, 
therefore,  under  section  49  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017,  this  is  an 
exceptional  circumstance  in  which  the  Election  Commission  can 
include the name  of the petitioner so as to amend the  electoral  roll. 
He  also  submits  that  under  section  25  of  the  said  Act  (ibid),  the 
National  Database  and  Registration  Authority  was  required  to 
transmit the data to the election commission so as to make necessary 
correction  in  accordance  with  such  procedure  already  prescribed. 
Also  submits  that  under  section  40,  the  Election  Commission  is 
empowered  to  modify  the  electoral  roll  to  include  the  name  of  any 
person entitled to be enrolled  in such electoral roll, therefore, prays 
that the writ petition be allowed. 
 
4. 
Conversely,  learned  law  officer  assisted  by  District  Election 
Commissioner-I submits that under section  39 of the Elections Act, 
2017, the petitioner was required to inform the election commission 
to  be  enrolled  as  a  voter  within  the  stipulated  time  but  he  failed  to 
perform his national duty. Adds that at this stage, when the election 
process has already started, the inclusion of his name in the voter list 
will  surely  create  inconvenience  and  put  extra  burden  upon  the 
election  commission  as  the  list  will  have  to  revive  and  the  ballot 
W.P.No.218242-2018 
3 
papers  modified accordingly. He also submits that under section  25 
and 40 of the Elections Act, 2017, the electoral rolls can be modified 
but a voter cannot be included. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, perusing the 
file  and  the  relevant  record,  it  is  not  denied  by  the  respondent  that 
petitioner is a permanent resident of constituency PP-113 Faisalabad 
having CNIC No.33100-8655201-9 renewed on 05.07.2017 after the 
expiry of the earlier CNIC. It is also admitted by the respondent that 
other family members of the petitioner are already enrolled voters in 
the constituency. It is also fairly admitted by the respondent side that 
had the petitioner applied for enrollment of his vote in the list within 
time,  the  respondent  No.2  would  have  no  objection  to  enroll  his 
vote.  However,  he  submits  that  the  required  procedure  had  to  be 
followed  and  if  the  petitioner  had  failed  to  take  the  benefit  of  the 
offer  publically  made  by  the  election  commission  to  check  the 
enrolled votes, the respondent commission is not responsible. 
 
7.  With  this  background,  it  will  be  important  here  to  read  and 
understand the related  provisions of the Constitution. Under Article 
4 of the Constitution, the petitioner enjoys the protection of law and 
to be treated in accordance with law as his inalienable right being the 
citizen of this country. Under Article 219-(a) of the Constitution, the 
election  commission  is  duty  bound  to  prepare  electoral  roll  for 
election to the National Assembly, Provincial Assemblies and revise 
such  rolls  periodically 
to  keep 
them  up-to-date  under  22nd 
Amendment by the Act dated 10.06.2016. Article 219 is reproduced 
as under:- 
“219(a)….preparing  electoral  rolls 
the  National 
Assembly,  Provincial  Assemblies  and  local  governments,  and  revising 
such rolls periodically to keep them up-to-date.” 
 
for  election 
to 
8. 
Under  Section  25  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017,  the  National 
Database  and  Registration  Authority  is  duty  bound  to  transmit 
relevant  data  of  every  fresh  CNIC  issued  by  it  to  the  election 
commission  for  registration  of  the  card  holder  as  a  voter  in  the 
W.P.No.218242-2018 
4 
electoral  area  in  which  his  permanent  and  temporary  address  is 
located.  Likewise,  the  authority  shall  also  transmit  to  the  election 
commission  the  relevant  data  of  every  modified  CNIC  and  such 
other  details  as  required  by  the  Commission.  After  transmission  of 
such  data, 
the  election  commission  shall 
take  steps 
for 
enrollment/correction  in  the  relevant  electoral  roll  in  accordance 
with the procedure. In the explanation of the section, it has also been 
laid  down  that  a  fresh  CNIC  includes  any  card  that  has  not  been 
earlier  made  part  of  the  electoral  roll  data  base  due  to  any  reason 
whatsoever. The authority is bound to transmit the data of any CNIC 
which has been renewed if the holder of which was not enrolled as a 
voter.  This  section  clearly  emphasis  that  a  citizen  of  this  country 
must  not  be  disenfranchised  in  any  circumstance.  Section  25  of  the 
Elections Act, 2017 is reproduced as under for ready reference:- 
“25.     National  Database and  Registration  Authority  to  transmit  data. 
— (1) In such manner as may be prescribed, the National Database and 
Registration  Authority  shall  transmit  relevant  data  of  every  fresh 
National Identity Card issued by it to the Commission for registration of 
the  card-holder  as  a  voter  in  the  electoral  roll  of  the  electoral  area  in 
which  his  permanent  or  temporary  address  is  located,  in  accordance 
with  the  option  indicated  by  him  in  the  application  for  issuance  of  the 
National Identity Card. 
 
(2)  The Authority shall also transmit to the Commission relevant data of 
every  cancelled  or  modified  National  Identity  Card,  information 
regarding deceased voters and such other details as may be required by 
the Commission for the purposes of this Act. 
 
(3)   The Commission shall forward the data referred to in sub-sections 
(1) and (2) to the Registration Officer concerned who shall take steps for 
enrolment or, as the case may be, correction in the relevant electoral roll 
in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.” 
 
9. 
Under Section 39 of the Elections Act, 2017, 30 days time is 
provided  before  expiry  of  the  term  of  the  assembly  during  which 
such inclusion of voter is possible. This information was required to 
be  made  publically  by  the  election  commission.  Under  Section  40, 
the election commission is empowered to modify the electoral roll at 
any  time  by  inclusion  in  the  electoral  roll  the  name  of  any  person 
entitled  to be  enrolled  through  a  valid order  of  course after hearing 
the  person  concerned.  Section  39  &  40  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017 
are reproduced as under for ready reference:- 
“39.   No revision, correction or transfer after constituency called upon 
to  elect.—  (1)  No  revision  of  or  correction  in  an  electoral  roll  of  an 
electoral area or inclusion or transfer of a vote from the electoral roll of 
W.P.No.218242-2018 
5 
an electoral area to the electoral roll of another electoral area shall be 
made  nor  shall  any  order  under  section  38  be  made  in  respect  of  any 
electoral roll during the period beginning thirty days before the day on 
which  the  term  of  an  Assembly  or  a  local  government  is  due  to  expire 
(hereinafter  referred  to  as  „the  cut-off  date‟)  till  announcement  of  the 
results  of  the  general  election  to  the  Assembly  or  the  local  government 
but  it  shall  not  apply  to  an  election  to  fill  a  casual  vacancy  in  an 
Assembly or a local government. 
 
(2)    In  case of  an election to fill  a  casual vacancy to an  Assembly  or a 
local government, no revision of or correction in an electoral roll of an 
electoral area or inclusion or transfer of a vote from the electoral roll of 
an electoral area to the electoral roll of another electoral area shall be 
made  nor  shall  any  order  under  section  38  be  made  in  respect  of  any 
electoral  roll  at  any  time after  the  constituency of  which  such  electoral 
area  forms  part  has  been  called  upon  to  elect  its  representative  and 
before such representative has been elected.  
 
(3)  The Commission shall, through press release and its website, inform 
the general public about the cut-off date for revision of or correction in 
an  electoral  roll  of  an  electoral  area  or  inclusion  or  transfer  of  a  vote 
from the electoral roll of an electoral area to the electoral roll of another 
electoral area.” 
“40.   Power of the Commission to modify electoral roll.— (1) Subject 
to section 39, the Commission may, at any time, order— 
 
(a)  the inclusion in an electoral roll of the name of any person entitled 
to be enrolled on such electoral roll, and such name shall, from the date 
of such order, form part of the electoral roll; 
(b)  the exclusion from an electoral roll of the name of any person who 
has died or has become disqualified to be a voter, and such name shall, 
from the date of such order, stand excluded from that roll; and 
(c)  the removal of the name of any person from an electoral roll where 
such removal becomes necessary due to the repetition of the name in the 
same  electoral  roll  or  in  the  electoral  rolls  of  more  than  one  electoral 
area.  
 
 
 
 
(2)   Before taking decision under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section 
(1), the Commission shall afford a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
to  the  person  likely  to  be  affected  and  shall  record  reasons  for  its 
decision.” 
 
10.  Under  Section  49  of  the  Act,  the  Election  Commission  may 
depart from the normal proceedings in exceptional circumstance, if it 
is satisfied that normal procedure cannot be followed for revision of 
electoral  roll  in  respect  of  any  electoral  area.  However,  such 
exceptional circumstance be recorded by the commission. Section 49 
of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  is  reproduced  as  under  for  ready 
reference:- 
 
  Departure 
from  normal  procedure 
“49. 
in  exceptional 
circumstances.—  (1)  Where  the  Commission  is  satisfied  that  it  is  not 
possible  to  follow  the  procedure  laid  down  for  the  preparation  or 
revision  of  an  electoral  roll  in  respect  of  any  electoral  area,  the 
the  exceptional  circumstances 
Commission  may,  after  recording 
W.P.No.218242-2018 
6 
necessitating  deviation  from  the  laid  down  procedure,  direct  that  an 
electoral  roll  for  such electoral  area  shall  be  prepared  in  such  manner 
as it deems fit. 
 
(2)    The  Commission  shall  immediately  publish  the  direction  issued 
under sub-section (1) on its website.” 
 
11.  Under clause 2(xli), a voter means a person who is enrolled as 
a  voter  on  the  electoral  roll  of  any  electoral  area  in  a  constituency 
and under section 2(xx) electoral roll means a roll prepared, revised 
or  corrected  under  this  Act.  Under  section  2(xvi),  the  electoral  area 
in the urban area means, municipal ward or census block, or if there 
is no municipal ward or census block, the well-defined Mohallah or 
a street or well defined part. Otherwise, such other area which  may 
be determined by the commission. Sections 2(xx) and section 2 (xli) 
are reproduced as under for ready reference:- 
“2(xx)    “electoral  roll”  means  an  electoral  roll  prepared,  revised  or 
corrected under this Act and includes the electoral rolls prepared under 
the Electoral Rolls Act 1974 (XXI of 1974), existing immediately before 
the commencement of this Act; 
 
2(xli)  “voter” means— 
(a)    in  relation  to  an  Assembly  or a  local government,  a  person  who  is 
enrolled  as  a  voter  on  the  electoral  roll  of  any  electoral  area  in  a 
constituency; and 4 
 
(b)  in relation to the Senate, a person who— 
 
I.  for election to a seat from a Province, is a Member of the Provincial 
Assembly; 
 
II.    for  election  to  seats  from  the  Islamabad  Capital  Territory,  is  a 
Member of the National Assembly; and 
 
III.  for election to a seat from the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, 
is  a  Member  of  the  National  Assembly  elected  from  the  Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas.” 
 
12. 
The above discussion clearly leads this court to an irresistible 
conclusion  that  the  petitioner  being  citizen  of  the  country  having 
valid  CNIC  duly  mentioned  in  the  family  registration  certificate  is 
entitled to vote and also contest election. The omission to enroll his 
vote is rectifiable since his failure to apply for enrollment as a voter, 
would  not  absolve 
the  election  commission 
to  fulfill 
their 
responsibility to collect the data from Registration Authority in order 
to  modify  the  voter  list  and  make  it  compatible  to  the  existing 
position. 
 
W.P.No.218242-2018 
7 
13.  Our  country  is  passing  through  a  very  important  phase  of 
transfer  of  power  to  the  new  government  through  national  election. 
This  process  must  win  the  trust  of  all  stake  holders.  The  election 
laws  are  aimed  at  fair  and  free  elections  without  any  possibility  of 
pre  or  post  poll  rigging.  It  is  also  intent  of  the  Election  Laws  to 
provide  equal  level  playing  field  for  every  person  to  vote  for  or 
become a possible representative having clean credentials. 
 
14. 
For  the  foregoing  reasons,  I  am  of  the  considered  view  that 
omissions of including the name of the petitioner as a voter was not 
entirely due to the acts of the petitioner as it is the responsibility of 
the  respondent  as  well  as  the  National  Database  and  Registration 
Authority to transmit the correct data to the Election Commission to 
enroll  the  petitioner  as  a  voter  in  the  constituency  No.113 
Faisalabad.  This  petition  is  therefore  allowed  and  the  respondents 
are directed to forthwith enroll the name of the petitioner as a voter 
in  the  said  constituency  and  on  the  basis  of  it  issue  him  the 
nomination forms for the MPA without wastage of any further time. 
Copy Dasti on payment of usual charges. 
 
A.Qadoos* 
(ALI BAQAR NAJAFI) 
JUDGE 
