                            Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
     IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
                         JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
     C.R.No.546/2015 
Chaudhry Muhammad Younas Vs.Muhammad Khursheed,etc. 
          JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing 
  
02.11.2018 
 
                                   
 
Petitioners by 
 
M/s.  Maqbool  Elahi  Malik,  Muhammad 
Umar  Riaz,  Muhammad  Sajid  Chaudhry 
and  Shahzada  Babar,  Advocates 
for 
petitioner  in  CR  No.  546  of  2015  and 
respondent No.10 in CR No.547 of 2015. 
M/s.  Khalil  Ahmed  and  Hassan  Iqbal 
Warriach,  Advocates  for  respondent  No.10 
and petitioner in CR No.547 of 2015. 
 
Respondents No.1 to 3  M/s. Sh. Naveed Shahryar, Imtiaz Hussain 
Rehan,  Fatima  Malik  and  Tariq  Siddique, 
Advocates.  
           
 
 Ch.  Muhammad  Masood  Jahangir  ,J:  Undisputedly,  Ch. 
Maula  Bakhsh  was  exclusive  owner  of  House  No.111-D,  Model 
Town,  Lahore,  who  expired  on  04.07.1996  leaving  behind  five  sons 
and  three  daughters,  out  of  whom  Mehmood  Ahmed,  respondent 
No.3,  on  12.03.2001  instituted  a  suit  for  administration,  declaration 
and  permanent  injunction  against  his  other  brothers  and  sisters  to 
claim his share in the legacy pertaining to the subject House  left by 
their father. Although a joint written statement (Exh.P7) on behalf of 
rest of the brothers and sisters was filed to contest the suit with the 
defence that their father had already gifted out the House to his two 
sons  (petitioner  and  respondent  No.10)  in  1989,  but  during  its 
proceedings, out of them, Muhammad Khursheed and Mst. Surriya 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
2 
Begum (respondents No.1 and 2) filed independent applications and 
also made statements before the Court seized of the suit to resile that 
said  written  statement  was  filed  on  their  behalf,  who  also  sought 
leave to raise their independent defence. Although their request was 
accorded,  but  prior  to  its  submission  on  05.12.2008,  the  suit  was 
dismissed for want of evidence while attracting penal consequences 
of  Order  XVII  rule  3  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  and  the 
appeal  as  well  as  Civil  Revision  preferred  by  respondent  No.3  also 
failed  up  to  the  level  of  this  Court,  however  in  the  meantime, 
Muhammad  Khursheed  respondent  No.1  on  15.12.2008  and  Mst. 
Surriya  Begum  respondent  No.2  on  26.01.2010  instituted  two 
independent  civil  suits  before  the  learned  Trial  Court  to  basically 
claim  separate  possession  of  their  legal  and  shari  shares  in  the 
demised  House  through  partition,  which  were  consolidated  and 
much thereafter, Ch. Muhammad Younas, petitioner of instant Civil 
Revision  also  instituted  a  suit  for  recovery  of  possession,  mesne 
profit  and  damages  only  against  respondent  No.1,  which  was  not 
tagged  with  the  earlier  suits  for  the  reasons  that  the  latters  had 
ripped till then. Although declension in this regard was assailed by 
the  petitioners,  but without  any  success  and  as  a  result of  common 
protracted  trial  suits  under  these  Petitions  were  decreed  vide 
consolidated 
judgment  dated  21.05.2014,  which  was 
further 
congealed  when 
independent  appeals  of  the  petitioner  and 
respondent  No.10/beneficiaries  of  the  alleged  gift  failed  on 
22.12.2014,  hence  Civil  Revision  in  hand  along  with  connected  one 
bearing No.547 of 2015. As common questions of law and facts inter 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
3 
se the parties are involved in these lis having arisen out of joint trial 
and  consolidated  judgments  of  the  Courts  below,  hence  for  all 
intents  and  purposes,  I  intend  to  decide  those  jointly  through  this 
single  judgment.  However,  the  reference  and  source  point  for 
rendering this judgment will be Civil Revision in hand. 
2. 
Heard and record perused.  
3.  M/s.  Maqbool  Elahi  Malik,  Ch.  Khalil  Ahmed,  Muhammad 
Umar  Riaz,  Muhammad  Sajid  Chaudhry,  Shahzada  Babar  and 
Hassan  Iqbal  Warriach,  Advocates  appearing  on  behalf  of  Civil 
Revisioners/beneficiaries 
inaugurally  emphasized 
that  mere 
affirmation of plaintiffs regarding denial  of ownership rights of the 
defendants/beneficiaries did not absolve them of their obligation to 
produce  cogent  evidence  in  order  to  substantiate  their  assertions, 
who  not  only  failed  to  lead  tangible  evidence,  but  also  remained 
unsuccessful  to plead  and  prove  the  alleged  forgery with regard  to 
acknowledgement of gift executed by Maula Bakhsh in their favour 
was  not  well  founded.  Ex  facie  Paras-4  to  7  of  the  plaint  of 
respondent  No.1  were  very  much  elaborated  to  disclose  the 
wrongdoings engineered by beneficiaries to usurp the shares of the 
other  co-owners.  Moreover, 
the  moment  Ch.  Muhammad 
Khursheed/plaintiff  (PW1)  while  appearing  in  the  witness-box 
deposed  that  their  father  had  never  alienated  the  house  and  his 
brothers/beneficiaries  had  managed  fictitious  documents  through 
forgery,  onus  was  shifted  upon  the  latters  to  prove  the  original 
transaction  as  well  as  documents  executed  in  this  regard.  Reliance 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
4 
can be placed upon judgment reported as “Allah Ditta and others Vs. 
Manak alias Muhammad Siddique and others (2017 SCMR 402).  
 
Before embarking any further, I would like to add that under 
the Mohammadan Law, a gift, in order to be valid and binding upon 
the parties, must fulfil the following conditions:- 
(a) a declaration of gift by the donor; 
(b) acceptance of gift by the donee; and 
(c) delivery of possession of corpus. 
On the accomplishment of these ingredients, a valid gift comes into 
existence.  A  written  instrument  in  any  case  would  not  create  a  gift 
but was mere piece of paper to record a past transaction and in such 
eventuality it was sine qua non for its gainer to independently prove 
the aforenoted three components of the gift besides the execution of 
the document as well.  
4. 
During the proceedings of earlier suit instituted by Mehmood 
Ahmed regarding the identical controversy, the beneficiaries in their 
written  statements  without  mentioning  any  date  or  month  and 
specific  names  of  the  witnesses  of  the  transaction  simply  disclosed 
that their father with his free will in presence of witnesses had made 
a declaration of gift in 1989 in lieu whereof, the possession was also 
handed over to them, but absolutely  there was no disclosure  to the 
extent that any instrument was constructed as well to acknowledge 
the  transaction.  The  beneficiaries  again  in  the  instant suits  failed  to 
give  essential  details  regarding  any  writing  executed  for  the 
confirmation  of  oral  gift.  Anyhow,  in  evidence  only  photocopies  of 
different documents  (Mark-A,  B  and  Exh.DW3/5)  were  brought on 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
5 
suit file to prove that oral transaction of gift was ultimately admitted 
by  its  executant/donor,  but  neither  the  original  one  thereof  were 
brought  into  picture  nor  any  effort  was  made  to  prove  the  same 
through secondary evidence. It was again stunning that beneficiaries 
did  not  examine  any  of  its  marginal  witnesses,  scribe  and  stamp 
vendor.  
 
The contention of learned counsel for the beneficiaries that out 
of attesting signatories, one had already departed, whereas the other 
having  become  crippled  could  not  be  summoned,  but  at  the  same 
time,  they  were  compelled  to  concede  that  even  no  attempt  was 
made for the identification of their signatures through some persons 
familiar therewith. The learned counsel also failed to justify why the 
stamp vendor as well as scribe was withheld. The other setback was 
that out of two beneficiaries, only one was examined, whereas other 
despite  his  availability  did  not  appear  to  face  the  test  of  cross-
examination. It was  also shocking that no one in corroboration was 
produced  to  prove  the  factum  that  offer  of  gift  was  ever  made, 
which  was  accepted  before  him,  what  to  talk  of  the  change  of 
possession  in  lieu  of  alleged  transaction,  so  it  was  a  case  of  no 
evidence  on  behalf of  petitioners  to  prove  their  original  transaction 
as well as construction of subsequent documents to acknowledge it. 
The stress of learned counsel that in earlier suit rest of the siblings of 
the  donor  had  conceded  the  stance  of  the  petitioners,  as  such  their 
admission  was  binding  upon  them  was  fallacious.  It  is  well 
established  that  pleadings  cannot  be  treated  as  evidence  until  and 
unless its maker is called upon to testify it on oath. It is to be recalled 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
6 
that the plaintiffs of the lis in hand during the proceedings of earlier 
suit  resiled  to  have  filed  any  such  written  statement  while  leveling 
serious  allegations  upon  the  beneficiaries  that  they  had  fictitiously 
invented  it.  In  these  circumstances,  the  mere  fact  that  a  conceding 
written statement was filed, cannot be taken as proof of the disputed 
gift. 
 
At this stage,  Mr. Umar Riaz accented that  instrument of gift 
(Ex:DW3/5) was received in evidence without any objection, as such 
it  stood  proved,  was  not  correct.  The  pivotal  question  in  the 
litigation was its genuineness or otherwise. Articles 78 and 79 of the 
Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  are  the  relevant  provisions,  which 
provide procedure for proof of such like instrument. Even if  it was 
brought  on  record  without  objection,  but  it  could  not  be  treated  as 
evidence  of  the  original  having  been  signed  and  written  by  the 
persons,  who  purported  to  have  written  or  signed  it,  unless  the 
writing  and  their  signatures  were  proved  in  terms  of  aforenoted 
provisions.  The  identical  controversy  has  already  been  clinched  by 
the  apex  Court  in  a  case  reported  as  Khan  Muhammad  Yousaf 
Khattak Vs. S.M. Ayub and others (PLD 1973 S.C. 160).  
5. 
The next emphasis of learned counsel for the beneficiaries that 
gift  was  duly  recorded  in  the  relevant  record  of  Model  Town 
Housing Society and after its transfer to their clients in the life of the 
donor,  neither  there  left  any  requirement  to  prove  it  nor  the  other 
siblings of the donor had any locus standi to dispute the same, is not 
well  founded.  Although  Record  Keeper  (DW3)  of  the  Society  was 
examined  by  the  beneficiaries,  who  tendered  copies  of  some 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
7 
documents  as  per  availability  thereof  in  Office  File,  but  admittedly 
none  of  these  was  either  scribed  or  signed  in  any  capacity  by  him. 
Anyhow,  the  testimony  of  this  star  witness  was  of  no  help  to  the 
petitioners  and  for  ready  reference  some  relevant  extract  from  his 
cross-examination in verbatim is reproduced as under:- 
 کرذ میں ٹرپا  ٹنگنو کا جس ۔ تھا کیا ہبہ لکنا تین تین قبہر کو یفشر محمد روا بخش لامو ںبیٹو ود پنےا نے بخش للہا
 کا نےکر ہبہ منا کے ںبیٹو  ود میں جس ۔ہے نہ نبیا ئیکو 
 سے فطر کی بخش للہا یساا 
 میں  ہپہر ٹنگنو ۔۔۔ ہے نہ
 
۔ ستخطد ئیکو ہی نہ روا ہے نبیا ئیکو  کا بخش لامو ئیکو نہ
 پر ٹرپا ٹنگنو کہ  ہے سترد۔۔۔ہو گیا کیا کرذ
During the cross-examination, the specific question as follows: 
 
" کی ر اد ستاوارد ک ا روا ے آ 
ضرحا حبصا بخش لامو جآ"کہ ہے کرذ کا تبا سا پر ٹرپا ٹنگنو کیا
was  extended  to  him  by  learned  counsel  for  the  plaintiffs  and  he 
replied:-  
۔ہے نہ کرذ یساا میں ہپہر ٹنگنو 
So,  nothing  was  made  available  on  the  record  during  the  trial  to 
prove  that  Maula  Bakhsh  had  ever  appeared  before  the  Society  to 
make a request for transfer of suit property through gift in favour of 
his  two  sons/petitioners.  The  entire  proceedings  for  transfer  of  the 
House were allegedly conducted by the Secretary of the Society, but 
despite  availability,  he  was  also  not  examined  and  Courts  below 
were  perfect  to  draw  an  adverse  inference  under  Article  129 
illustration  (g)  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  that  had  he 
been  examined,  he  would  have  not  acknowledged  the  proceedings 
of  transfer  available  in  the  relevant  file  and  the  alleged  transfer  of 
said  house  to  beneficiaries  without  any  legal  back  was  of  no  legal 
effect.  Under  the  law,  a  property  could  only  be  transferred  either 
through  mutation,  registered  instrument  or  by  orders  of  Court  of 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
8 
law, whereas its transfer was made by the Society without securing 
identification of the donor or recording his statement, hence Courts 
below were perfect to disbelieve those proceedings.  
 
The  additional  setback  of  the  controversy  would  be  that  the 
alleged  donor  had  five  sons  and  two  daughters  or  their  siblings,  if 
any  out  of  them  had  already  departed,  but  no  reason  was  ever 
furnished either in the memo of gift or record of the Society that for 
what evil deeds rest of the sons as well as daughters were deprived 
of  the  said  benefit.  See  Sadar  Abbas  Vs.  Province  of  Punjab  and 
others (2015 CLC 822) and Barkat Ali through Legal Heirs and others 
Vs.  Muhammad  Ismail  through Legal  Heirs  and  others  (2002  SCMR 
1938). The apropos of entire discussion is that beneficiaries failed to 
discharge onus of issue No.5 duly shifted upon them and this Court 
being sanguine to unanimous findings returned by the Courts below 
feels no hesitation to confirm it.  
6. 
The next argument of learned counsel for the beneficiaries that 
suits  were  badly time  barred  having been  filed  after  many years  of 
the  departure  of  Maula  Bakhsh  is  also  not  forceful.  In  the  present 
case,  perspicuous  stance  of  the  plaintiffs  was  that  the  impugned 
memos  of  gift  were  fictitious,  forged  as  well  as  fabricated  and  on 
having been proved as such beyond any shadow of doubt, the same 
could  not be  perpetuated,  but those  can  be  assailed  at any point of 
time. Reliance in this respect can be placed on the case law reported 
as  Abdul  Rahim  and  another  Vs.  Mrs.  Jannatay  Bibi  and  13  others 
(2000 SCMR 346) and Khair Din Vs. Mst. Salaman and others (PLD 
2002 SC 677). 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
9 
7. 
The  next  submission  of  learned  counsel  for  the  beneficiaries 
that  after  dismissal  of  earlier  suit  instituted  by  Mehmood  Ahmed 
respondent No.3, a fresh suit could not be instituted on behalf of the 
defendants  of  afore-noted  lis  and  both  the  Courts  below  failed  to 
apply principle of res judicata is again not tenable.  
 
Admittedly,  during  trial  of  suits  in  hand,  application  under 
Section 11 of the Code, 1908 seeking rejection of plaint being barred 
by  law  was  filed  by  the  petitioners,  but  was  declined  and 
maintained  upto  the  level  of  this  Court,  hence  interlocutory  order 
having  attained  finality  could  not  be  re-agitated.  Reliance  in  this 
respect is placed on the judgment reported as Gulistan Textile Mills 
Ltd. and another Vs. Soneri Bank Ltd. and another (PLD 2018 SC 322). 
Moreover,  in  cases  reported  as  Ghulam  Muhammad,  etc  Vs. 
Muhammad Hussain, etc (2006 CLJ 633) and Muhammad Zubair and 
others Vs. Muhammad Sharif (2005 SCMR 1217) the Superior Courts 
have  already  concluded  that  right  of  inheritance  could  not  be 
defeated by law of limitation or principle of  res judicata as no law or 
judgment could  override  law of  Sharia  being a  superior  law,  hence 
the arguments in this regard being meritless are repelled.  
8. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  beneficiaries  while  relying  upon 
judgments  reported  as  Yasmeen  Qureshi  Vs.Tariq  Qureshi  and  2 
others  (PLD  2006  Lahore  311),  Mehbub  Alim  Vs.  Razia  Begum  and 
others  (PLD  1949  Lahore  263),  Syed  Mehdi  Hussain  Shah  Vs.  Mst. 
Sahadoo Bibi and others (PLD 1962 SC 291), Muhammad Sharif and 2 
others Vs. Mst. Aisha Bibi (1994 MLD 677), Chanar Gul and 4 others 
Vs.  Province  of  Sindh  through  Secretary,  Sindh  Secretariat  and  3 
C.R.Nos.546 & 547 of 2015 
10 
others  (2017  YLR  Note  434),  Murad  Bakhsh  and  4  others  Vs.  Mst. 
Syeda  Ashraf  Jhan  and  4  others  (2017  CLC  646),  Chandu  Lal 
Agarwala  and  others  Vs.  Khalil  ur  Rehman  and  others  (PLD  1949 
Privy  Council  239),  Muhammad  Akbar  and  others  Vs.  Mst.  Sahib 
Khatoon and others (1991 SCMR 1196) and Rashid Ahmed and others 
Vs. Allah Ditta and others (2014 YLR 1748) put their best to persuade 
that  concurrent  findings  of  two  Courts  below  were  liable  to  be 
interfered with, but  minute perusal of  the referred case law reveals 
that these being distinguishable from the facts and circumstances of 
the  instant  case  cannot  be  made  basis  to  reverse  unanimous 
impugned 
judgments,  which  having  been  based  upon  well 
appreciation  of  evidence  and  application  of  law  on  the  subject  are 
approved and confirmed.  
9. 
Consequently, these Civil Revisions being devoid of any force 
and merit are dismissed with cost throughout. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Syed Zameer 
 
 
           (Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir) 
 
              Judge 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
      Judge 
 
