Form No. HCJD/-121   
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Civil Revision No.2124 of 2015 
Muhammad Riaz and another 
Versus 
Ahmed Bakhsh and others 
Sr.  No.  of  order/ 
proceedings 
Date  of  Order/ 
proceedings 
Order  with  signature  of  Judge  and  that  of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
07.05.2018  Rai Muhammad Hussain Kharal, Advocate for the 
petitioners 
 
 
 
Through  the  instant  civil  revision,  the  petitioners 
have  challenged  the  order  and  decree  dated  24.07.2013  passed 
by the learned trial Court whereby the suit for declaration filed 
by them against the respondents/defendants has been dismissed 
on  the  basis  of  special  oath  administered  by  Muhammad  Yar, 
witness  of 
the  respondents/defendants  as  per  offer  and 
acceptance  as  well  as  judgment  and  decree  dated  14.04.2015 
passed  by  the  learned  Addl.  District  Judge,  Bhalwal  Camp  at 
Kot Momin whereby the appeal preferred by the petitioners has 
been dismissed. 
2. 
 
Heard at length and available record has been gone 
through. 
3. 
 
Perusal  of  record  goes  to  make  it  diaphanous  on 
17.07.2013,  the  petitioner  Muhammad  Riaz  alongwith  learned 
counsel for the petitioners, when the suit was fixed for evidence 
of the respondents/defendants, appeared before the learned trial 
Court and made an offer for decision of the suit on the basis of 
special  oath  of  Muhammad  Yar,  one  of  the  witness  of  the 
respondents/defendants  on  Holy  Quran,  which  statement  was 
reduced  into  writing  by  the  learned  trial  Court  and  that 
statement  was  thumb  marked/signed  by  Muhammad  Riaz  and 
also  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners.  Thereafter, 
C,R.No.2124 of 2015 
2 
Muhammad  Yar,  witness  of  the  respondents/defendants  while 
present  in  the  Court  alongwith  learned  counsel  for  the 
respondents  accepted  the  said  offer  and  got  his  statement 
recorded,  where-after  in  response  to  the  same  he  administered 
special oath on Holy Quran and his statement was also recorded 
by 
the 
learned 
trial  Court,  who  deposed 
that  Ghulam 
Muhammad,  predecessor  of  the  plaintiffs,  with  his  free  will 
appeared  before  the  Revenue  Officer  of  the  area  and  got  his 
statement  recorded  that  he  had  sold  the  disputed  property  to 
defendants No.1 and 2 and he had received Rs.100,000/- out of 
the  settled  amount  in  his  presence  and  for  remaining  sale 
consideration  he,  in  my  presence,  stated  that  he  had  received 
the  same  and  had  sold  the  land;  however,  remaining  amount 
was  not  paid  in  my  presence.  On  such  statement,  Muhammad 
Riaz  and  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners/plaintiffs  got  their 
statements  recorded  that  suit  be  decided  in  light  of  the 
statement  of  Muhammad  Yar,  witness.  After  recording 
statements  of  the  parties,  the  learned  trial  Court  adjourned  the 
case for further proceedings for 24.07.2013 and on the said date 
proceeded  to  dismiss  the  suit  instituted  by  the  petitioners/ 
plaintiffs.  There  is  nothing  on  record  to  suggest  that  the  offer 
for  decision  of  the  suit  on  special  oath  administered  by 
Muhammad  Yar  witness  was  made  under  some  coercion  or 
compulsion  by  the  petitioners,  rather  it  appears  that  same  was 
out of free will and consent. I would like to reproduce sections 
8  to  11  of  the  Oath  Act,  1873,  here,  which  are  relevant  to  the 
peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  in  hand,  which 
run:- 
“8.  Power  of  Court  to  tender  certain  oaths.—If 
any party to, or witness in, any judicial proceeding 
offers 
to  give  evidence  on  oath  or  solemn 
C,R.No.2124 of 2015 
3 
affirmation in any form common amongst, or held 
binding  by  persons  of  the  race  or  persuasion  to 
which he belongs  and not repugnant to justice  or  
decency  and    not    purporting  to  affect  any  third  
person, 
 
the  Court  may, 
if 
it 
thinks 
fit, 
notwithstanding anything  hereinbefore contained, 
tender such oath or affirmation to him. 
9.  Court may ask party or witness whether be will 
make  oath  proposed  by  opposite  Party.–    If    any 
party to any judicial proceeding offers to be bound 
by  any  such  oath  or  solemn  affirmation  as  is 
mentioned  in 
  section  8,  if  such  oath 
  or 
affirmation is made by the other party to, or by any 
witness  in,  such  proceeding,  the  Court  may,  if  it 
thinks fit,  ask such party or witness, or cause him 
to be asked, whether or not he will make the oath 
or affirmation: 
Provided  that  no  party  or  witness  shall  be 
compelled  to  attend  personally  in  court  solely  for 
the purpose of answering such question. 
10.   Administration of oath if accepted.–    If such 
party  or  witness  agrees  to  make  such  oath  or 
affirmation,  the  Court  may  proceed  to  administer 
it, or, if it is of such a nature  that it may be more 
conveniently  made out  of  Court,     the    Court  may 
issue a commission to any person to administer it ,  
and  authorize  him  to  take  the  evidence  of  the 
person to be sworn or affirmed and return it to the 
Court. 
C,R.No.2124 of 2015 
4 
11.    Evidence  conclusive  as  against  person 
offering  to  be  bound.–    The  evidence  so  given 
shall,  as  against  the  person  who  offered  to  be 
bound  as  aforesaid,  be  conclusive  proof  of  the 
matter stated.” 
Meaning  thereby  the  learned  trial  Court  has  observed  all  the 
formalities  provided  under  sections  8  to  11  of  the  Oaths  Act, 
1873 and has strictly followed the said provisions as is evident 
from  the  proceedings  conducted  by  it,  as  the  proceedings  for 
offer,  acceptance  and  administration  of  oath  were  carried  on 
17.07.2013, whereas the learned trial Court, decided the matter 
on  24.07.2013;  during  the  intervening  period  from  17.07.2013 
to  24.07.2013,  the  petitioners  did  not  agitate  the  matter, 
contending the same a result of fraud and misrepresentation or 
of  coercion  but  kept  mum  and  when  the  proceedings  were 
finalized through the impugned order and decree, the petitioners 
woke  up  from  deep  slumber  and  agitated  the  matter  by  filing 
appeal;  in  this  case  principle  of  approbate  and  reprobate  fully 
attracts  and  the  learned  appellate  Court  has  rightly  dismissed 
the appeal, because Article 163 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 
1984 is different from the provisions of sections 8 to 11 of the 
Oaths Act, 1873, as Article 163 provides:- 
“163. Acceptance of denial  of  claim on oath: (1) 
when  the  plaintiff  takes  oath  in  support  of  his 
claim,  the  Court  shall,  on  the  application  of  the 
plaintiff, call upon the defendant to deny the claim 
on oath. 
(2) 
The Court may pass such orders as to costs 
and other matters as it may deem fit. 
C,R.No.2124 of 2015 
5 
(3).  Nothing  in  this  Article  applies  to  laws 
relating  to  the  enforcement  of  Hudood  or  other 
criminal cases.” 
Bare  reading  of  this  provision  of  Law  makes  it  vivid  that  an 
initiative has to be taken by the plaintiff, who in first stance has 
to  take  an  oath  in  support  of  his  claim  where-after  on  his 
request  the  Court  has  to  call  upon  the  other  side  to  refute  the 
said  statement  of  the  plaintiff  on  oath  and  it  is  mandatory  for 
the Court to pass any order in the light of the said statements of 
the parties; but in the present case, the petitioners did not make 
an  offer  for  administering  special  oath  as  provided  in  Article 
163  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  rather, on  the  offer 
of  the  petitioners,  one  Muhammad  Yar  witness,  administered 
oath in the light of the mutual agreement of the parties and said 
mutual consent is the basic theme of above referred provisions 
of the Oaths Act, 1873. 
 
Here  this  question  also  loses  its  significance  that  the 
petitioner  Muhammad  Riaz  could  not  understand 
the 
consequences  of  the  offer  so  made  by  him,  because,  if  the 
position  was  as  such,  the  matter  would  have  been  agitated 
during 
the 
intervening  period 
i.e.  from  17.07.2013 
to 
24.07.2013,  but  no  such  exertion  was  made  by  the  petitioners. 
Thus,  after  accomplishment  of  the  process  in  response  to  the 
offer, the petitioners could not step-back or resile, because once 
an offer made by one party has been accepted by the other party 
and  the same  is  acted  upon, they  cannot squirm/back out from 
the  output  thereof  as  such  offer  and  acceptance  would  be  an 
agreement of binding nature. 
4. 
 
Pursuant to the above discussion, it is held that the 
learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  could  not  point  out  any 
C,R.No.2124 of 2015 
6 
illegality  or  irregularity  as  well  as  wrong  exercise  of  vested 
jurisdiction,  alleged  committed  by  the  learned  Courts  below 
while  passing  the  impugned  order,  judgment  and  decrees, 
warranting  interference  by  this  Court.  Resultantly,  while 
placing  reliance  on  Attiqullah  v.  Kafayatullah  (1981  SCMR 
162), Nazir Ahmad v. Mahmood Ahmad and others (1984 CLC 
2658-Lahore)  and  Abdul  Khaliq  v.  Gul  Faraz  (PLD  2011 
Peshawar  112),  the  civil  revision  in  hand  being  without  any 
force and substance stands dismissed in limine. 
 
M.A.Hassan 
SHAHID BILAL HASSAN 
Judge 
