 
 
FORM No. HCJD/C-121 
 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Mubashir Hussain  Versus  Syed Hussain Abbas, etc. 
Sr.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties of counsel, where 
necessary 
04.3.2019.  
  Mr. Imran Abbas Sindhu, Advocate for the petitioner. 
 
The  petitioner  in  this  revision  petition  assails  the 
judgment  and  decree  dated  16.1.2015  passed  by  the 
learned  Civil  Judge,  Depalpur,  as  also  the  judgment  and 
decree  dated  22.9.2017  of  learned  Addl.  District  Judge, 
Depalpur, District Okara, dismissing the appeal. 
2. 
 Respondents  herein,  Syed  Hassan  Abbas  and  Syed 
Hassan  Jahanyan  (respondents  herein)  filed  a  suit  for 
declaration claiming that they were the real sons of Syed 
Bashir  Hussain  and  Mst.  Sagheer  Fatima,  both  then 
deceased;  and 
that  suit  property  comprising 
land 
measuring 49 kanals 15 marlas, which was owned by their 
mother, 
on 
her 
death 
devolved 
upon 
the 
respondents/plaintiffs, the petitioner  (Mubashar  Hussain), 
Musharaf  Hussain  and  Syed  Kaukab  Zia,  as  legal  heirs. 
While they were enjoying possession of the suit property 
through  their  tenants,  the  petitioner  who  was  resident  of 
Canada returned three months before the institution of the 
suit,  and  forcibly  took  the  possession  from  the  servants 
and  pattadaraan.  The  petitioner 
thereafter  started 
claiming that the land had been gifted to him through gift 
deed  No.  1731  dated  19.8.2002  by  their  mother  Mst. 
Sagheer Fatima and mutation No. 390 based thereon was 
entered.  The  alleged  plea  of  gift,  according 
to 
` 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-2 
respondent/plaintiff was false. (Late) Mst. Sagheer Fatima 
was an illiterate lady, who never made any gift in favour 
of  the  petitioner  and  that  the  alleged  deed  of  gift  was 
forged  and  fraudulent,  which  was  prepared  and  got 
attested  by  impersonation.  Their  mother  never  appeared 
before the sub-registrar  or the  local  commission  and  also 
that  the  three  foundational  conditions  for  claiming  gift 
were  non-existent  and  therefore  they  were  entitled  to  a 
declaration  to  the  effect  that  the  alleged  document  was 
inoperative qua their rights. 
3.  The  suit  was  resisted  by  the  petitioner  on  the  plea 
that  their  mother  considered  respondent/plaintiffs  to  be 
disobedient progeny and out of natural love and affection 
voluntarily  gifted  the  suit  property  to  petitioner;  which 
none of them challenged during  her lifetime. Further that 
the  respondent  Nos.  2  and  3  were  fully  aware  about  the 
alleged  gift  as  also  the  document  and  that  the  suit  was 
filed  to  harass  the  petitioner  which  was  liable  to  be 
dismissed. 
4. 
 Issues  crystalized  from  divergent  pleadings  were 
framed  on  12.12.2012  and  parties  produced  evidence  pro 
and  contra.  Oral  as  well  as  documentary  evidence  was 
adduced  by  both  sides.  On  consideration  of  the  evidence 
as  also  the  points  raised  by  the  parties,  the  learned  Civil 
Judge decreed the suit vide judgment dated 16.1.2015. 
5.  Petitioner  impugned  the  judgment  and  decree  in 
appeal which was dismissed by the learned Addl. District 
Judge on 22.9.2017; in consequence decree of the learned 
trial court was affirmed. 
6.  Learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  petitioner 
while throwing a challenge to the judgments of the courts 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-3 
below, argued that the three essential ingredients to prove 
gift  were  duly  established  by  evidence;  that  minor 
discrepancies in the evidence were natural consequence of 
recording  of  the  evidence  after  several  years  and  thus 
ignorable; 
that  petitioner 
filed  an  application 
for 
additional  evidence  before the  first  appellate  court  which 
was  illegally  declined;  that  statement  of  DW1  was  duly 
supported  and  corroborated  by  the  other  DWs;  that  the 
respondent No.3, sister of the petitioner, allegedly filed a 
suit  for  declaration  during  the  lifetime  of  the  mother  but 
respondent  Nos.1  and  2 
failed 
to  challenge 
the 
proceedings/orders  passed  therein  under  section  12(2), 
C.P.C.; that the suit was liable to be dismissed due to the 
delayed  institution  thereof;  and  that  petitioner  has  filed 
miscellaneous  application  (CM  1-C/2018)  before  this 
Court with the instant revision petition, to seek permission 
for  additional  evidence  declined  by  the  learned  appellate 
court, which deserves to be allowed. 
7.  The submissions made in the course of the hearing of 
the  petition  have  been  considered  in  the  light  of  the 
evidence  on  the  record  as  also  the  findings  recorded  by 
the learned courts below on the basis thereof. 
8.  From  the  record  annexed  with  this  petition,  it  is 
manifest  that  the  relationship  of  the  parties  inter  se  as 
legal  heirs  of  deceased  Syed  Bashir  Hussain  and  Mst. 
Sagheer  Fatima  is  not  in  issue.  The  dispute  relates  to 
alleged  gift  deed  No.  1731  dated  19.8.2002  as  also 
mutation  No.  390  on  the  basis  thereof  in  terms  of  which 
the  petitioner  claims  that  the  land  in  question  was 
allegedly  gifted  to  him  by  his  late  mother.  While 
respondent/plaintiffs  claimed  that  no  such  gift  was  ever 
made,  their  mother  never  divested  herself  of  title  in  the 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-4 
land,  she  was  an  illiterate  lady,  never  appeared  either 
before the local  commission  or  the  sub-registrar  nor  ever 
executed any alleged gift deed and that the document was 
prepared and got registered fraudulently by impersonation 
and by producing of a different person which as such was 
inoperative qua the rights of the legal heirs.  
9. 
It  is  a  consistent  rule  that  where  the  existence  and 
execution  of  a  document  is  questioned  on  the  plea  of 
being  fictitious, fraudulent  and  a  result of  impersonation, 
the  onus  to  prove  the  transaction  and  execution  of 
document  as  also the  registration/attestation  thereof, with 
free will and volition of the alleged executant, always rest 
upon the beneficiary of the document. In this case, as also 
observed by the two courts below, the respondent/plaintiff 
appeared  as  PW1,  who  deposed  that  no  gift  was  ever 
made.  The  foundational  elements  of  gift  were  non-
existent.  The  deceased  never  transferred  the  property  or 
executed  the  document  nor  there  was  any  independent 
advice  for  the  old  lady  and  that  the  document  was 
prepared  and  registered  by  producing  a  different  person. 
The statement was supported by PW2 in his deposition. In 
defence,  the  petitioner  appeared  as  DW1,  who  during 
cross-examination  admitted 
that  he  was  permanent 
resident of Canada and that he was not in Pakistan at the 
time of death of his mother, and that he did not recollect 
the  names  witnesses  of  the  alleged  gift  and  that  he  had 
family  terms  with  Aslam  Shad  Joya,  the  alleged  local 
commission. The petitioner did not  deny  that in  2002  his 
mother  was  60  to  65  years  of  age  and  that  his  father  did 
not  make  any  gift  in  his  favour;  and  that  the  property  of 
the father devolved upon all the legal heirs in accordance 
with  their  Islamic  shares.    It  is  thus  evident  that  the 
petitioner  who  claimed  to  be  beneficiary  of  the  alleged 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-5 
gift did not recollect the names of the supposed witnesses 
nor  did  he  mention  the  time  of  the  alleged  gift  in  the 
written statement. So much so DW2, Syed Asim, admitted 
in  cross-examination  that  none  of  the  witnesses  was 
resident of Rajgarh and that apart from Aslam Shad Joya, 
two other witnesses were present but he could not disclose 
their  names.  Razzaq  Ahmad  the  other  alleged  identifier 
was not produced in evidence. 
10.       The alleged gift deed, Ex.P1, does not indicate that 
it was signed by any person as an attesting witness; rather 
the document reveals that the status of Muhammad Akram 
Qasmana,  Advocate  and  Razzaq  Ahmad,  who  had 
allegedly  signed,  was  mentioned  as  identifier  No.1  and 
identifier  No.2.  Mian  Muhammad  Aslam  Shad  Joya, 
Advocate  claims  to  have  acted  as  a  local  commission. 
Identifier  and  attesting  witness  represent  two  distinct 
capacities.  The  testimony  of  a  person  who  had  allegedly 
acted as identifier could not be considered to be that of an 
attesting witness. Be that as it may, even the statement of 
Muhammad Akram Qasmana, Advocate and that of Mian 
Aslam  Shad  Joya,  local  commission  was  not  credible. 
None  of  them  was  either  related  to  (late)  Mst.  Sagheer 
Fatima  nor  claimed  to  be  resident  of  the  area  where  she 
statedly  lived.  Razzaq  Ahmad  the  other  person  who 
allegedly identified did not appear in the trial as a witness. 
As  noted  by  the  learned  courts  below  DW2  as  also  the 
other  witnesses  who  appeared  in  the  evidence,  did  not 
recollect  the  names  of  the  witnesses  to  the  alleged  gift, 
nor those  two  to  three  persons  who  find mention  in their 
testimonies,  were  produced  in  evidence.  It  was  a  case  in 
which  the  alleged  donor  (mother)  was  an  illiterate 
pardanashin  lady  aged  between  60  and  65  years  who  is 
claimed to have allegedly executed the document without 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-6 
any  independent  advice  and  in  the  absence  of  any  of  her 
near  and  dear  ones  i.e.  other  sons  and  the  daughter.  The 
petitioner  claims  that  the  deceased  made  the  gift  as 
plaintiffs/respondents  1  and  2  were  allegedly  disobedient 
children  but  this  stance  is  belied  by  the  gift  deed,  ExP1, 
itself  that  does  not  mention  any  such  reason  for  the 
alleged  gift.  The  learned  courts  below  after  in  depth 
scrutiny  of  the  evidence  recorded  findings  to  the  effect 
that  the  petitioner  could  not  prove  the  alleged  gift  deed, 
ExP1,  while  the  mutation  under  challenge  was  based  on 
the  document  the  execution  whereof  could  not  be 
established. 
11.   In “Phul Peer Shah v. Hafeez Fatima” (2016 SCMR 
1225)  it  was  observed  by  the  honourable  Supreme  Court 
that in the cases where the transaction is claimed to be by 
a pardanashin lady, the onus to prove transaction is upon 
the beneficiary who has to prove free of all suspicions and 
doubt, that the transaction was legitimately made and that 
certain  mandatory  conditions  were 
fulfilled 
in  a 
transparent  manner.  The  operative  part  of  the  judgment 
reads as follows: - 
 
8.  In  a  case  of  such  transaction  with  old, 
illiterate/rustic  village  ‘Parda  Nasheen’  lady 
onus  to  prove  the  transaction  being  legitimate 
and  free  from  all  suspicious  and  doubts 
surrounding it, can only be dispelled if the lady 
divesting  herself  of  a  valuable  property,  the 
following  mandatory  conditions  are  complied 
with  and  fulfilled  through  transparent  manner 
and 
through  evidence  of  a  high  degree. 
Amongst  this  condition,  the  pre-dominantly 
followed are as follows: - 
(i)  That the lady was fully cognizant and was 
aware of the nature of the transaction and 
its probable consequences; 
(ii)  That  she  was  having  independent  advice 
from  a  reliable  source/person  of  trust  to 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-7 
fully  understand 
transaction; 
the  nature  of 
the 
(iii)  That witnesses to the transaction are such, 
who are close relatives or fully acquainted 
with the lady and were having no conflict 
of interest with her; 
(iv)  That the sale consideration was duly paid 
and  received  by  the  lady  in  the  same 
manner; and 
(v)  That  the  very  nature  of  transaction  is 
explained  to  her  in  the  language  she 
understands fully and she was apprised of 
the  contents  of  the  deed/receipt,  as  the 
case may be.” 
  
12.   In the case of “Arshad Khan v. Mst. Resham Jan and 
others”  (2005  SCMR  1859)  it  was  observed  by  the 
honourable  Supreme  Court  to  the  effect  that  in  case  of 
transaction  involving  pardanashin  lady,  heavy  burden 
rests  on  party  in  position  of  active  confidence  to  prove 
good faith and genuineness of transaction as envisaged in 
Article  127  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  The 
august  Court  was  please  to  observe that  “this is a settled 
law  regarding  the  disposition  of  properties  of  Parda 
Nasheen  Ladies  and  also  the  illiterate  and  ignorant 
women  that  the  genuineness  of  the  transaction  of 
disposition must be established by the persons who claims 
its  genuineness  or  who  is  to  be  benefitted  by  such 
transaction  through  reliable,  cogent  and  convincing 
evidence.” 
13.    In  “Fayyaz  Hussain  and  others  v.  Haji  Jan 
Muhammad  and  others”  (PLD  2018  SC  698)  it  was 
observed  by  the  honourable  Supreme  Court    that  even  in 
the cases of death of the executant prior to the suit and in 
the face of the denial of the execution by the plaintiff, the 
requirement  of  two  attesting  witnesses  could  not  be 
dispensed with, and that the alleged beneficiary is legally 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-8 
required  to  prove  three  ingredients  of  gift:  (i)  offer  by 
donor,  (ii)  acceptance  of  gift  by  the  donee  and  (iii) 
delivery of possession; and all these ingredients need to be 
proved and established through independent evidence.  
14.  Likewise  in  “Ghulam  Farid  and  another  v.  Sher 
Rehman 
through  LRs” 
(2016  SCMR  862)  while 
examining the plea of transaction by a pardanashin lady it 
was observed by the honourable Supreme Court as under:- 
 
 
lady’s  vital 
“14.    The  inflexible,  hard  and  fast  rule  is,  that 
when any transaction is made by any one where 
“Parda  Nasheen” 
is 
involved  then,  the  following  conditions  are  to 
be invariably and essentially fulfilled: - 
 
(i) 
to  establish  through  evidence  that  the 
transaction  was  free  from  any  influence, 
misrepresentation or fraud; 
interest 
(ii) 
(iii) 
that,  the  amount  of  consideration  equal 
to  the  value  of  the  property  was  indeed 
paid to the ladies; 
ladies  were 
in  the  case  of  “Parda  Nasheen”  rustic 
village  ladies  at  the  time  of  transaction 
such 
to 
understand  the  nature  of  the  transaction 
and 
emanating 
therefrom and; 
consequences, 
fully  made 
the 
(iv)  That at the time of transaction, the ladies 
were  having  access 
independent 
advice  of  their  nearer  or  dearer,  who 
have no hostile interest to them.” 
to 
15.     Considering  the  rule  supra,  if  the  facts  and 
evidence of this case are considered, it is manifest that the 
petitioner miserably failed to prove the alleged gift as also 
the execution and registration of the disputed document of 
gift  by  his  mother,  a  pardanashin  old  lady,  through  any 
independent  evidence.  The  persons  who  allegedly 
identified and deposed in favour of the petitioner were not 
related to the alleged donor; she was not claimed to have 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-9 
any independent advice, except the petitioner who claims 
the  alleged  gift;  and  none  of  the  other  children  of  the 
deceased  are  either  claimed  to  be  present  at  the  relevant 
time  or  ever  appeared  in  the  witness  box  to  support  the 
petitioner  on  oath  by  undergoing  the  test  of  cross-
examination.  The  statement  of 
the  witnesses  was 
unworthy of any credibility as rightly observed by the two 
courts below. It was a case in which the petitioner claimed 
that  the  property  which  was  to  be  inherited  from  the 
mother by all the siblings as per their Islamic shares, was 
gifted to him to their exclusion but he was unable to prove 
through  any  cogent  evidence  even  the  excuses  taken 
through  written 
statement 
to 
justify 
the  alleged 
transaction. 
16.   In a similar case  “Fareed and others v. Muhammad 
Tufail  and  another”  (2018  SCMR  139)  honourable 
Supreme Court while dealing with the plea as taken by the 
petitioner observed as under: - 
 
“2. The principal issue, whether the respondent-
plaintiff  Muhammad  Tufail  could  claim  as  a 
legal heir of Gomaan, is settled by a concurrent 
finding  of  fact  given  by  three  learned  courts 
below. In the light thereof the rule laid down by 
this court in “Kulsoom Bibi v. Muhammad Arif” 
(2005  SCMR  135)  and  Ghulam  Haider 
v.Ghulam  Rasool  (2003  SCMR  1829)  that  a 
done claiming under a gift that excludes an heir, 
is  required  by  law  to  establish  the  original 
transaction  of  gift  irrespective  of  whether  such 
transaction is evidenced by a registered deed. In 
the  present  case  there  is  no  evidence  of 
declaration  of  gift  or  of  its  acceptance  on 
record.  The  mere  transfer  of  possession  to  a 
done  is  not  sufficient  to  constitute  a  valid  gift 
under the law. Furthermore, in the judgment  of 
this court reported as “Barkat Ali v. Muhammad 
Ismail” (2002 SCMR 1938) a gift deed as in the 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-10 
present  case  must  justify  the  disinheritance  of 
an heir from the gift…” 
 
17.   The  petitioner  miserably  failed  to  produce  any 
cogent  evidence  in  support  of  his  plea  of  gift  to  the 
exclusion of other legal heirs. As to the plea that the other 
legal heirs did not deny the gift in their reply, suffice it to 
say  that  any  alleged  admission  of  a  co-defendant  or  co-
plaintiff  cannot  non-suit 
the  plaintiff  or 
the  other 
defendant  in  the  suit,  till  such  time  s/he  appears  in  the 
witness box and submits to cross-examination. 
18.     In  “Shah  Muhammad  and  2  others  v.  Dulla  and  2 
others”  (2000  SCMR  1588),  it  was  observed  that  the 
admission of a co-plaintiff or co-defendant does not bind 
the other in the absence of direct evidence. 
19.     The  petitioner  was  required  in  law  to  prove  by 
independent  and  credible  evidence  the  alleged  gift  and 
also 
the  execution  of 
the  document.  These  were 
undeniably  not  proved  in  this  case.  Two  courts  below 
minutely  examined  the  entire  evidence  and  recorded 
concurrent  findings  of  fact  that  the  alleged  gift  and  the 
disputed  document  could  not  be  proved;  even  no 
misreading  or  non-reading  of  the  evidence  could  be 
pointed out. 
20.      As to the application (CM 1-C/2018) for additional 
evidence  whereby  the  petitioner  seeks  permission  to 
produce  Razzaq  Ahmad  and  copy  of  Khasra  Girdawari, 
the  request  cannot  be  accepted  for  the  reason  that  the 
petitioner was allowed sufficient opportunities in the trial 
court  to  produce  evidence,  who  opted  to  confine  himself 
to the evidence already produced. After having lost in trial 
court petitioner attempted to make up the deficiency in his 
evidence  by  moving  an  application  by  way  of  additional 
Civil Rev. No.130272 of 2018 
Page-11 
evidence  which  was  also  declined  by  the  learned  first 
appellate  court  for  cogent  reasons.  The  production  of 
Razzaq Ahmad at this stage could not lend any support to 
the  petitioner’s  case  as  the  evidence  already  on  record 
does not prove the existence of gift or the execution of the 
document;  while  the  witnesses  produced  as  noted  by  the 
courts below did not mention the name of Razzaq Ahmad. 
Even  otherwise,  he  is  not  claimed  to  be  related  to  the 
deceased  mother  nor  had  any  acquaintance  with  her 
family. In these circumstances Razzaq Ahmad’s statement 
could  hardly  furnish  any  support  in  defence  of  the 
petitioner. The application  (CM  1-C/2018)  for  additional 
evidence is therefore declined. 
21.  For the reasons herein above, this revision petition is 
without  substance,  which  fails  and 
is  accordingly 
dismissed. 
   
 
  (RASAAL HASAN SYED) 
        
 
 
     JUDGE 
Approved for reporting 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Mian M. Rabbani*   
  
 
