Stereo.  HCJDA38.
Judgrnent  Sheet
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT
BAHAWALPUR BENCH BAHAWALPU  R
JUDICI,\L  DEPARTMENT
Noor Muhammad  and two others
Versus
Falak Sher
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing:
13.01 .1?.017
Petitioners  by:
Ch. NJc,ser Ahmod, Advocote.
Respondent  by:
Mr. Aejoz Ahmed Ansori,  Advocqte
MUJAHIp  MUSL\eEEM  AHMEp. J:  Factual
matrix giving rise to the instant civil Revision and
necessary for  its  decision is  that  suit  property
measuring 238 Kanal situatt:d  in Mouza Bareka Hittar,
Tehsil Minchinabad, District Bahawainagar was owned
by  Mst.Taj Bibi. Noor Muhammad and Ahmad
Ali/petitioners  filed suit lbr specific performance  of
contract, which was decre,:<l in their faovour by civil
court and subsequently mutation  of sale No.527,  dated
30.11.1989 (Exh.PS) was attested in their favour in
consideration  of Rs.100,000/-.  Fa,lak Sher respondent
filed pre-emption suit against this transaction on the
Civil  Revision No.J70  of 2003
qualification of Shafi sharik, shafi Khalit and shafi-a-
Jar. He further alleged that approximately  ten days
prior to the institution  of the suit, he came to know
about the sale under pre-emption and in presence of
witnesses (without  naming them) declared his right of
pre-emption  and informed the present petitioners No.1
& 2/vendees  about maki'g of ralb-a-Muwathibat and
thereafter  performed Talb-i-Ishhad. (The mod.e  and
manner of making it  not given) Sale price of suit
property was admitted  by him. petitioner No.1 and
2/vendees  denied the factual controversy and claimed
that the suit was barred by rimitation, the pre-emptor
has no superior right of pre-emption and he failed to
make Talabs in accordance  with law.
2. 
To resolve  the controversy  between the parties,
the learned civil Judge framed ten issues and thereafter
recorded evidence.  Durir.g; pend.ency of suit, Noor
Muhammad-petitioner  transferred  his share in  suit
property vide mutation No.rlo6 sanctioned in favour of
his daughei Mst. safia Eibi-petitioner No.3 (wife of
petitioner No.2) and as suctr she was also impleaded  in
the array of defendants.
3. 
Learned Civil Jucge vide impugned judgment
and decree dated 28.06.2a0.[, decreed the suit in favour
of respondent  to the extent cf 119 Kanal land and to the
extent of remaining suit property  pre-emption suit was
dismissed. Both the parties filed appeals before the
learned  Additional District ,Judge, who vide judgment
dated 11.03.2003,  acceptec the appeal of respondent
and decreed the suit in to,-o and cross appeal filed by
petitioners/vendees was dismissed.  Feeling  aggrieved by
the  impugned  judgmenl.s and  d.ecrees, present
Civil Revision No.170 of 2003
petitioners assailed the same through the instant civil
revision, mainly  on  the  grounds that  the
respondent/pre-emptor  after consolidation of Mouza
was not having any pre-emption rights, Ta_labs were not
mad'e according to Islamic Law of pre-emption.  This
revision petition was accepted vide judgment of this
Court dated 03.06.2010  and impugned judgments  and
decrees were set aside and the pre-emption suit was
d.ismissed.  Respondent  filecl C.P.L.A.N o.252-L of 2010,
before Apex Supreme Court of Pakistan and the same
was allowed vide orders  dated. 10.03.2016 in following
terms:-
'  "It is conceded by Mian Al1ah Nawaz,
learned counsel  for the respondents,  that
the question of  l.imitation has been
erroneousiy  dealt vrith and decided  by the
High Court in the 1>resent  matter through
the impugned  judgment, however,  he
states that the re''rision  petition  filed by
the respondents was liabie to be allowed
on the ground of Talbs because the
appellants  had falr:d to prove Talbs in
accgrdance with the relevant law because
the suit at that time was filed during the
interregnurn  and the Islamic principles of
Talbs were attracted. Thus, both the
learned counsel fcrr the parties have no
objection  for the setting aside of the
impugned judgment  and remanding of
the matter to the !.earned High Court for
decision afresh of the civil revision,  inter
alia,  on  the  question of  Ta1bs.
Resultantly,  the instant appeal  is allowed,
the impugned judgment  is set aside and
the matter is rernanded  to the iearned
High Court for decision  afresh of the civil
revision.
Arguments heard.  Record perused.
4. 
it is al admitted fact that the respondent/pre-
5. 
emptor was co-sharer in  suit property but during
Civil  Revision  No,170  of 2003
pendency  of the suit, consolidation proceedings were
conducted  in the Mouza arld land of respond.ent was
separated from the land of present petitioners.  Falak
Sher as PW-4, during cross examination  has conceded
that after consolidation cf Mouza, his land and of
petitioners/vendees  was included in Wanda No.53 and
63 respectively. It is well settled law that a preemptor in
a suit must have pre-emption  right at the time of sale,
institution of suit and at the time of passing final
decree. Thus, at the stage of final decision of pre-
emption suit, the respondent has no pre-emption  right
on the basis of co-sharer.  Counsel for respondent  has
made an unsuccessful attempt to convince the Court
that the respondent was stil1 owner in revenue estate,
whereas petitioners/vandees  have no such qualification
being strangers, as such on this qualification also
respondent  is entitled to a pre-emption decree. No such
qualification  has been pleaded in  plaint, so the
respondent cannot be perrnitted to prove the facts not
pleaded in pleadings.  Reliance is placed on 2Ot6 YLR
423 Lahore (D.B.l Lahore 'Oasim Rafique  Versus
Muhammad  Ra-fique throug\ L.Rs. and others'.  As such
the findings of learned. Corrts below that respond.ent
has  pre-emption right  is  against record and
consequently their findings  on issue No.7 are reversed.
!
6. 
The pre-emption  suit was li1ed on 30.01.1990
in  respect of  mutation of  sale No.527, dated
30.11.1989. In the above referred.  remand. ord.er passed
by the Apex Supreme Court of Pakistan, the legal
question of limitation of pre-emption suit filed during
interregnum  period (1-B-1986 to 28-3-1990) has been
settled as one vear. As such the suit filed bv
Civil Revision No.110 of 2003
respondent/pre-emptor  is well in  time. Findings of
Courts  below on issue No..L are affirmed.
7. 
As noticed supra in para No.4 of pre-emption
suit, respondent has clainted that he came to know
about sale transaction approximately ten days before
filing of the suit and he declared his right of pre-
emption in presence  of witnesses and then apprised  the
petitioners/vendees  about rnaking of ralb-i-muwathibat
and thereafter he made Ta.lb-i-ishhad.  In the plaint, the
respondent/pre-emptor  has failed to mention  date, time
and place and narne of infor:mer  of sa1e. He has also not
given the names of the witn.esses  before whom he made
Talb-i-muwathibat.  He has also not detailed in plaint
the mode and manner of making Talb-i-ishhad.  Now it
is well settled 1aw that a party cannot be permitted to
lead evidence regarding a material  fact until and uniess
it has laid a foundation  in its pleadings.  The purpose of
this rule is that the other perrty be not taken by surprise
and it  should know befcrre hand the version of his
opponent.  In L996 SCMR 336 'BinUameen and 3 others
Versus Chaudhru Hakim t@angthef it has been laid
down that as per practice and procedure, no evid.ence
can be led or looked in sutpport of any plea which  had
not been taken in pleadings. Similar view has been
taken in 2OL6 YLR 539 Lahore  'Mst. HaLtqtan Mai
Versus Mst. Aziz Mai alias,W'
B. 
Admittedly,  the pre-emption suit was filed by
the respondent during  inte:rregnum  period commencing
from 01.08.1986 till 28.03.1990. In recent precedent
2OL6 SCMR 1836 'Mushtdq AIi Versus Multan Khan
and others', it  has been l.aid down that during the
interregnum  period the classic Islamic 1aw governed  the
Civil Revision No.770 of 2003
right of  pre-emption. So, rule of  specification  of
particulars of Talb-i-Muvrathibat under the classic
Islamic law applied to a pre-emption suit filed during
the interregnum period. As such it is crystal clear that
the respondent/pre-emptor has failed to  give the
requisite details of making Talb-i-Muwathibat and Talb-
i-Ishhad. It  is settled lavr that facts which are not
pieaded  cannot be proved and if any evidence is brought
on record, the sarne canmlt. be read. Vide mutation of
sale  No.526 (Exh.Pa) attested. on  30.11.1989
respondent  purchased  land in disputed Khata from Mst.
Taj Bibi-vendor  on the basjs of a decree passed by Civil
Court. Whereas  vide mutation of sale No.527  attested
on 30. i 1.1989, the petitioners  No.1 and 2  have
purchased the suit propert:y  from same vendor. Both
the mutations were sanctioned  on one and the sarne
date and in same meeting. The petitioners No.1 and 2
and respondent got attested  these mutations on the
basis of protracted civil litigation.  The respondent as
PW-4 in rebuttal evidence  admitted  his presence before
revenue officer. He also conceded that he was in
possession of suit property  siince long. As such the plea
of respondent that approximately  ten days before filing
of suit, he came to know about sale under pre-emption
is'after thought, based  on c:oncoction and not believable
as gospel truth. PW- 1 Muhammad Ali, claimed that he
has informed respondent eibout sale, when he (PW-
4/respondent) alongwith PW-2 Abdur Razaq, PW-3
Khadim Hussain visited his residence and respondent
expressed his  intention ro  file  pre-emption  suit.
Thereafter, on next day they visited resid.ence  of
petitioners/vendees  to mertr:e Talb-i-Ishhad.  PW-2 to
PW-4 have stated that on very date of making  Talb-i-
/
a^
Civil R?vlsion No.770 of 2003
is 
Muwathibat, Talb-i-ishhacl  was made. As such the
version of PWs regarding rnode and manner of making
Talbs is contradictory to each other and thus not
believable. So  it 
ful1y  established that
respondent/pre-emptor has failed to  timely make
necessary Talbs under Cletssic Islamic  Law. Therefore,
the courts below have wrcngly decided issue No.S in
favour of respondent.  Their findings are based  on
misreading and non-reading of evidence  and as such
not sustainable.  Conseque.ntly,  the findings of both the
Courts  below on this issue are reversed..
9. 
As a sequel of above discussion, the petitioners
have succeeded to establish that at the crucial third
stage of pre-emption suit :i.e its final adjudication,  the
respondent/pre-emptor  has no pre-emptive  right due to
consolidation  proceedings  ia.nd separation  of 1and of
both the contesting parties. The petitioners  have also
succeeded.  to  prove that. the respondent  has not
promptly  and timely made Talbs in accordance with
Islamic Lawl As such, this Civil Revision is allowed.,  the
impugned  judgments and decrees  dated 28.O6.2O0L
and 11.03.2003  passed  by the learned Civil Judge Ist
Class, Minchinabad  and learned Additional  District
Judge, Bahawalnagar  respectively  are set aside and the
pre-emption suit filed by  the respondent  stands
dismissed.
(Mujahid Mustaqeem
Judge
Approved for reporting.
44. "^*^n*non,.
li  ,n -r- ,
