 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
TAHIRA BIBI 
 Vs.   MUHAMMAD KHAN, etc. 
Date of hearing 
17.04.2018 
JUDGMENT 
Petitioner by 
Respondent No.1 by 
Mr. Naveed Shehryar Sheikh and Ms. 
Fatima Malik, Advocates. 
Mr. Muhammad Zaman Mangat, 
Advocate. 
Respondents No.2 & 3 by  Mr. Muhammad Nawaz Bosal, 
Advocate. 
 
SHAHID  WAHEED,  J:-  This  application  in  revision  is  of 
the  plaintiff  and  arises  from  a  dispute  relating  to  land  measuring  27-
Kanals 4-Marlas, which was owned by Ghulam Qadir, who was her real 
father  and  step  brother  of  defendant  No.1,  Muhammad  Khan.  Vide  gift 
mutation No.3847 dated 16.06.1999 (Exh.P-3) and gift mutation No.3760 
dated 17.02.1998 (Exh.P-4), land measuring 15-Kanals, 4-Marlas and 12-
Kanals  respectively  stood  transferred  in  the  name  of  Mst.  Fatima  Bibi, 
who was mother of Ghulam Qadir. Subsequently vide mutation No.3846 
dated  16.06.1999  (Exh.P-1)  and  mutation  No.3850  dated  26.08.1999 
(Exh.P-2),  the  land  mentioned  in  mutations  No.3760  and  3847  were 
transferred in the name of defendant No.1, Muhammad Khan, by way of 
oral  gifts.  On  12.04.2008  the  plaintiff  challenged  the  above  transactions 
of  gift  through  a  declaratory  suit  on  the  ground  of  fraud  and 
misrepresentation  with  the  assertion  that  her  deceased  father,  Ghulam 
Qadir being follower of  Shia faith had never made  any gift in favour of 
his  mother  Mst.  Fatima  Bibi.  Subsequently,  the  defendant  No.1  on 
15.10.2008  instituted  a  suit  under  Section  9  of  the  Specific  Relief  Act, 
1877, against the plaintiff and 4 others seeking a decree for possession. It 
was  alleged  in  the  plaint  that  the  plaintiff  alongwith  four  others  had 
illegally  dispossessed  him  (defendant  No.1)  from  the  suit  land.  During 
trial  of  the  suits  Muhammad  Munir  and  Nazir  filed  application  under 
Order  1  Rule  10  CPC  for  their  impleadment  as  defendants.  Since  they 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
2 
were  cousins  (Chachazad)  of  Ghulam  Qadir,  their  application  was 
allowed  and  they  were  impleaded  as  defendants  No.2  &  3  in  plaintiff’s 
suit. The defendants No.2 & 3 also contested the allegations made in the 
plaint.  They  in  their  written  statement  maintained  that  Ghulam  Qadir 
belonged to Sunni school of thought; and, that the plaintiff was entitled to 
inherit  only  ½  share  of  the  property  of  her  deceased  father,  Ghulam 
Qadir. 
2. 
Both the said two suits were consolidated. On pleadings, the Trial 
Court vide order dated 04.06.2009 framed consolidated issues. Parties to 
the  suits  led  evidence  in  support  of  their  respective  claims  before  the 
Trial Court. After appraising evidence, the Trial Court dismissed both the 
suits  through  consolidated  judgment  dated  23.02.2012  and  resultantly 
two decree sheets were accordingly prepared. The plaintiff and defendant 
No.1  through  separate  appeals  challenged  the  said  decrees  of  the  Trial 
Court.  Both  the  appeals  met  the  same  fate  and  were  dismissed  through 
two  separate  decrees  which  were  issued  vide  consolidated  judgment 
dated 11.03.2015. The plaintiff now seeks revision of the decrees of the 
Courts  below  which  were  issued  in  her  suit.  It  is  made  clear  that  the 
decrees issued in the suit of defendant No.1 are not  the subject matter of 
this revision application and, therefore, issues relating to it would not be 
discussed. 
3. 
 In the present case, the prime fact in issue was as to what was the 
belief of the deceased, Ghulam Qadir, that is to say, whether in the matter 
of  religious  faith,  he  adhered  to  Shia  faith  or  Sunni  discipline.  At  this 
juncture it would be apposite to state here that the fact in issue means any 
fact  from  which  either  by  itself  or  in  connection  with  other  facts  the 
existence,  non-existence,  nature  or  existence  of  any  right,  liability  or 
disability,  asserted  or  denied  in  any  suit  or  proceedings  necessarily 
follows. The word “fact” has been defined in Article 2(d) of the Qanun-e-
Shahadat, 1984 and includes:- 
(i)  Anything, set  of  things, or  relation  or  things,  capable  of  being 
perceived by the senses; and 
(ii)  Any mental condition of which any person is conscious. 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
3 
According  to  J.  Bentham,  Rationale  of  Judicial  Evidence  (Vol.6,  1838-
43, Edinburgh: William Tait. P.45), physical facts are such as either have 
their seat in some inanimate being or if in one that is animate, then not by 
virtue of the qualities which constitute it such; while psychological facts 
are  those  which  have  their  seat  in  an  animate  being  by  virtue  of  the 
qualities by which it is constituted animate. The definition under Article 
2(d)  supra,  therefore,  refers  to  two  kinds  of  facts:  firstly,  physical  fact, 
that  is  anything,  set  of  things,  or  relation  of  things  capable  of  being 
perceived by the senses; and, secondly, psychological fact which includes 
any  mental  condition  of  which  a  person is  conscious. It  was  held in the 
case of Edginaton v. Fitzmaurice ( 1885) 29 Ch. D 459 that a person’s 
state of mind was as much a matter of fact as his state of digestion. This 
principle was followed in the cases of Emperor v. Ramanuja Ayyangav 
(AIR  1935  Mad  528)and  Sabhapathi  v.  Huntley  (AIR  1938  PC  91). 
Belief is the state of mind in which a person thinks something to be the 
case  with  or  without  there  being  empirical  evidence  to  prove  that 
something  is  the  case  with  factual  certainity.  The  religious  faith  of  a 
person being related to state of mind, therefore, falls within the category 
of  psychological  fact.  Article  27  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat,  1984 
expressly deals with the relevancy of facts showing the existence of any 
state of mind and Explanation-1 appended thereto provides as under: 
“A  fact  relevant  as  showing  the  existence  of  a  relevant 
state  of  mind  must  show  that  the  state  of  mind  exist,  not 
generally  but  in  reference  to  the  particular  matter  in 
question.”   
 
In this perspective the Trial Court settled two issues. The first was issue 
No.1 (whether plaintiff Tahira Parveen is owner in possession of the suit 
property as sole heir of her Shia father, Ghulam Qadir, as averred in the 
plaint? OPP), whereas the second was issue No.13-A (whether father of 
plaintiff  Mst.  Tahira  Parveen  was  belonging  to  Shia  school  of  thought? 
OPP).    Upon  the  decision  of  said  two  issues  would  depend  as  to    what 
law  would  govern  the  succession  to  the  estate  of  the  deceased,  Ghulam 
Qadir. 
4. 
The  first  witness  PW-1  who  appeared  before  the  Trial  Court  to 
prove  that  the  deceased  Ghulam  Qadir  was  not  Sunni  but  Shia  was 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
4 
plaintiff  herself.  She  was  the  real  daughter  of  deceased  Ghulam  Qadir. 
She  in  her  examination-in-chief  stated  that  her  father  belonged  to  the 
Shia  sect.  During  the  course  of  cross-examination  she  admitted  that 
funeral prayer of her father was offered by a Sunni Molvi. She, however, 
voluntarily  stated  that  in  her  village  funeral  prayers  of  Sunni  and  Shia 
were  offered  by  the  same  Molvi;  that  her  Nikah  was  solemnized  by  a 
Sunni  Molvi;  that  she  also  professed  Shia  faith;  and,  that  Nikah  of 
defendant was also solemnized by  a Sunni Molvi. The plaintiff was also 
cross-examined  by  the  counsel  of  defendants  No.2  &  3.  During  this 
cross-examination the plaintiff also stated that her father belonged to Shia 
sect whereas mother was of Sunni faith; that her grand-father (Dada) and 
grand-mother  (Dadi)  were  Shias;  that  no  mosque  of  Shia  sect  was 
available  in  their  village  Mousa  Seeray  and,  therefore,  Sunni  and  Shia 
offered prayers together in the same mosque; that there were four or five 
mosques in their village; that there was no  Imambargah in their village; 
that  sometimes  her  father  offered  Juma  prayer  at  Mauza  Dhaal  and 
sometimes at home; that her father used to observe Iftar timing according 
to Mauza Dhaal; and, that she did not remember the name and sect of the 
Molvi  who  offered  the  funeral  prayer  of  her  father.  The  second  witness 
who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  plaintiff  was  Umer  Hayat  (PW-2).  This 
witness in his examination-in-chief stated that Ghulam Qadir belonged to 
Shia  faith.  During  cross-examination  he  stated  that  funeral  prayer  of 
Ghulam  Qadir  was  offered  by  a  Sunni  Molvi.  This  witness  was  also 
cross-examined  by  the  counsel  of  defendants  No.2  &  3.  In  this  cross-
examination,  PW-2  stated  that  plaintiff  was  his  neice;  that  plaintiff’s 
grand-father  (Dada  )  and  grand-mother  (Dadi)  were  of  Shia  faith;    that 
plaintiff’s  father  used  to  offer  Eid  prayer  under  the  Imamat  (leadership) 
of  Sunni  Molvi;  that  plaintiff’s  funeral  prayer  was  offered  by  a  Sunni 
Molvi namely Noor-ul-Haq; that plaintiff’s Nikah was also solemnized by 
a Sunni Molvi; that before 1986 plaintiff’s father was  Sunni but later on 
he  professed  Shia  faith;  that  he  did  not  know  in  whose  presence 
plaintiff’s  father  professed  Shia  faith.  He,  however,  voluntarily  deposed 
that  he  used  to  arrange  Majlis  at  the  house  of  his  brother,  namely, 
Muhammad Khan. 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
5 
5. 
On the other hand the nephew (Bhanja) and attorney of defendant 
No.1,  namely,  Iftikhar  appeared  before  the  Trial  Court  as  DW-1.  He  in 
his  examination-in-chief  stated  that  father  of  the  plaintiff  was  Sunni. 
During cross-examination, he deposed that defendant No.1 (Muhammad 
Khan)  and  his  mother  were  Sunni  by  faith.  This  witness  further  stated 
that he and his wife were followers of Shia faith.  The defendant No.1 in 
support of his claim also produced Sher Muhammad (DW-2), who in his 
statement  stated  that  Ghulam  Qadir  was  Sunni.  Another    witness  who 
appeared on behalf of defendant No.1 was Saee Muhammad (DW-3). He 
was  husband  of  the  sister  of  defendant  No.1.  This  witness  in  his 
statement stated that Ghulam Qadir was Sunni.   
6. 
Defendant No.2, Muhammad Munir, as his own witness appeared 
before  the  Trial  Court  as  DW-4.  He  was  cousin  (Chachazad)  of  the 
deceased  Ghulam  Qadir.  He  in  his  examination-in-chief  stated  that 
Ghulam Qadir was Sunni by faith; that Ghulam Qadir used to offer prayer 
according to Sunni creed; that Ghulam Qadir died professing Sunni faith; 
and,  that  his  funeral  prayer  was  offered  by  Sunni  Molvi  Noor-ul-Haq. 
During  cross-examination  he  stated  that  mutation  regarding  inheritance 
of Ghulam Qadir was sanctioned as per Shia sect; that appeal against the 
said  mutation  was  preferred  before  DDO(Revenue)  by  the  defendant 
which was allowed; that deision of the DDO (Revenue) was reversed by 
the  EDO  (Revenue);  that  mother  of  defendant  No.1  was  Sunni;  that 
Majlis had been arranging at the house of defendant No.1; that there were 
five or six houses of Shia community in Mauza Serray; that there was no 
Molvi  or  Imambargah    of  Shia  sect  in  Mauza  Serray;  that  all  persons 
belonging  to  Shia  faith  of  Mauza  Serray  used  to  offer  Eid  prayer  in 
Mauza  Dhaal.  The  defendant  No.2  produced  Syed  Mureed  Hussain 
(DW-5).  He  was  Khateeb  of  Masjid  Hussainia  of  Mouza  Dhaal.  This 
witness  in  his  statement  deposed  that  the  distance  between  Seeray  and 
Mauza  Dhall  was  two  miles  and  that  Ghulam  Qadir  was  Sunni.  During 
cross-examination  he  stated  that  he  knew  all  the  persons  belonging  to 
Shia  faith  of  Moauza  Seeray.  The  last  witness  was  Muhammad  Rafiq 
(DW-6). He was lumberdar of Mouza Seeray and stated before the Trial 
Court that Ghulam Qadir was Sunni by faith. 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
6 
7. 
Now a question arises as to what would be the principle of law to 
evaluate  the  above  stated  evidence  led  by  the  parties  of  the  suit  for 
determination  of  faith  of  deceased  Ghulam  Qadir.  In  order  to  find  out 
answer to this question, it is essential to survey the relevant case law. The 
first case which may be referred is “Saiyid Rashid Ahmad vs. Mst. Anisa 
Khatoon” (AIR 1932 PC 25). In that case no suggestion had been made 
in  the  pleadings  or  in  the  arguments  that  parties  were  not  Sunni 
Muhammadan governed by the ordinary  Hanafi Law.  The Court had to 
decide  the  question  of  Muhammadan  Law  relating  to  Talak  and  it  was 
held  that  as  there  was  no  such  suggestion  mentioned  in  the  record,  the 
Hanafi Law should be applied. 
 
 The second case is “Akbarally v. Mahomedally” (AIR 1932 Bom 
356). In that case Tyabji, J. observed: “it is not easy however to conceive 
of a case so devoid of all other circumstances from which the religion of 
the  parties  can  be  inferred,  that  this  presumption  from  numbers  should 
effectually come into operation.”  
 
In the case of “Mst. Iqbal Begum v. Mst. Syed Begum” (AIR 1933 
Lahore 80), the plaintiff who was the sister of the last holder alleged that 
the deceased was a Sunni but the defendants who were the daughters of 
the  last  holder  denied  that  fact.  The  onus  of  proving  that  the  deceased 
was a Shia was held to be on the defendants. The above stated principles 
were reiterated by a Division Bench of this Court in case of “Mst. Sardar 
Bibi  v.  Muhammad  Bakhsh  and  others”  (PLD  1954  Lahore  480)  and 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of “Pathana vs. Mst. 
Wasai and another”  (PLD 1965 SC 134).  
 
In the case of “Hussain v. Mansoor Ali and 5 others” (PLD 1977 
Karachi 320) the dispute was with regard to the administration of estate 
of  late  Mohatrama  Fatima  Jinnah,  the  sister  of  the  founder  of  Pakistan 
Quaid-e-Azam  Muhammad  Ali  Jinnah.  Inter-alia,  the  question  for 
consideration  was  whether  late  Mohatrama  Fatima  Jinnah  practised 
Sunni/Hanafi  faith  during  her  life  time  and  remained  a  Sunni  until  the 
time  of  her  death.  One  of  the  arguments  was  that  funeral  prayer  at  the 
time of death of Quaid-e-Azam as well as that of the deceased was held 
according  to  the  Sunni  manner  and  was  led  by  Sunni  Pesh  Imam  and,  
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
7 
therefore,  it  be  declared  that  Mohatrama  Fatima  Jinnah  died  professing 
Sunni faith. This argument was repelled and the Court observed that the 
fact that funeral prayers were performed according to the manner of her 
particular sect was not by itself sufficient for decision as to the religious 
belief held by the deceased himself or herself, for obviously the matter of 
funeral  ceremony  would  be  in  the  hands of  those  who  were incharge of 
the  same  and  it  was  conceivable  in  fact  it  had  been  so  held  that  such 
persons  might  arrange  such  ceremonies  not  strictly  according  to  the 
religious  faith  of  the  deceased  but    for  their  own  reasons  in  some  other 
manner.  
 
This Court in the case of “Zohran Mai v. Mst. Siftan and others” 
(1983  CLC  2559)  has  held  that  question  of  sect  of  a  person  cannot  be 
determined:  (i)  by  opinion  of  parties  but  can  be  inferred  from  facts 
creating  presumption  one  way  or  other;  and,  (ii)  merely  from  sect  to 
which his relatives belonged. 
 
In    the  case  of  “Amir  Ali  v.  Gul  Shaker  and  10  others”  (PLD 
1985  Karachi  365),  the  Division  Bench  of  Sindh  High  Court  has  held 
that  it  is  not  necessary  that  a  Mussalman  must  either  be  a  Sunni,  or,  a 
Shia  and  it  may  well  be  that  he  is  free  from  all  sectarian  feelings, 
sentiments and faith; and, that if it is not established that deceased was a 
Sunni or Shia then his estate has to be distributed in accordance with pure 
Muslim Law, as is stated in Quran in Sura Nisa. 
 
This Court in the case of  “Mst. Jantan through Mazhar Hussain 
v. Mst. Manzooran Bibi and others” (2005 YLR 233) held that donation 
receipts could only prove monetary contributions to an organization, but 
could  not  be  proof  of  donor’s  faith,  which  would  require  independent, 
clear and indisputable evidence for its proof or disproof. 
 
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Mst. 
Ghulam  Ayesha  alias  Ilyas  Begum  etc.  v.  Sardar  Sher  Khan,  etc.” 
(2006 SCJ 313) has held that flying of Alam of Hazrat Abbas on house 
of deceased would be proof of fact that deceased was of Shia faith. 
 
In the case of Pathana and others v. Allah Ditta (2008 YLR 589) 
the  presumption  that  the  deceased  was  Sunni  was  not  at  all  displaced 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
8 
either  by  the  respondent  or  by  the  petitioner  and,  therefore,  it  was  held 
that deceased was a Sunni. 
 
The full Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case 
of  “Ghulam  Shabbir  and  others  v.  Mst.  Bakhat  Khatoon  and  others” 
(2009 SCMR 644) has held that the initial presumption in Pakistan is that 
a Muslim is a Sunni until the contrary is proved; and, that the burden to 
prove that the deceased was Shia is on the person alleging him to be not 
Sunni but Shia. 
 
Finally,  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of 
Muhammad Bashir and others vs. Mst. Latifa Bibi through L.Rs (2010 
SCMR  1915)  while  reversing  the  judgment  rendered  by  this  Court 
reported as “Mst. Latif Bibi and 8 others v. Muhammad Bashir and 10 
others”  (2006  CLC  1076)  has  held  that  no  principle  of  universal 
application  is  available  to  determine  the  faith  of  a  person  and 
determination  whereof  depends  on  the  surrounding  circumstances,  the 
way of life, the paternal faith and faith of other kith and kins. 
8. 
Having carefully examined the case-law on the question in issue, I 
am  of  the  view  that  although  the  psychological  fact,  that  is,  faith  of  a 
person  is  incapable  of  direct  proof  and  no  principle  of  universal 
application  is  available  to  determine  it  yet  diagnosis  whereof  may  be 
made  through:  (i) direct  disclosures by  word of  mouth by  the  deceased; 
(ii)  circumstantial  evidence  of  the  conduct  of  the  deceased;  and  (iii) 
opinion  of  witnesses.  In  the  present  case  onus  was  upon  the  plaintiff  to 
displace the presumption that deceased Ghulam Qadir was not Sunni but 
Shia. The plaintiff appeared before the Trial Court as her own witness as 
PW-1  and  produced  her  distant  relative,  Umer  Hayat,  PW-2.  The 
statements  of  these  two  witnesses  were  deficient  to  prove  that  Ghulam 
Qadir was Shia. Mere their statement that Ghulam Qadir and his parents 
professed  Shia  faith  was  not  sufficient  particularly  when  PW-2  in  his 
cross-examination  admitted  that  till  1986  Ghulam  Qadir  was  Sunni  by 
faith  and  later  on he professed  Shia  creed.  The  plaintiff  was required to 
produce  the  person(s)  before  whom  Ghulam  Qadir  denounced  Sunni 
faith. This was not done. None of the witnesses particularly deposed as to 
the mode or manner of performance by Ghulam Qadir of his alleged Shia 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
9 
faith,  prayers,  rites,  its  practices,  ceremonies  and  mandates.  The 
witnesses  also  failed  to  disclose  their  source,  basis  and  reason  that  the 
deceased Ghulam Qadir was a Shia. Similarly, no witness was produced 
to  show  that  the  deceased  ever  attended  Zuljinah/Tazia/Taboot/Alam  or 
the  Muharram  processions.  The  documentary  evidence, 
that 
is, 
certificates  (Mark-A  to  Mark-C)  issued  by  different  private  Shia 
institutions were of no avail for two reasons: firstly, the scribes of these 
two  certificates  were  not  produced;  and  secondly,  these  private 
documents were tendered in the statement of the counsel, which itself  is 
not  permissible  as  per  principle  settled  in  the  case  of  “Federation  of 
Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Defence and another v. Jaffar 
Khan and others” (PLD 2010 SC 604). The conclusion, therefore, is that 
inference  drawn  by  the  Courts  below  fairly  arose  on  that  evidence  and 
was indeed, in all probability, is in accord with the facts. No fault could, 
therefore,  be  found  with  the  appreciation  of  the  evidence  by  the  Courts 
below in revisional jurisdiction of this Court. Consequently the findings 
of  the  Courts  below  under  issue  No.1  &  13-A  that  deceased  Ghulam 
Qadir died professing Sunni/Hanafi creed are maintained and upheld. 
9. 
Now,  I  address  the  other  fact  in  issue.  This  is  the  case  in  which 
transactions  of  gift  incorporated  in  mutations  No.3760,  3847,  3846  and 
3850  were  questioned  by  the  plaintiff  on  the  ground  of  fraud  and 
misrepresentation.  The  Trial  Court,  therefore,  framed  issue  No.2  i.e. 
whether  mutations  of  Hibba  No.3760  (17.02.1998),  3847  (16.06.1999), 
3846 (16.06.1999) and 3850 (26.08.1999) are against law and facts, null 
and void on rights of plaintiff Tahira Parveen? OPP; and, issue No.3 i.e. 
whether plaintiff  Tahira  Parveen is  entitled  to the  decree  for  declaration 
alongwith  consequential  relief  for  perpetual  injunction  as  prayed  for? 
OPP. The onus to prove the said issues was placed upon the plaintiff. The 
Courts  below  decided  these  issues  on  the  basis  of  provisions  of  law 
contained in Order VI Rule 4 CPC which contemplates that in all cases in 
which  the  party  pleading  relies  on  any  misrepresentation,  fraud,  breach  of 
trust,  wilful  default,  or  undue  influence,  and  in  all  other  cases  in  which 
particulars  may  be  necessary  beyond  such  as  are  exemplified  in  the  forms 
aforesaid, particulars (with date and items if necessary) shall be stated in the 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
10 
pleading.  Applying  the  above  said  provisions  of  law,  the  issue  No.2  was 
decided against the plaintiff on the ground that the plaint of the plaintiff was 
lacking  particulars  of  fraud.  I  am  afraid  the  Courts  below  while  returning 
findings on this issue not only mis-read and non-read the contents of plaint 
but  were  also  misdirected  in  law.  The  contents  of  plaint  of  the  plaintiff 
were  required  to  be  appraised  on  the  basis  of  two  fundamental  facts  of 
the case, that is, firstly, that the plaintiff is real daughter of the deceased 
Ghulam Qadir whereas defendant No.1 is step brother of Ghulam Qadir; 
and,  secondly,  that  initially,  the  suit  land  stood  transferred  through  oral 
gift  by  way  of  two  mutations  i.e.  mutation  No.3760    dated  17.02.1998 
and  mutation  No.3847  dated  16.06.1999  in  favour  of  Fatima  Bibi,  who 
was  mother  of  Ghulam  Qadir  and  subsequently  the  said  land  stood 
transferred  in  favour  of  defendant  No.1  by  way  of  mutation  No.3846 
dated  16.06.1999  and  3850  dated  26.08.1999.  The  allegations  of  the 
plaintiff were that defendant No.1 was a cunning and sneak person; that 
neither  there  was  any  offer  and  acceptance  of  gift  nor  there  was  any 
occasion  to  make  any  gift  in  favour  of  Fatima  Bibi;  that  her  deceased 
father neither appeared before any revenue officer nor he thumb marked 
any  document  in  this  regard;  that  possession  of  the  land    was  also  not 
delivered to defendant No.1; and, that  the defendant No.1 through fraud 
and in collusion with the revenue staff got transferred the suit land in his 
favour  by  way  of  a  fake  oral  gift  so  as  to  deprive  her  of  her  right  of 
inheritance.  Aforestated allegations pointing fraud and misrepresentation 
in  the  sanctioning  of  disputed  mutations  as  per  principle  settled  in  the 
case  of  “Mst.  Kulsoom  Bibi  and  another  v.  Muhammad  Arif  and 
others”  (2005  SCMR  135)  were  sufficient  to  meet  the  requirements  of 
Order VI Rule 4 CPC.  
10.  The other ground which prevailed upon the Courts below to decide 
issues No.2 & 3 against the plaintiff was that she had failed to prove the 
allegation  of  fraud  and  misrepresentation.  Again  the  approach  of  the 
Courts below to evaluate the evidence available on record was incorrect. 
The  general  rule  is  incumbit  probation  qui  dicit,  non  qui  negat  i.e.  the 
burden  of  proving  a fact  rests on the party  who  substantially  asserts  the 
affirmative  of  the  issue  and  not  upon  the  party  who  denies  it;  for  a 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
11 
negative  is  usually  incapable  of  proof.  It  is  an  ancient  rule  founded  on 
consideration  of  good  sense  and  should  not  be  departed  from  without 
strong  reasons  [See  Joseph  Constantine  Steamship  Line  Ltd.  V. 
Imperial  Smelting  Corporation  Ltd.  (1941)  2  All  ER  165  at  179)]. 
Article  117  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat,  1984  defines  “burden  of  proof” 
which  clearly  lays  down  that  whosoever  desires  any  Court  to  give 
judgment  as  to any  legal  right or liability  dependent on  the  existence of 
facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist. When a person is 
bound to prove the existence of any fact it is said that the burden of proof 
lies  on  that  person.  Thus,  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat,  1984  has  clearly  laid 
down  that  the  burden  of  proving  fact  always  lies  upon  the  person  who 
asserts. Until such burden is discharged; the other party is not required to 
be called upon to prove his case. The Court has to examine as to whether 
the person upon whom burden lies has been able to discharge his burden. 
Until the Court arrives at such conclusion, it cannot proceed on the basis 
of  weakness  of  the  other  party.  In  view  of  this  legal  position  of  the 
Qanun-e-Shahadat,  1984,  it  is  clear  that  there  can  be  no  dispute  that  a 
person who attacks a transaction as sham, bogus, fraudulent and fictitious 
must prove the same. Initial burden to prove the said negative fact would 
stand  discharged  the  moment  a  person  substantiates  his  allegations 
prima-facie by making a statement on oath and the onus would be shifted 
to  the  other  side  to  prove  that  the  transaction  in  question  was  bonafide 
and  legal.  In  this  regard  reference  may  be  made  to  the  cases  of  “M. 
Krishnaswami  Naidu  v.  Secretary  of  State  represented  by  Collector  of 
Tanjore and others”  (A.I.R. (30) 1943 Madras 15)  “Inayat Ali Shah v. 
Anwar Hussain” (1995 CLC 1906), “Muhammad Aslam v. Muhammd 
Tufail and 2 others” (1995 CLC1061). In the case on hands, the plaintiff 
as  her  own  witness  appeared  before  the  Trial  Court  and  reiterated  the 
allegation of fraud and misrepresentation on oath and, thus as per above 
stated principle of law the defendant No.1 was required to prove not only 
the validity of the disputed mutations but also to prove the bonafide and 
legality of transactions of gift incorporated therein. The facts of the case 
and  principles  of  law  applicable  thereto  were  not  properly  appreciated 
and  the  Courts  below  misdirected  themselves  by  misplacing  the  burden 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
12 
of  proof  and  recording  in  the  impugned  judgment  that  the  plaintiff  had 
failed to prove issue  No.2.  Since  the  Courts below  misplaced burden of 
proof,  they  clearly  vitiated  their  own  judgments.  It  is  well  established 
principle  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  that  misplacing  burden  of  proof  may 
vitiate judgment. It is  also equally and undoubtedly true that the burden 
of  proof  may  not  be  of  much  consequence  after  both  the  parties  lay 
evidence,  but  while  appreciating  the  question  of  burden  of  proof, 
misplacing  of  burden  of  proof  on  a  particular  party  and  recording 
findings  in  a  particular  way  definitely  vitiates  the  judgment  as  it  has 
happened  in  the  instant  matter  where  the  Courts  below  illegally  and 
erroneously  failed  not  to  cast  the  burden  on  defendant  No.1  by  clearly 
misconstruing the whole case and thus resulted into recording of findings 
which are wholly perverse.  
11. 
It was the case of defendant No.1 that firstly his step brother Ghulam 
Qadir during his life time gifted the suit land to his mother Fatima Bibi vide 
mutation No.3847 dated 16.06.1999 (Exh.P-3) and mutation No.3760 dated 
17.02.1998  (Exh.P-4);  and,  that  subsequently  Fatima  Bibi  transferred  the 
said  land  through  oral  gift  in  his  favour  vide  mutation  No.3846  dated 
16.06.1999  (Exh.P1)  and  mutation  No.3850  dated  26.08.1999  (Exh.P-2).                                                                                   
According to principle settled in the cases of “Mst. Raj Bibi and others v. 
Province  of  Punjab  through  District  Collector  ,  Okara  and  5  others” 
(2001 SCMR 1591),Mst. Kalsoom Bibi & another v Muhammad Arif & 
others  (2005  SCMR  135)  “Aurangzeb  through  L.Rs  and  others  v. 
Muhammad  Jafar  and  another”  (2007  SCMR  236)  and  “Rehmatullah 
and others v. Saleh Khan and others”  (2007 SCMR 729), , “Aurangzeb 
through L.Rs and others v. Muhammad Jafar and another” (2007 SCMR 
236), “Muhammad Iqbal and another v. Mukhtar Ahmad through L.Rs” 
(2008  SCMR  855)  and  “Muhammad  Ejaz  and  2  others  v.  Mst.  Khalida 
Awan and another” (2010 SCMR 342).”Allah Ditta and others v. Manak 
alias  Muhammad  Siddique  and  others”  (2017  SCMR  402)  and  “Mrs. 
Khalida  Azhar  v.  Viqar  Rustam  Bakhshi  and  others”  (2018  SCMR  30), 
the beneficiary of the transaction, that is, defendant No.1 was bound not 
only to prove the disputed mutations but also to prove the actual factum 
of gift by falling back on three ingredients, that is, (i) declaration of gift 
by  the  donor;  (ii)  acceptance  of  gift  by  the  donee;  and,  (iii)  delivery  of 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
13 
possession  of  corpus.  In  this  perspective,  I  have  examined  the  evidence 
available on record. The defendant No.1 neither in his written statement 
stated  the  date,  time,  place  and  name  of  witnesses  before  whom  the 
declaration and acceptance of gift was made nor any of the witness who 
appeared  on  behalf  of  the  defendants  made  any  statement  that  proposal 
and acceptance of gift was made in his presence. Failure to establish the 
twin requirement of gift i.e. proposal and acceptance of gift was fatal to 
the claim of defendant No.1. This aspect of the matter was not considered 
by either of the Courts below and thus, their findings on issues No.2 & 3 
cannot be approved. 
12.  There  is  another  aspect  of  the  matter  which  has  prompted  me  to 
interfere  with  the  findings  of  the  Courts  below.  The  acceptance  of  gift 
was  a  personal  act  and,  therefore,  it  was  required  to  be  proved  by  the 
donee through his own statement and attorney cannot substitute the donee 
under the law. In the present case defendant No.1 i.e. Muhammad Khan 
was donee of the transaction of gift as incorporated in mutation No.3846 
dated  16.06.1999  (Exh.P-1)  and  mutation  No.3850  dated  26.08.1999 
(Exh.P2) and thus he was required to appear before the Trial Court as his 
own witness to make statement with regard to date, time, place and name 
of witnesses before whom he made the declaration to accept the offer of 
gift.  Instead  of  appearing  as  his  own  witness,  the  defendant  No.1 
produced  his  attorney  Iftikhar  as  DW-1.  His  statement  as  per  principle 
settled in the cases of “Shah Nawaz and another v. Nawab Khan” (PLD 
1976 Supreme Court 767) “Mst. Gumbad and others v. Member, Board 
of  Revenue  and  others”  (1996  SCMR  1755)  “Muhammad  Ejaz  and  2 
others v. Mst. Khalida Awan and another” (2010 SCMR 342) was of no 
avail to prove the transaction of gift and thus the gift incorporated in the 
impugned mutations stood unproved. 
13. 
It is settled principle of law that neither presumption of correctness 
nor  that  of  truth  to  the  contents  of  mutation  is  attached  under  the  law. 
Once the existence of a transaction itself has been questioned by a party 
in suit, it was legal obligation of the person claiming  benefit thereunder 
to  prove  the  same.  Most  important  entities  in  connection  with  the 
attestation  of  mutation  were  the  Patwari  Halqa  who  had  to  enter  the 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
14 
mutation  and  the  Revenue  Officer  who  was  to  attest  the  same.  The 
defendant  No.1, 
thus,  as  per  principle  settled 
in 
the  cases  of 
“Muhammad  Akram  and  another  v.  Altaf  Ahmad”  (PLD  2003 
Supreme  Court  688)  “Sher  Baz  Khan  and  others  v.  Mst.  Malkani 
Sahibzadi  Tiwana  and  others”  (PLD  2003  Supreme  Court  849)  was 
required to produce the said two persons in the witness box to prove the 
valid attestation of the mutations in question. The defendant No.1 neither 
produced  the  Patwari  Halqa  nor  Revenue  Officer  who  sanctioned  the 
impugned  mutations and  thus  the  inference  which  may  be  drawn  is that 
defendants  had  failed  to  prove  the  valid  sanctioning  of  the  impugned 
mutations.  
14.  The  fraud  and  collusion  alleged  by  the  plaintiff  may  also  be 
unearth from the intention and motive of defendant No.1. It is to be noted 
that defendant No.1 was not the legal heir of deceased Ghulam Qadir nor 
in  the  ordinary  circumstances  was  entitled  to  get  the  suit  property. 
Though it is not necessary for a donor to furnish reasons for making a gift 
yet  no  gift  in  the  ordinary  course  of  human  conduct  be  made  without 
reason  or  justification  unless  the  donor  is  divested  of  power  of  reasons 
and  logic  and  unless  he/she  is  a  person  of  unsound  mind.  The  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of “Barkat Ali through L.Rs and 
others  v  Muhammad  Ismail  through  L.Rs  and  others”  (2002  SCMR 
1938)  has  held  that  in  the  wake  of  frivolous  gifts  generally  made  to 
deprive the females in the family from the course of inheritance prevalent 
at  present  times,  the  Courts  are  not  divested  of  the  powers  to  scrutinize 
the  reasons and  justification  for a gift so that no  injustice  is done to the 
rightful claimant and no course of inheritance is bye passed. In the instant 
case,  no  reason  has  been  furnished  for  making  gift  in  the  impugned 
mutations.  The  attorney  of  defendant  No.1,  that  is,  Iftikhar,  however, 
while  appearing  before  the  Trial  Court  as  DW-1  stated  that  Ghulam 
Qadir  had  transferred  the  suit  land  in  favour  of  Fatima  Bibi  for  God’s 
sake  (
   ےط واس
اللہ
). It means that love and affection of mother was not the 
consideration of gift but instead the intention behind the transaction was 
to  please  God  Almighty.  If  that  was  the  intention  of  Ghulam  Qadir,  he 
could not ignore his real daughter (plaintiff) and deprive her of her share 
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
15 
of inheritance, ordained by the Allah Almighty. Even otherwise the fraud 
and  collusion  stood  established  from  the  date  itself  i.e.  16.06.1999  on 
which date the alleged gift mutations No.3847 and 3846 were sanctioned. 
The defendant No.1 had neither led any evidence to establish the fact that 
Ghulam Qadir in his life time was aware about the transaction of gift nor 
explained the reasons as to why Ghulam Qadir had not made gift directly 
to  him;  and,  that  why  the  land  was  firstly  transferred  in  the  name  of 
Fatima Bibi and from her, it was gifted to him on the same date. All these 
facts  show  nothing  but  fraud  on  the  part  of  defendant  No.1,  so  as  to 
deprive the plaintiff of her right of inheritance. Since the defendant No.1 
had  failed  to  justify  the  disinheritence  of  the  plaintiff,  the  disputed  gift 
mutations  as  per  principle  settled  in  the  case  of  “Fareed  and  others  v. 
Muhammad  Tufail  and  another”    (2018  SCMR  139)  cannot  be  held 
valid. In view of above, findings of the Courts below in respect of issues 
No.2  &  3  are  reversed  and  the  said  issues  are  decided  in  favour  of  the 
plaintiff. 
15.  Lastly,  I  would  address  the  question  of  limitation  which  was  the 
subject matter of issue No.7. It is well settled principle of law that fraud 
vitiates even the most solemn transaction, as such any transaction based 
on  fraud  would  be  void  and  notwithstanding  the  bar  of  limitation  the 
matter can be considered on merit so as not to allow fraud to perpetuate. 
In this  regard  reference  may  be  made  to the  case  of    Mst.  Raj  Bibi  and 
others  v  Province  of  Punjab  through  District  Collector,  Okara  and  5 
others (2001 SCMR 1591). In another recent judgment handed down by 
the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  “Peer  Bakhsh 
through  LRs  and  others  v.  Mst.  Khanzadi  and  others”    (2016  SCMR 
1417)  it  has  been  held  that  limitation  does  not  run  against  the  void 
transaction  nor  efflux  of  time  extinguishes  the  right  of  inheritance.  In 
view of above settled principles of law, the objection of defendant No.1 
qua limitation is repelled.  
16.  The other issues i.e. issues No.5,6,8,9 and 10 were neither pressed 
before  the  first  Appellate  Court  nor  during  the  course  of  arguments 
before this Court and, therefore, there is no need to dilate upon them.  
Civil Revision No.955 of 2015 
16 
17.  The  upshot  of  the  above  discussion  is  that  this  application  in 
revision by setting aside the judgments and decrees of the Courts below 
is  accepted  and  consequently  it  is  declared  that  the  mutation  No.3847 
dated  16.06.1998,  mutation  No.3760  dated  17.02.1998,  mutation 
No.3846  dated  16.06.1999  and  mutation  No.3850  dated  26.08.1999  are 
illegal, void ab-initio and ineffective upon the rights of the plaintiff; and, 
that the plaintiff is entitled to get her share as per Sunni school of thought 
from the inheritance of the deceased Ghulam Qadir. Injunction as prayed 
for in  the plaint  is  also granted  and thus defendant  No.1 is  restrained to 
interfere  in  the possession of  the  plaintiff and  also to  further  alienate or 
transfer  the  suit  land  to  any  other    person  on  the  basis  of  above  said 
mutations. Decree in above terms be issued. No order as to costs.  
  
 
 
M.R.Shad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
(SHAHID WAHEED) 
JUDGE 
Approved for reporting. 
Judge  
 
 
 
