 
Stereo.HCJDA-38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  R.S.A. No.55 of 2013 
Farooq Hanif 
Versus 
Muhammad Ibrahim 
 
J U D G M E N T  
Date of Hearing 
APPELLANT BY 
12.12.2018 
 
Ch. Khalil-ur-Rehman, Advocate. 
 
RESPONDENT BY  M/s  Mian  Hamad  Yaseen  and  Ch. 
Muhammad Tariq Rehman, Advocates. 
 
 
 
Rasaal Hasan Syed, J.    This appeal impugns 
judgment  dated  08.2.2013  of  the  learned  Addl. 
District  Judge  Samundari,  District  Faisalabad 
whereby the judgment and decree dated 22.12.2011 
of  the  learned  Civil  Judge  Samundari  in  a  suit  for 
specific performance, was set aside, and the suit of 
the appellant was dismissed. 
2. 
Facts  material  to  decision  of  this  appeal  are 
that  on  16.10.2008  the  appellant,  acting  through 
his  attorney, 
instituted  a  suit 
for  specific 
performance  seeking  enforcement  of  the  alleged 
agreement  of  sale  dated  27.10.2006  in  respect  of 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suit  property  that  comprised  04  kanals  of  land.  It 
was  asserted  that  the  respondent  executed  the 
agreement  to  sell  the  suit  property  in  appellant’s 
favor  for  a  total  price  of  Rs.770,000/-.  A  sum  of 
Rs.150,000/-  was  allegedly  paid  through  cheques 
dated 27.9.2006, 28.9.2006, 29.9.2006,  30.9.2006 
and  1.10.2006.  The  date  for  the  completion  of  the 
agreement  as  also  the  execution  of  the  sale  deed 
was  allegedly  fixed  as  27.10.2007.  The  appellant 
alleged  that  further  payment  of  Rs.300,000/-  was 
made 
through  cheques  dated  11.1.2008  and 
07.1.2008.  In  this  backdrop  it  was  alleged  that  a 
total sum of Rs.450,000/- had been received by the 
respondent,  leaving  the  balance  consideration  as 
Rs.325,000/-.  As  per  appellant  the  respondent  did 
not execute the sale deed as contractually obligated, 
in  result,  the  suit  for  specific  performance  was 
instituted. 
3. 
In  his  written  statement  the  respondent  in 
addition  to  the  legal  objections,  pleaded  on  factual 
side  that  there  was  no  agreement  of  sale  between 
the  parties;  he  had  never  executed    any  such 
agreement  of  sale;  he  did  not  receive  the  alleged 
earnest  money  or  the  subsequent  payments  under 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any  agreement;  and  that  the  respondent  had  been 
lending  certain  amounts  from  time  to  time  to 
appellant’s  father  who  had  been  reimbursing  the 
same  through  cheques;  and  at  the  time  of 
reimbursement  of  loan  amounts  he  used  to  secure 
signatures  on  blank  paper  and  that  alleged 
agreement  of  sale  was 
fictitious, 
forged  and 
fabricated. 
4. 
The 
learned  Civil  Judge  after  receiving 
evidence and hearing the parties decreed appellant’s 
suit vide judgment dated 22.12.2011. In appeal filed 
by the respondent, the learned Addl. District Judge 
after  consideration  of  entire  evidence  accepted  the 
appeal,  set  aside  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the 
learned  trial  court,  and  dismissed  the  suit  vide 
judgment dated 8.2.2013, which is being assailed in 
this appeal. 
5. 
Learned counsel for the appellant argued that 
the learned Addl. District Judge failed to appreciate 
that the entire sale price was paid through cheques 
and  that  the  receipt  of  the  payment  was  admitted. 
Referring to para 3 of the written statement, learned 
counsel  submitted  that  the  signatures/thumb 
impression were not in issue and that the appellant 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the given circumstances was entitled to a decree. 
It was also argued that  one marginal witness could 
not  be  produced  as  the  other  witness  was  the 
brother of respondent who was not willing to appear 
as  witness  in  court;  the  appellant  produced  the 
scribe  of  the  document  to  prove  the  agreement. 
Lastly  it  was  urged  that  the  respondent  could  not 
rebut or shake the credibility of the evidence  of the 
appellant  and  that  the  appellate  court  illegally 
interfered with the findings of trial court. 
6.  Responding  to  the  points  raised,  learned 
counsel 
for  respondents  submitted 
that 
the 
existence of the sale transaction as also the alleged 
agreement  was  specifically  controverted; 
the 
appellant  was  under  a  statutory  obligation  to 
discharge  the  onus  by  proving  the  document  and 
also  the  existence  of  the  transaction;  the  appellant 
failed to produce two marginal witnesses which was 
a  mandatory  requirement    of  law,  in  result,  the 
alleged  agreement  could  not  deemed  to  have  been 
proved,  the  alleged  cheques  could  not  be  shown  to 
have  any  nexus  with  the  alleged  agreement,  and 
that  the  learned  appellate  court  reversed  the 
findings of the learned trial court for sound reasons 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and after scrutinizing the entire evidence on record, 
while  the  appellant  could  not  identify  any  legally 
significant misreading or non-reading of evidence by 
the  appellate  court  hence  the  findings  of  fact 
rendered by the appellate court did not call for any 
interference. 
7. 
Points raised by the respective sides have been 
duly  considered  in  the  light  of  pleadings  and 
evidence on record. 
8. 
Appellant  filed  suit  for  specific  performance 
claiming  that  the  alleged  agreement  of  sale  was 
executed by respondent, a sum of Rs.150,000/- was 
paid through cheques, the total price was settled as 
Rs.750,000/-, 
the  appellant  allegedly  made 
payments 
through  cheques 
to 
the 
tune  of             
Rs.300,000/-  after  the  agreement,  thereby  making 
the  total  alleged  receipts  of  Rs.  450,000/-  leaving 
the  balance  sale  consideration  as  Rs.  325,000/-, 
which was allegedly payable at the time of execution 
of  the  sale  deed  i.e.  on  or  before  27.10.2007.  The 
existence of the sale transaction, or the execution of 
any  sale  agreement  as  also  the  payment  alleged  to 
be  made  pursuant  to it,  was vehemently  denied. In 
view  of  the  stance  taken  in  the  reply,  issues  No.  6, 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7,  and  9  were  framed  which  were  to  the  effect  that 
whether  agreement  to  sell  dated  27.10.2006  was 
entered  into;  whether  Rs.  450,000/-  was  paid  as 
advance through cheques; and whether the plaintiff 
was entitled to a decree of specific performance. 
9. 
The  appellant  as  plaintiff  was  under  a  legal 
obligation  to  prove  that  the  agreement  to  sell  was 
executed and that the respondent had agreed to sell 
suit  property  and  that  he  received  the  advance 
amount on the alleged execution of the document or 
subsequent  thereto.  In  law,  the  appellant  was 
expected not only to prove the execution of the sale 
agreement  but  also  to  prove  the  existence  of  the 
intended  transaction  of  sale.  Article  79  of  the 
Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 1984 reads as under: 
“If  a  document  is  required  by  law  to  be 
attested,  it  shall  not  be  used  as  evidence 
until two attesting witnesses (at) least have 
been  called  for  the  purpose  of  proving  its 
execution, 
two  attesting 
witnesses  alive,  and subject  to  the process 
of the Court and capable of giving evidence: 
 
there  be 
if 
Provided  that  it  shall  not  be  necessary 
to  call  an  attesting  witness  in  proof  of  the 
execution  of  any  document,  not  being  a 
will,  which  has  been 
in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
Registration  Act  1908  XVI  of  1908)  unless 
its  execution  by  the  person  by  whom  it 
purports 
is 
specifically denied.” 
to  have  been  executed 
registered 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.  The  alleged  agreement  of  sale,  Ex.P1,  shows 
that 
it  was  attested  by  Abu  Bakar  son  of 
Muhammad  Hanif  and  Muhammad  Ismail  son  of 
Muhammad  Suleman.    In  this  case,  Muhammad 
Abu  Bakar,  real  brother  of  the  appellant,  appeared 
as PW3 while Muhammad Ismail son of Muhammad 
Suleman,  the  other  attesting  witness,  was  not 
produced or ever summoned. It was for this reason 
that  the  learned  Addl.  District  Judge  observed  that 
the  execution  of  the  document  was  not  proved  in 
accordance  with  the  mandate  of  Article  79  of 
Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order  1984,  and  was  thus 
inadmissible.  As  regards  the  deed  writer  Ghufran 
son  of  Sultan  who  appeared  as  PW1  and  deposed 
that  he  had  drafted  the  agreement  and  that  the 
parties had allegedly executed the same; but he was 
not  one  of  the  attesting  witness  as  per  Ex.P1,  and 
therefore  he  could  not  possibly  make  up  the 
deficiency  in  evidence  due  to  non-appearance  of 
other attesting witness of Ex.P1.  
11. 
In “Hafiz Tasaddaq Hussain v. Muhammad Din 
through  legal  heirs  and  others”  (PLD 2011 SC 241) 
the August Supreme Court observed that: 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and 
alive 
otherwise 
‘8.  The  command  of  the  Article  79  is 
vividly discernible which elucidates that in 
order to prove an instrument which by law 
is  required  to  be  attested,  it  has  to  be 
proved  by  two  attesting  witnesses,  if  they 
are 
are  not 
incapacitated  and  are  subject  to  the 
process of the Court and capable of giving 
evidence.  The  powerful  expression  “shall 
not  be  used  as  evidence”  until  the 
requisite  number  of  attesting  witnesses 
have been examined to prove its execution 
is  couched  in  the  negative,  which  depicts 
the  clear  and  unquestionable  intention  of 
the  legislature,  barring  and  placing  a 
complete  prohibition  for  using  in  evidence 
any  such  document,  which  is  either  not 
attested as mandated by the law and/or  if 
the required number of attesting witnesses 
are    not  produced  to  prove  it.  As  the 
consequences  of  the  failure  in  this  behalf 
are provided by the Article itself, therefore, 
it  is  a  mandatory  provision  of  law  and 
should be given due effect by the Courts in 
letter  and  spirit.  The  provisions  of  this 
Article  are  most  uncompromising,  so  long 
as  there  is  an  attesting  witness  alive 
capable  of  giving  evidence  and  subject  to 
the  process  of  the  court,  no  document 
which is required by law to be attested can 
be used in evidence until such witness has 
been  called,  the  omission  to  call  the 
requisite  number  of  attesting  witnesses  is 
fatal to the admissibility of the document. 
See  Sheikh  Karimullah.  vs.  Gudar  Koeri 
and  others  (AIR  1925  Allahabad  56).  The 
purpose  and  object  of  the  attestation  of 
document  by  a  certain  number  of 
witnesses  and  its  proof  through  them  is 
also  meant  to  eliminate  the  possibility  of 
fraud and purported attempt to create and 
fabricate 
for  the  proof 
thereof  and  for  this  the  legislature  in  its 
wisdom  has  established  a  class  of 
documents  which  are  specified,  inter  alia, 
in Article 17 of the Order, 1984. (See. Ram 
Samujh  Singh  vs.  Mst.  Mainath  Kuer  and 
others  (AIR  1925  Oudh  737).  The  resume 
of  the  above  discussion  leads  us  to  an 
irresistible  conclusion  that  for  the  validity 
of the instruments falling within Article 17 
the  attestation  as  required  therein  is 
absolute  and  imperative.  And  for  the 
purpose  of  proof  of  such  a  document,  the 
false  evidence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-9 
have 
witnesses 
to 
examined  as  per 
be 
attesting 
the 
compulsorily 
requirement  of  Article  79,  otherwise  it 
shall  not  be  considered  and  taken  as 
proved  and  used  in  evidence.  This  is  in 
line  with  the  principle  that  where  the  law 
requires  an  act  to  be  done  in  a  particular 
manner, it has to be done in that way and 
not otherwise.’ 
 
12.  As  to  the  admissibility  of  statement  of  deed 
writer  the  August  Supreme  Court 
in  above-
mentioned case observed that: 
‘9.    Coming  to  the  proposition  canvassed 
by  the  counsel  for  the  appellant  that  a 
scribe of the document can be a substitute 
for  the  attesting  witnesses;  the  point  on 
which  leave  was  also  granted.  It  may  be 
held  that  if  such  witness  is  allowed  to  be 
considered as the attesting witness it shall 
be  against  the  very  concept,  the  purpose, 
object and the mandatory command of the 
law  highlighted  above.  The  question 
however  has  been  examined  in  catena  of 
judgments  and  the  answer  is  in  the 
negative. 
 
It  has  been  held  in  Nazir  Ahmad 
10. 
and another v. M. Muzaffar Hussain (2008 
SCMR 1939):- 
 
“Attesting  witness  was  the  one  who 
had  not  only  seen  the  document 
being executed by the executant but 
also  signed  same  as  a  witness  --- 
Person who wrote or was ‘scribe’ of a 
document  was  as  good  a  witness  as 
anybody  else,  if  he  had  signed  the 
document  as  a  witness  (Emphasis 
supplied). 
inherent 
incompetency  existed  in  the  writer 
of  a  document  to  be  an  attesting 
witness to it”  
legal 
No 
 
In  N.  Kamalam  and  another  v.  Ayyasamy 
and  another  (2001)  7  Supreme  Court 
cases 503), it has been held:- 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Evidence  of  scribe  could  not 
displace statutory requirement as he 
did  not  have  necessary  intent  to 
attest.” 
 
In  Badri  Prasad  and  another  v. 
Abdul  Karim  and  others  (1913  (19) 
IC 451, it is held:- 
 
“The  evidence  of  the  scribe  of  a 
mortgage deed, who signed the deed 
in  the  usual  way  without  any 
intention of attesting it as a witness, 
is not sufficient to prove the deed.” 
 
An  attesting  witness  is  a  witness 
who has seen the deed executed and 
has  signed 
it  as  a  witness. 
(Emphasis supplied).” 
 
To  the  same  effect  are  the  judgments 
reported as Qasim Ali vs. Khadim Hussain 
through  legal  representatives  and  others 
(PLD 2005 Lahore 654) and Shamu Patter 
vs. Abdul Kadir Rowthan and others (1912 
(16)  IC  250).  Therefore,  in  my  considered 
view a scribe of a document can only be a 
competent  witness  in  terms  of  Articles  17 
and  79  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 
1984 if he has  affixed his signature as  an 
attesting witness of the document and not 
otherwise; his signing the document in the 
capacity  of  a  writer  does  not  fulfill  and 
meet 
requirement  of 
attestation    by  him  separately,  however, 
he  may  be  examined  by  the  concerned 
party for the corroboration of the evidence 
of 
the 
eventuality  those  are  conceived  by  Article 
79 itself not as a substitute.’ 
the  marginal  witness,  or 
the  mandatory 
in 
13. 
In  another  case  “Farid  Bakhsh  v.  Jind  Wadda 
and  others” 
(2015  SCMR  1044)  the  August 
Supreme Court ruled as follows: 
in 
clear 
Article 
‘…This 
and 
unambiguous  words  provides 
that  a 
document required to be attested shall not 
be  used  as  evidence  unless  two  attesting 
witnesses at least have been called for the 
purpose  of  proving  its  execution.  The 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
words  “shall  not  be  used  as  evidence” 
unmistakably  show  that  such  document 
shall  be  proved  in  such  and  no  other 
manner.  The  words 
“two  attesting 
witnesses  at  lease”  further  show  that 
calling  two  attesting  witnesses  for  the 
purpose  of  proving  its  execution  is  a  bare 
minimum.  Nothing  short  of  two  attesting 
witnesses  if  alive  and  capable  of  giving 
evidence can even be imagined for proving 
its  execution.  Construing  the  requirement 
of  the  Article  as  being  procedural  rather 
than  substantive  and  equating 
the 
testimony  of  a  Scribe  with  that  of  an 
attesting witness would not only defeat the 
letter  and  spirit  of  the  Article  but  reduce 
the  whole  exercise  of  re-enacting    it  to  a 
farce.  We,  thus,  have  no  doubt  in  our 
mind  that  this  Article  being  mandatory 
has to be construed and complied with as 
such… 
 
9.  Another  reason  for  no  equating  the 
testimony  of  a  Scribe  with  that  of  an 
attesting  witness  is  that  both  of  them 
signed 
in  a  different 
capacity  and  with  a  different  state  of 
mind.  They,  as  such,  do  not  meet  the 
requirements  of  Article  79  of  Qanun-e-
Shahadat  Order.    Scribe,  however,  could 
be examined by the party for corroboration 
of  the  evidence  of  the  attesting  witnesses 
but  not  as  a  substitute  therefor.  This 
aspect  was  also  highlighted  in  the  case 
Hafiz  Tassaduq  Hussain  v.  Muhammad 
Din  through  Legal  Heirs  (supra)  in  the 
paragraph which reads as under: 
 
the  document 
 
the  same  effect  are 
“To 
the 
judgments  reported  as  Qasim  Ali  v. 
through 
Khadim  Hussain 
legal 
representatives  and  others 
(PLD 
2005  Lahore  654)  and  Shamu  Patter 
v.  Abdul  Nadir  Rowthan  and  others 
(1912  (16)  IC  250).  Therefore,  in  my 
considered  view  a  scribe  of  a 
document  can  only  be  a  competent 
witness  in  terms  of  Articles  17  and 
79 of the Qanun-e-Shahdadat Order, 
1984 if he has fixed his signature as 
an attesting witness of the document 
and  not  otherwise;  his  signing  the 
document  in  the  capacity  of  a  writer 
does  not 
the 
fulfill  and  meet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-12 
mandatory requirement of attestation 
by  him  separately,  however,  he  may 
be  examined  by  the  concerned  party 
for  the  corroboration  of  the  evidence 
of  the  marginal  witnesses  or  in  the 
eventuality  those  are  conceived  by 
Article 79 itself not as a substitute’ 
14. 
In view of the rule laid by the August Supreme 
Court  in  cases  referred  above,  the  argument  that 
the  statement  of  the  deed  writer  shall  be  sufficient 
to  prove  the  document  along  with  the  other 
marginal  witnesses,  is  fallacious  and  cannot  be 
entertained.  Even  otherwise,  the  statement  of  the 
deed  writer 
is  highly  unconvincing  and 
its 
credibility  stood  shaken  in  the  cross-examination 
when  he  admitted  that  he  did  not  earlier  know  the 
parties  or  the  witnesses  and  that  no  payment  was 
ever made in his presence and also that he did not 
ascertain the identity of the parties in the document 
from anyone. In this scenario where the witness did 
not  know  the  parties  and  also  did  not  get  their 
identification  from  any  independent  person,  his 
statement  could  hardly  be  of  any  value  let  alone to 
prove the execution or the existence of transaction. 
15.  As  to  the  other  argument  that  the  second 
marginal witness was real brother of the respondent 
who  had  declined  to  appear,  suffice  it  to  say  that 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this  argument  is  an  afterthought  and  otherwise 
lacks  any  merit.  The  appellant  never  attempted  to 
summon  the  witness  through  court  nor  availed  the 
opportunity  to  produce  him  and  to  depose  him 
before  the  court.  There  is  no  correspondence 
between  the  appellant  or  the  other  witnesses  to 
verify  that  the  witness  even  refused  to  record  his 
statement.  In  these  circumstances  the  plea  was 
totally  self-assumed.  The  non-adherence  to  the 
procedure,  raises  serious  adverse  inference  against 
the appellant.  
16.  Even otherwise the procedure as contemplated 
by Article 82 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 
provides  that  if an  attesting  witness  denies  or  does 
not  recollect  the  execution  of  the  document,  its 
execution  may  be  proved  by  other  evidence.  This 
placed  strong  onus  on  the  appellant  to  have 
summoned  the  witness  and  if  on  appearance  he 
denied  the  document,  the  course  permissible  in 
Article  82  could  have  been  resorted  to.    The 
appellant could have  made  a  request  for  the expert 
view on comparison of signatures of witness on the 
document  with  his  specimen  signatures,  to  satisfy 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  court  that  he  had  unreasonably  denied  the 
execution of document.  
17. 
In any case without following the legal course, 
the petitioner could not be allowed to raise the plea 
on  the  assumption  that  because  he  was  related  to 
the  other  side  he  would  not  have  appeared  as 
witness  if  summoned.  Another  notable  fact  is  that 
the  petitioner  did  not  make  any  effort  to  get  the 
specimen  thumb  impression  and  the  signatures  of 
respondent  in  the  court.  No  request  for  an  expert 
opinion  was  ever  made  nor  any  expert  was  ever 
summoned  to  prove  the  signatures  so  as  to 
establish the execution of document. 
18. 
It was a case in which the very existence of the 
document  was  in  issue,  the  appellant  should  have 
summoned the stamp vendor as the respondent had 
denied to have ever purchased the stamp paper, but 
no  attempt  was  ever  made  to  produce  the  stamp 
vendor thus the best evidence was with-held raising 
serious  adverse  presumption  against  the  appellant.  
In  “Manzoor  Hussain  v.  Haji  Khushi  Muhammad” 
(2017 CLC 70) a learned Single Judge of this Court 
observed  that  the  non-production  of  the  stamp 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vendor  would  raise  an  adverse  presumption  under 
Article 129(g) of Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984. 
19.  Another aspect that has a material bearing on 
this  case  is  that  in  the  plaint  the  appellant  claims 
that  the  alleged  earnest  money  of  Rs.  150,000/- 
was  paid  through  cheques  but  perusal  of  the 
document  Ex.  P1  completely  belies  the  plea  and 
contradicts this stance, where it is so recorded that 
Rs.150,000/-  was  allegedly  paid  in  cash.  This 
contradiction  demolished  the  appellant’s  case  that 
the  alleged  earnest  money  was  paid  through 
cheques. It is also observed that the agreement was 
purportedly written on 27.10.2006 but the cheques 
were  claimed  to  be  dated  27.9.2006,  28.9.2006, 
29.9.2006,  30.9.2006  and  01.10.2006  i.e.  of  date 
which  were  prior  to  the  date  of  the  document 
whereas  it  was  not  the  case  of  appellant  that  any 
sale  transaction  was  ever  settled  prior  to  this  date; 
rather  on  being  asked  in  cross-examination  the 
appellant as PW 2 deposed that the agreement was 
made  in  October  2006  and  that  before  the  alleged 
intended  transaction,  he  had  never  talked  to 
Ibrahim  respondent  on  telephone.    He  further 
admitted  that  he  was  in  Belgium  when  the  alleged 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreement  was  made  and 
that  his 
father 
purportedly  arranged  the  alleged  deal.  Obviously 
plaintiff’s  own  statement  would  not  be  insignificant 
i.e. that he did not claim to be present at the time of 
the  alleged  agreement.  In  the  above  scenario,  the 
appellant  miserably  failed  to  prove  any  nexus 
between  the  cheques  and  the  agreement  nor  the 
same  could  be  assumed  as  payment  of  any  correct 
amount;  rather 
it  supports  the  plea  of  the 
respondent  that  there  was  a  loan  arrangement 
between  him  and  father  of  appellant  and  the 
cheques  were  towards  the  reimbursement  of  the 
amount,  which  father  of  appellant  had  received 
from him.  
20.  As  to  the  arguments  that  the  respondent  did 
not  deny  the  execution  in  the  written  statement  at 
para  3,  the  same  is  not  well-founded,  and  where  it 
is not so recorded; rather the respondent denied the 
execution  of  any  agreement  and  claimed  that  the 
alleged  signature  on  the  blank  paper  were  for  the 
acknowledgement of the repayment of loan amount. 
As  DW1,  the  respondent,  when  asked  in  cross-
examination  about  his  signature  on  the  document, 
categorically  denied  his  signature  or 
thumb 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A. No. 55 of 2013  
 
        
        Page-17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
impression  on  Ex.  P  1.  This  being  so  the  objection 
raised by appellant’s counsel is ill-founded.  
21.  The  learned  Addl.  District  Judge  correctly 
appreciated  the  evidence,  and  declared  that  the 
appellant  had  failed  to  prove  the  existence  of  sale 
transaction  or  execution  of  sale  agreement  and  in 
doing  so  no  misreading  or  non-reading  of  record 
was observed. 
22.  For the reasons supra, this appeal lacks merit, 
which  is  accordingly  dismissed  leaving  the  parties 
to bear their own costs. 
   
 
  (RASAAL HASAN SYED) 
     JUDGE 
 
Approved for reporting. 
Announced in open Court on 04.1.2019. 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
*Mian M. Rabbani*   
 
 
 
