Stereo. HCJDA 38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
1. Criminal Appeal No. 1802 of 2011 
(Misbah-ul-Hassan   v.  The State etc.) 
2. Criminal Revision No.1202 of 2011 
     (Syed Imran Haider  v.  The State etc.) 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
09-02-2018 
DATE OF 
HEARING 
Appellant by:  Ms. Bushra Qamar, Mr. Shahid Azeem and 
Mr. Farrukh Sultan, Advocates. 
State by: 
Mr. Muhammad Ikram Ullah Khan, DPG. 
Complainant 
by: 
Mr. Zafar Iqbal Chohan, Advocate. 
 
 
 
 
Tariq Saleem Sheikh,J:- Appellant Misbah-ul-Hassan 
was tried by the Additional Sessions Judge, Jhang, for committing 
Qatl-i-Amd  of  Syed  Aqeel  Haider  in  case  FIR  No.551/09  dated 
18.06.2009 registered at Police Station Saddar, Jhang. The learned 
trial  Court,  vide  judgment  dated  29.10.2011,  convicted  the 
Appellant  under  Section  302(b)  PPC  and  sentenced  him  to 
imprisonment  for  life  with  a  fine  of  Rs.20,000/-  and  in  default 
thereof to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of six 
months.  The  Appellant  was  ordered  to  pay  Rs.100,000/-  as 
compensation to the legal heirs of the deceased in terms of Section 
544-A  Cr.P.C.  Benefit  of  Section  382-B  Cr.P.C.  was  accorded  to 
him. The Appellant has assailed his conviction and sentence before 
this  Court  through  Criminal  Appeal  No.1802/2011.  On  the  other 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 2 - 
hand, Complainant Syed Imran Haider has filed Criminal Revision 
No.1202/2011  for  the  enhancement  of  the  sentence.  I  propose  to 
decide both these matters by this single judgment.  
2. 
 
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  on  18.06.2009 
Complainant  Syed  Imran  Haider  (PW-6)  made  a  statement  Ex.PA 
before  Fazal  Hussain/SI  (PW-8)  that  he  was  a  resident  of  Garh 
Maharaja, Tehsil Ahmedpur Sial, District Jhang, and was employed 
as  Supervisor  in  Nestle  Pakistan  Limited.  On  17.06.2009  at  about 
06:00 p.m. he alongwith his cousins Syed Aqeel Haider (deceased), 
Asad Abbas  (PW-7) and Akhtar Abbas ( PW given up) proceeded 
from Jhang to Lahore in Car No.LY-3928. At about 9:30 p.m. when 
they  reached  Niazi  Adda  at  Band  Road,  Lahore,  Aqeel  Haider 
stopped  the  car  and  met  some  unknown  persons  whom  he  could 
identify.  Aqeel  Haider  decided  to  stay  behind  and  asked  the 
Complainant  and  the  PWs  to  go  to  his  house  at  Gulzar  Colony, 
Thokar  Niaz  Beg,  Lahore.  They  went  and  had  no  communication 
with him after 10:00 p.m. The following morning (i.e. 18.06.2009) 
at  about  08:00  a.m.  the  Complainant  was  informed  that  some 
unknown  persons  had  murdered  Aqeel  Haider  and  had  thrown  his 
dead  body  near  the  Chenab  College,  Chiniot  Road,  Jhang.  It  was 
alleged  that  Aqeel  Haider  had  two  driving  licences  (one  of  which 
was issued by the Government of Kuwait), Identity Card, bank card 
and  Nokia  mobile  phone  with  SIM  No.0300-8707170  with  him. 
Fazal  Hussain  S.I  (PW-8)  sent  the  complaint  Ex.PA  to  the  police 
station  through  Ahmed  Nawaz  774/C  in  pursuance  whereof  FIR 
No.551/2009 Ex.PA/1was registered.  
3. 
 
After  sending  the  complaint  to  the  police  station  as 
aforesaid,  Fazal  Hussain/SI  proceeded  to  the  place  where  dead 
body  had  been  found.  He  took  the  corpse  into  custody,  prepared 
Injury  Statement  Ex.PC  and  Inquest  Report  Ex.PD  and  then 
despatched  it  to  the  DHQ  Hospital  Jhang.  He  also  prepared  the 
rough  site  plan  of  place  of  recovery  Ex.PS  and  recorded  the 
statements  of  witnesses  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.  After  the  post-
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 3 - 
mortem  examination  was  done  he  took  into  possession  the  last 
worn  clothes  of  the  deceased  vide  Recovery  Memo  Ex.PE  and 
handed  over  his  dead  body  to  his  legal  heirs.  On  10.07.2009,  the 
Complainant  nominated  the  Appellant  in  this  case  through 
application  Ex.DB.  In  the  meanwhile,  Fazal  Hussain/SI  was 
transferred.  Ashiq  Hussain/Inspector  (PW-9) 
took  over 
the 
investigation.  On  27.08.2009  he  arrested  the  Appellant  and  sent 
him  to  jail  where  his  identification  test  parade  was  held  under  the 
supervision  of  Majid  Hussain  Gadhi,  Area  Magistrate  (PW-4)  on 
09.09.2009. Thereafter he was also transferred and the investigation 
was  handed  over  to  Bashir  Ahmad/SI  (PW-10).  On  19.09.2009, 
Bashir  Ahmad/SI  obtained  the  Appellant’s  physical  remand  for 
interrogation  during  the  course  of  which  he  recovered  various 
articles belonging to the deceased from him, including Wheel Pana 
(wheel  spanner),  the  alleged  weapon  of  offence.  During  his 
investigation  he  found  that  the  Appellant  was  involved  in  the 
offence.  Report  under  Section  173  Cr.P.C  was  submitted 
accordingly. The learned Additional Sessions Judge summoned the 
Appellant  and  indicted  him  on  15.03.2010.  The  Appellant  denied 
the charge and claimed trial. 
4. 
 
The  prosecution  examined  10  witnesses  to  prove  its 
case.  Imran  Haider  (PW-6)  and  Asad  Abbas  (PW-7)  deposed  that 
they  last  saw  Aqeel  Haider  deceased  with  the  Appellant.  Imran 
Haider  also  witnessed  recovery  of  articles  (P-6  to  P-14)  from  the 
Appellant.  Dr.  Hafiz  Muhammad  Mohsin  (PW-2)  furnished  the 
medical  evidence.  Majid  Hussain  Gadhi  (PW.4)  deposed  with 
respect  to  the  identification  parade.  The  Investigation  Officers 
Fazal  Hussain/SI  (PW-8),  Ashiq  Hussain/Inspector  (PW-9)  and 
Bashir  Ahmad/SI  (PW-10)  gave  details  of  their  investigation  and 
the  evidence  they  had  collected  in  this  case.  Remaining  witnesses 
were formal in nature. The learned prosecutor gave up PWs Ahmad 
Nawaz,  Akhtar  Abbas,  Zawar  Hussain,  Ghulam  Shabbir  Shah/SI 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 4 - 
being  unnecessary.  On  25.10.2011,  he  closed  the  prosecution 
evidence.  
5. 
 
After  the  close  of  prosecution  evidence  the  learned 
trial  Court  recorded  the  statement  of  the  Appellant  under  Section 
342  Cr.P.C.  The  Appellant  denied  the  allegations  and  professed 
innocence. When asked as to why he had been involved in this case 
and why the witnesses had deposed against him he replied as under: 
in  Jhang 
from  1990 
“PWs are related to  the  deceased and they  are also related 
inter  se.  No  PW  from  the  alleged  place  of  recovery  of  the 
dead  body  had  been  produced  during  investigation  or 
during recording of evidence in the court. PWs are resident 
of Tehsil Ahmedpur Sial. I and the family of the deceased 
belong  to  Shia  sect  and  the  sectarian  violence  remained 
rampant 
to  2007.  Anjuman  
Sipa-e-Sahaba  representing  Sunni  sect  whereas  Tahreek 
Nifaz  Fiqa  Jafaria  was  representing  Shia  sect.  My  uncle 
Syed  Sana-ul-Haq  Advocate  was  elected  Central  General 
Secretary  of  Tahreek  Nifaz  Fiqa  Jafaria.  The  father  of  the 
deceased,  PWs  and  the  other  relatives  of  the  deceased  are 
big  landlords  and  are  well-off  families  of  Garh  Maharaja, 
Tehsil  Ahmadpur  Sial,  District  Jhang,  and  they  used  to 
oppose  my  uncle  Syed  Sana-ul-Haq  advocate  during  his 
election  as  Central  General  Secretary  of  the  above-said 
Tahreek. I was the main supporter of my uncle Sana-ul-Haq 
in  the said  election so they nourished a  grudge against me 
and  my  family.  When  Aqeel  Haider  was  murdered  and 
thrown near Chenab College by unknown persons and they 
could not trace the real culprits they later on involved me in 
this  false  case  due 
the  above-said  grudge.  The 
prosecution  has  introduced  no  motive  against  me  to  cause 
murder of Aqeel Haider deceased.” 
to 
 
6. 
 
The  Appellant  neither  got  his  statement  recorded  on 
oath under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C. nor produced any evidence in his 
defence.  On  the  conclusion  of  the  trial  the  learned  Additional 
Sessions  Judge,  vide  judgment  dated  29.10.2012,  convicted  and 
sentenced the Appellant as mentioned hereinabove. 
7. 
 
In  support  of  Criminal  Appeal  No.1802/2011  Ms. 
Bushra  Qamar,  Advocate,  contended  that  it  was  a  blind  murder. 
The  Complainant  had  falsely  implicated  the  Appellant  in  this case 
due  to  political  rivalry.  She  argued  that,  firstly,  the  learned  trial 
Court had failed to appreciate that the last seen evidence furnished 
by  the  witnesses  was  not  in  consonance  with  the  principle  of 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 5 - 
proximity of time and distance. Secondly, the prosecution case was 
that Allah Ditta Aaheer had seen the accused persons throwing the 
dead  body  of  Aqeel  Haider  at  Chiniot  Road,  Jhang,  and  he 
informed  the  Complainant  about  it.  The  said  Allah  Ditta  Aaheer 
was  a  material  witness  but  he  was  neither  produced  before  any  of 
the  Investigation  Officers  nor  the  trial  Court.  Thirdly,  as  per 
statement  of  Zafar  Iqbal  958/C  (PW-3),  the  dead  body  of  Aqeel 
Haider  reached  the  DHQ  Hospital  at  12:15  p.m.  but  post-mortem 
was  conducted  at  7:45  p.m.  The  prosecution  did  not  furnish  any 
explanation  for  that  delay.  Fourthly,  the  identification  test  parade 
was  of  no  legal  consequence  because  the  features  of  the  persons 
whom  Aqeel  Haider  allegedly  met  at  the  Niazi  Adda  were  not 
described  in  the  FIR  and  it  was  not  conducted  in  accordance  with 
law.  Fifthly,  articles  P-6  to  P-14  were  not  recovered  from  the 
Appellant and the police had foisted them on him in collusion with 
the  complainant  party.  The 
learned  counsel  concluded  his 
arguments  with  the  submission  that  the  prosecution  case  was 
replete with doubts which entitled the Appellant to benefit of doubt 
not as a matter of grace but as a right. She prayed that this appeal 
may be accepted and the Appellant be acquitted of the charge.  
8. 
 
The learned Deputy Prosecutor General assisted by the 
learned  counsel  for  the  Complainant  controverted  the  above 
contentions and supported the impugned judgment. He argued that 
the PWs had no enmity or ill-will against the Appellant and had no 
reason  to  falsely  implicate  him  in  this  case.  The  FIR  was  initially 
registered  against  unknown  persons.  Subsequently  the  Appellant 
was  traced  from  mobile  phone  call  data  and  on  its  basis  the 
Complainant named him through a supplementary application. The 
Appellant  was  correctly  identified  in  the  identification  test 
conducted  by  the  Area  Magistrate,  Majid  Hussain  Gadhi  (PW-4). 
The learned Law Officer further argued that the last seen evidence 
furnished  by  PWs  Imran  Haider  and  Asad  Abbas  alongwith  the 
identification  test  and  the  recovery  of  articles  P-6  to  P-14  fully 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 6 - 
connected  the  Appellant  with  the  offence.  He  prayed  that  the 
Appellant’s appeal may be dismissed.  
9. 
 
In  support  of  Criminal  Revision  No.  1202/2011,  the 
learned counsel for the Complainant/Revision Petitioner argued that 
Convict  Misbah-ul-Hassan  murdered  Aqeel  Haider  in  a  gruesome 
manner by inflicting 26 injuries on different parts of his body. The 
prosecution  had  proved  its  case  to  the  hilt.  There  were  no 
extenuating circumstances in the case for which he could be given 
lesser punishment. He prayed that the sentence of Convict Misbah-
ul-Hassan be enhanced and he be awarded death penalty.  
10. 
 
I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and 
have examined the record with their able assistance.  
11. 
 
Admittedly,  it  was  a  blind  murder.  The  dead  body  of 
Aqeel  Haider  aged  32/33  years  was  found  near  Chenab  College, 
Chiniot  Road,  Jhang,  on  18.06.2009.  The  prosecution  relies  on 
circumstantial  evidence  comprising  of  the  last  seen  evidence,  the 
identification  test,  the  medical  evidence  and  the  recovery  of 
incriminating articles to bring home guilt of the Appellant.  
12. 
 
As  already  noted,  the  evidence  of  last  seen  was 
furnished  by  Complainant  Imran  Haider  (PW-6)  and  Asad  Abbas 
(PW-7).  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  elucidated  the 
principles for evaluating the last seen evidence in a recent judgment 
reported as “Fayyaz Ahmad v. The State” (2017 SCMR 2026). For 
facility of reference, they are reproduced hereunder in extenso: 
“(i) 
(ii) 
There  must  be  cogent  reasons  that  the  deceased  in 
normal  and  ordinary  course  was  supposed  to 
accompany  the  accused  and  those  reasons  must  be 
palpable  and  prima 
the 
prosecution.  
furnished  by 
facie 
The proximity of the crime scene plays  a vital  role 
because  if  within  a  short  distance  the  deceased  is 
done  to  death  then,  ordinarily  the  inference  would 
be  that  he  did  not  part  ways  or  separate  from  the 
accused  and onus in  such regard  would shift  to  the 
accused 
those  circumstances  under 
which, the deceased left him and parted ways in the 
course of transit.  
to  furnish 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 7 - 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
 
The  timing  of  that  the  deceased  was  last  seen  with 
the  accused  and  subsequently  his  murder,  must  be 
reasonably  close  to  each  other  to  exclude  any 
possibility  of  the  deceased  getting  away  from  the 
accused or the accused getting away from him. 
There must be some reasons and objects on account 
of which the deceased accompanied the accused for 
accomplishment  of  the  same  towards  a  particular 
destination,  otherwise  giving  company  by 
the 
deceased  to  the  accused  would  become  a  question 
mark.  
Additionally there must be some motive on the part 
of  the  accused  to  kill  the  deceased  otherwise  the 
prosecution  has  to  furnish  evidence  that  it  was 
during 
something  happened 
abnormal  or  unpleasant  which  motivated 
the 
accused in killing the deceased.  
transit 
that 
the 
The quick reporting of the matter without any undue 
delay  is  essential,  otherwise  the  prosecution  story 
would become doubtful for the reason that the story 
of  last  seen  was  tailored  or  designed  falsely, 
involving accused person. 
Beside  the  above,  circumstantial  evidence  of  last 
seen must be corroborated by independent evidence, 
coming 
source  because 
uncorroborated last seen evidence is a weak type of 
evidence in cases involving capital punishment.  
from  unimpeachable 
(vii)  The recovery of the crime weapon from the accused 
and the opinion of the expert must be carried out in 
a transparent and fair manner to exclude all possible 
doubts, which may arise if it is not done in a proper 
and fair manner. 
(viii)  The  Court  has  also  to  seriously  consider  that 
whether  the  deceased  was  having  any  contributory 
role in the cause of his death inviting the trouble, if 
it was not a preplanned and calculated murder.” 
 13. 
 
PWs Imran Haider and Asad Abbas testified that they 
travelled with Aqeel Haider deceased and PW Akhtar Abbas (given 
up) from Jhang to Lahore in their car on 17.06.2009. At about 9:30 
p.m. Aqeel Haider dropped at the Niazi  Adda, Lahore and met the 
Appellant in their presence whereafter they went home leaving him 
there. His dead body was found in Jhang the following morning. To 
begin  with,  the  prosecution  has  not  brought  any  material  on  the 
record to explain why all these men travelled together to Lahore on 
17.06.2009. Further, it has not been established whether the alleged 
meeting between Aqeel Haider and the Appellant was pre-arranged 
and what was the purpose therefor. Assuring that all this happened 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 8 - 
in the  normal  course, there  is not  an  iota of  evidence on record  to 
suggest  that  after  the  alleged  meeting  the  Appellant  journeyed  to 
Jhang  and  Aqeel  Haider  accompanied  him.  The  precise  place  at 
where  he  was  done  to  death  is  also  not  known.  The  proximity  of 
that  place  with  Niazi  Adda  could  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  the 
innocence of the Appellant.  
14. 
 
There is another important aspect of the matter. Imran 
Haider  deposed  that  he  was  informed  about  the  recovery  of  the 
corpse  of  Aqeel  Haider  at  8:00  a.m.  During  his  cross-examination 
he  stated  that  Allah  Ditta  Aheer  gave  him  that  information  at 
Church Road, Hussain Clinic, Jhang. Asad Abbas also admitted this 
fact.  This  indicates  that  both  the  witnesses  who  claimed  that  they 
were in Lahore on 17.06.2009 till after 10:00 p.m. were in Jhang at 
8:00 a.m. on 18.06.2009. There is no evidence when they returned 
to Jhang. More importantly, the prosecution has also not explained 
why they did not stay overnight at Aqeel Haider’s house in Gulzar 
Colony and what made them rush back to Jhang. Since the purpose 
of their sojourn has not been stated, it seems doubtful that they ever 
travelled to Lahore.  
15. 
 
Imran  Haider  nominated  the  Appellant  in  this  case 
through an application Ex.DA on 10.07.2009, i.e. 22 days after the 
registration  of  FIR  Ex.PA/1.  However,  while  doing  so  he  neither 
disclosed  the  source  of  this  information  nor  the  circumstances 
which  made  him  suspect  that  the  Appellant  was  involved  in  the 
offence.  During  the  cross-examination  when  he  was  confronted 
with  this  omission he  maintained  that  he learnt  about involvement 
of the Appellant from the cell phone data. This claim is fallacious. 
During  the  course  of  investigation,  Fazal  Hussain/SI  (PW-8) 
collected  call  data  of  different  cell  numbers  which  he  secured 
through Ex.PT and PU. The name of the Appellant does not figure 
in  any  of  those  records.  Fazal  Hussain/SI  deposed  that  from  the 
scrutiny  of the  call  data of the  mobile  phones of the  deceased  and 
his  wife  he  found  that  they  received  calls  from  Cell  Nos.  0300-
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 9 - 
6505155 and 0321-6505155 which were in the use of the Appellant. 
However,  there  is  nothing  on  the  file  to  support  that  finding.  The 
learned trial Court has thoroughly examined Ex.PT and PU and has 
held  that  they  do  not  establish  the  Appellant’s  link  with  the 
deceased in any manner. I have no reason to disagree with it.   
16. 
 
I  next  turn  to  the  identification  test.  This  test  is 
generally  conducted  when  an  accused  is  not  previously  known  to 
the  witnesses  and  they  have  his  momentary  glimpse.  In  “Farman 
Ali v. The State” (1997 SCMR 971) the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan held that: 
“Holding  identification  test  becomes  necessary  in  cases, 
where  names  of  the  culprits  are  not  given  in  the  FIR. 
Holding of such test is a check against false implication and 
is a good piece of evidence against genuine culprits”. 
17. 
 
The  Rules  and  Orders  of  the  Lahore  High  Court 
Volume-III  Chapter  11  Part-C  lay  down  the  following  procedure 
for conducting identification parade:  
(1)   List  of  all  persons  included  in  the  parade  should  be 
prepared.----  The  Magistrate  in  charge  of  an  identification 
parade  should  prepare  a  list  of  all  persons,  including  the 
accused,  who  form  part  of  the  parade.  This  list  should  contain 
the  parentage,  address  and  occupation  of  each  member  of  the 
parade. 
(2) 
(3) 
Note  about  identification  by  witnesses.---  When  any  witness 
identifies a member of the parade, the Magistrate should note in 
what connection he is identified. A note should also be made if 
the  witness  identifies  a  person  wrongly;  in  such  a  case  it  is 
incorrect to note that the witness identified nobody. All persons 
identified must be mentioned, whether the identification is right 
or  wrong.  If  a  witness,  on  being  called  for  the  purpose,  states 
that  he  cannot  make  any  identification,  a  note  should  be 
recorded by the Magistrate to this effect.  
Objection  or  statements  by  accused  or 
identification 
witnesses to be recorded and power of Magistrate to decide 
objections.----  Should  the  accused  make  any  complaint  or 
statement  it  should    be  recorded  by  the  Magistrate.  If  from  his 
personal  knowledge  the  Magistrate  is  able  to  decide  beyond 
doubt  that  the  complaint  is  false  or  futile,  a  note  to  this  effect 
should  be  made,  but  in  other  cases  it  is  advisable  to  leave  any 
decision  as  to  the  value  to  be  attached  to  the  objection  to  the 
court  trying  the  case.  The  Magistrate  should  also  record  any 
statement made by a witness before making an identification.  
(4)   Duty of Magistrate to record precautions taken and to note 
other point.---- The Magistrate should state- 
 
(a)   what precautions he has taken to ensure- 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 10 - 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
that  the  witnesses  do  not  see  the  person  to  be 
identified  
identification 
proceedings   commence;  
them  before 
the 
by 
communication  which  would 
facilitate 
that  no 
identification is made to any witness who is  awaiting his 
turn to identify; and  
that  after  making  identification  the  witnesses  do  not 
communicate with other witnesses who have yet to  do 
so.  
(b) 
whether the person to be identified is handcuffed or is wearing 
fetters; and if so, whether or not other persons taking part in the 
parade  are  handcuffed  or  are  wearing  fetters,  and  also  whether 
or not they are inmates of the jail.  
18. 
 
Rule 26.32 of the Police Rules, 1934, while reiterating 
the above instructions adds1: 
(i)   Identification  should  be  carried  as  soon  as  possible  after  the 
arrest of the suspects.  
(ii)  The suspects should be placed among other persons similarly 
dressed  and  of  the  same  religion  and  social  status,  in  the 
proportion  of  8  or  9  such  persons  to  one  suspect.  Each 
witness  shall  then  be  brought  up  separately  to  attempt  his 
identification.  Care  shall  be  taken  that  the  remaining 
witnesses  are  still  kept  out  of  sight  and  hearing  and  that  no 
opportunity is permitted for communications to pass between 
witnesses who have been called up, and those who have not. 
If it is desired, through fear of revenge or for other adequate 
reasons,  that  witnesses  shall  not  be  seen  by  the  suspects, 
arrangements shall be made for the former, when called up to 
stand behind a screen or be otherwise placed so that they can 
see clearly without being seen.  
(iii)  The results of the test shall be recorded by the senior police 
officer  present  in  Form  26.32  (I)  (e)  as  each  witness  views 
the  suspect.  On  conclusion, 
the  magistrate,  or  other 
independent  witness  or  witnesses,  shall  be  requested  to  sign 
the  form  and  certify  that  the  test  has  been  carried  out 
correctly  and  that  no  collusion  between  the  police  and 
witnesses or among the witnesses themselves was possible.  
(iv)  Once  the  arrangements  for  the  proceedings  have  been 
undertaken,  the  officer  investigating  the  case  or  any  police 
officer  assisting  him  in  that  investigation  should  have  no 
access whatever either to the suspects or to the witnesses. 
(v)  Proceedings of the nature described above are extra-judicial. 
It  is  not  the  duty  of  the  officer  conducting  them  or  of  the 
independent witnesses to record statements or cross-examine 
either  suspects  or  identifying  witnesses,  but  they  should  be 
requested  to  question  the  latter  as  to  the  circumstances  in 
which  they  saw  the  suspect  whom  they  claimed  to  identify, 
and to record the answer in Column 4 of the form. 
                                           
1 Only relevant excerpts have been reproduced. 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 11 - 
19. 
 
Superior courts in our country have considered the 
aforementioned provisions in cases coming up before them over 
the years and have laid down following additional principles on 
the subject for the safe administration of justice.  
 (i) 
(ii) 
Identification parade must be held as early as possible 
after  the  arrest  of  the  accused  but  not  later  than  15 
days.  However,  delay  by  itself  is  not  sufficient  to 
discard this piece of evidence.2 
It is the paramount duty of the police to ensure that the 
accused  is  not  seen  by  the  witnesses  before  the 
identification parade. All these precautions should not 
only  be  taken  but  should  be  proved  during  the  trial. 
They  should  be  recorded  in  the  initial  record  like 
general diary of the police station and the daily register 
and  the  same  should  be  produced  in  Court.  In  the 
absence of such precaution and evidence, no value can 
be  attached  to  the  identification  of  the  accused  by 
witnesses.3  
(iii) 
The  accused  must  be  identified  with  reference  to  the 
role  played  by  him  with  reference  to  the  commission 
of offence.4  
(iv)  Where accused are known to the complainant conduct 
of identification parade is illegal.5  
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
It is not safe to rely on an identification test parade to 
record  a  conviction  unless  reasonable  description  of 
the  accused  is  given  by  the  witnesses  in  their 
statements before the police.6 
Identification  test  cannot  be  conducted  in  a  police 
station.7  
Joint identification parade of multiple accused persons 
is disapproved.8 
                                           
2 Arif Masih and another v. The State (PLD 2001 SC 398), Muhammad Zaman v. The 
State    (2007  SCMR  813),  Khawand  Bux  and  3  others  v.  The  State  (1997  P.Cr.L.J 
280). 
3 Shafqat Mehmood and others v. The State  (PLJ 2010 SC 986), Imran Ashraf and 7 
others v. The State (2001 SCMR 424), Kirir v. The State (PLD 1996 Karachi 246). 
 
4 Mehmood Ahmad and 3 others v. The State and another (1995 SCMR 127), Ghulam 
Rasul and 3 others v. The State (1988 SCMR 557)“Siraj-ul-Haq and another v. The 
State” (2008 SCMR 302), Khadim Hussain v. the State (1985 SCMR 721), Fayyaz v. 
The State (2012 SCMR 522), Azhar Mehmood and others v. the State (2017 SCMR 
135). 
5 Adrees v. The State (2002 SCMR 1439),  Khalid alias Khalidi and 2 others v. The 
State (2012 SCMR 327). 
 
6  Lal  Pasand  v.  The  State  (PLD  1981  SC  142),  Umaid  Ali  v.  The  State  (2008 
SCMR1419, Sabir Ali alias Fouji v. The State (2011 A.C 52). 
 
7 Pervaiz Iqbal alias Gogi v. the State (2000 YLR 600). 
 
8
Hakeem and others v. The State  (2017 SCMR 1546). 
 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 12 - 
(viii)  Conviction  cannot  be  recorded  on  mere  identification 
test  as  it  is  a  corroborative  piece  of  evidence  and 
carries no weight if substantive evidence is discarded.9  
20. 
 
In the instant case, it is observed that the identification 
test  was  conducted  13  days  after  the  Appellant  was  arrested.  The 
prosecution has not furnished any explanation for that delay. Even 
otherwise, on the touchstone of the law discussed above, there are a 
number of other factors which bereave the test of its credibility and 
significance.  First,  the  description  of  the  persons  whom  Aqeel 
Haider deceased met at the Niazi Adda was neither given in the FIR 
nor  in  the  statements  that  the  witnesses  got  recorded  with  the 
police. Secondly, the Complainant nominated the Appellant in this 
case 
through  application  Ex.DA  on  10.07.2009,  while 
the 
identification test was held on 09.09.2009. The Appellant was thus 
previously  known  to  the  Complainant  party.  Thirdly,  through  the 
cross-examination  of  Magistrate  Majid  Hussain  Gadhi  (PW-4)  the 
Appellant succeeded in proving that his face was not muffled when 
the  police  produced  him  before  the  Area  Magistrate  for  judicial 
remand  on  27-08-2009.  The  prosecution  thus  failed  in  its  primary 
duty  to  ensure  that  the  Appellant  was  not  seen  by  the  witnesses 
before  the  identification  test.  Lastly,  the  Appellant  was  mixed  up 
with  eight  dummies  but  without  disclosing  their  addresses, 
occupations  and  the  particular  of  the  cases  in  which  they  were 
arrested.  In  this  view  of  the  matter,  I  am  inclined  to  hold  that  the 
identification  test  is  of  no  evidentiary  value  and  cannot  be 
considered to maintain the conviction of the Appellant.  
21.  The  prosecution  seeks  corroboration  of  its  case  from  the 
recoveries  allegedly  effected  from  the  Appellant.  Syed  Imran 
Haider  and  Bashir  Ahmed/ASI  (PW-10)  testified  that  wheel 
spanner  P-8,  the  alleged  weapon  of  offence,  and  personal 
belongings of the deceased including mobile phone P-6, locket P-9, 
Identity  Card  P-10,  bank  card  P-11,  finger  ring  P-12,  wrist  watch  
                                           
9 Sabir Ali Waseem and 3 others v. The State (2007 YLR 2142). 
 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 13 - 
P-13  and  Passport  P-14  were  recovered  at  the  instance  of  the 
Appellant  from  the  almirah  in  his  residential  house.  The  alleged 
recoveries  are  extremely  tainted.  The  wheel  spanner  P-8  was  not 
blood  stained  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  it  was  used  in  the 
occurrence.  As  regards  the  other  articles  mentioned  above,  it  is 
observed  that  it  was  never  the  prosecution  case  that  the  deceased 
was  wearing  finger  ring  P-12,  wrist  watch  P-13  and  was  carrying 
passport P-14 when he stopped at the Niazi Adda. They do not find 
mention  in  FIR  Ex.PA/1.  The  recovery  of  mobile  phone  P-6, 
Identity  Card  P-10  and  bank  card  P-11  is  also  doubtful  as  the 
provisions  of  Section  103  Cr.P.C  were  not  complied  with.  More 
importantly,  since  these  recoveries  have  not  been  proved  by 
independent  evidence, 
they  can  hardly  be  used 
for  any 
corroboration.  It  is  a  fundamental  principle  of  justice  that 
corroboratory  evidence  must  come  from  an  independent  source. 
The  following  observations  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan in Mst. Rukhsana Begum  and others v. Sajjad and others 
(2017 SCMR 596) are quite instructive: 
“It  is  fundamental  principle  of  justice  that  corroboratory 
evidence,  must  come  from  independent  source  providing 
strength  and  endorsement  to  the  account  of  the  eye-
witnesses,  therefore,  eye-witnesses  in  the  absence  of 
extraordinary and very exceptional and rare circumstances, 
cannot  corroborate  themselves  by  becoming  attesting 
witness/witnesses to the recovery of crime articles.  In other 
words,  eye-witnesses  cannot  corroborate  themselves  but 
corroboratory  evidence  must  come  from  independent 
source  and  shall  be  supported  by  independent  witnesses 
other than eye-witnesses.”  
22. 
 
While we are still on the subject of recoveries, I must 
also refer to black Toyota corolla 2.OD car No.LH-417 (P-7) which 
the  prosecution  considers  has  immense  evidentiary  value.  As  the 
story  goes,  Allah  Ditta  Aaheer  had  witnessed  certain  culprits 
throwing a dead body from a black car near the Chenab College at 
Chiniot  Road,  Jhang, 
in 
the  wee  hours  of  18-06-2009. 
Subsequently,  during  investigation  it  was  found  that  the  Appellant 
obtained  Car  P-7  on  rent  from  Aroom  Car  Rentals,  Islamabad,  on 
05-06-2009 and it remained with him until 26-06-2009.  According 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 14 - 
to the contract form  of the afore-named rental service, the car was 
taken  from  Islamabad  for  Lahore.  Aqeel  Haider  was  murdered  in 
the night between 17-06-2009 and 18-06-2009. The learned counsel 
for  the  Complainant  argued  that  all  these  facts  fully  connect  the 
Appellant with the commission of the offence. I am afraid, they do 
not. In the  first  instance, Allah  Ditta  Aaheer  was  neither  produced 
before the Investigation Officer nor examined  during the trial. The 
entire story is hearsay and is inadmissible. Furthermore, there is no 
evidence  that  it  was  car  No.LH-417  (P-7)  which  was  used  to 
dispose of the corpse of Aqeel Haider and the Appellant was in it. 
This  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Complainant  is 
repelled.  
23. 
 
The  medical  evidence  furnished  by  Hafiz  Muhammad 
Mohsin  (PW-2)  is  of  no  avail  to  the  prosecution  because  in  the 
instant case the identity of the culprit could not be established. It is 
trite  that  medical  evidence  can  only  furnish  details  of  the  injuries 
received by a person, living or dead and the kind of weapon used in 
the  occurrence  but  it  cannot  raise  an  accusing  finger  towards 
anybody.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Altaf  Hussain  v.  Fakhar  Hussain 
and another  (2008 SCMR 1103), Mursal Kazmi alias Qamar Shah 
and another v. The State  (2009 SCMR 1410) and Jehangir Elahi v. 
Shoaib Ahmed and others (2017 SCMR 986). 
24. 
 
The prosecution is not called upon to establish motive 
in  every  case.  However,  in  a  case  which  is  entirely  based  on 
circumstantial  evidence  it  may  have  some  significance.  In  the 
instant  case,  the  prosecution  did  not  allege  that  the  Appellant  had 
any motive to murder Aqeel Haider.  
25. 
 
In  Azeem  Khan  and  another  v.  Mujahid  Khan  and 
others  (2016 SCMR 274), the Hon’ble Supreme Court ruled that: 
“…  the  entire  case  of  the  prosecution  is  based  on 
circumstantial  evidence.  The  principle  of  law,  consistently 
laid  down  by  this  Court  is,  that  different  pieces  of  such 
evidence  have  to  make  one  chain,  an  unbroken  one  where 
one end of it touches the dead body and the other the neck 
of the accused. In case of any missing link in the chain, the 
Crl. Appeal No. 1802/2011 
Crl. Revision No. 1202/2011 
- 15 - 
whole chain is broken and no conviction can be recorded in 
crimes  entailing  capital  punishment….In  cases  of 
circumstantial evidence, the courts are to take extraordinary 
care and caution before relying on the same. Circumstantial 
evidence,  even  if  supported  by  defective  or  in  adequate 
evidence, cannot be made basis for conviction on a capital 
charge.”   
 In  the  instant  case,  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  provide  any 
tangible  evidence  to  connect  the  Appellant  with  the  offence. 
Resultantly, he is entitled to benefit of doubt.  
26. 
 
In  view  of  the  foregoing,  this  appeal  is  allowed.  The 
impugned  judgment  is  set  aside  and  the  Appellant  is  acquitted  of 
the  charge.  Appellant  Misbah-ul-Hassan  is  in  jail.  He  shall  be 
released forthwith if not required to be detained in any other case.  
27. 
 
Since Mishah-ul-Hassan (Respondent No.2 in Criminal 
Revision  No.1202/2011)  has  been  acquitted  of  the  charge,  there 
remains  no  question  of  enhancement  of  his  sentence.  Resultantly, 
Criminal Revision No. 1202/2011 stands dismissed.  
  
Subhani* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 (Tariq Saleem Sheikh) 
        
       Judge 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
   
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
