Stereo HCJAD 38 
Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. W.P. No.30958 of 2017 
Pakistan Pharmacists 
Association  
Versus 
 
Province  of  Punjab 
and 3 others. 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Decision: 
09.03.2018 
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 
 
Abdullah, 
M/s.  Mansoor  Usman  Awan, 
Shahzeen 
Hussain 
Ibrahim  &  Barrister  Hamid  Azim 
Leghari Advocates.  
Mr.  Ashfaq  Ahmad  Kharral, 
Assistant Advocate-General. 
Barrister  Haris  Ramzan,  Director 
Legal. 
Mr. Aleem Akhtar Cheema, Deputy 
Director Legal. 
Mr.  Muhammad 
Deputy Director Legal. 
Mr. Imran Aslam Kharal, Advocate 
for NTS. 
  Khurished, 
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J.-    Through  the  instant  Constitutional 
petition,  filed  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (the  “Constitution”),  the  Petitioner  has 
made the following prayers: 
“In  view  of  the  foregoing,  it  is  most  respectfully  prayed 
that the instant petition may kindly be accepted and this 
Honourable Court may kindly be pleased to: 
Declare  that  the  Impugned  Recruitment  Process  is  ultra 
vires  the  provisions  of  Drugs  Act,  1976  and  the  Punjab 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
2 
Drugs  Rules,  2007,  amounts 
to  abdication  and 
outsourcing  of  regulatory  functions  and  is,  therefore, 
liable    to  be  declared  illegal,  unlawful  and  of  no  legal 
effect; 
 
Declare  that  the  Impugned  Recruitment  Process 
offends Articles 4, 10A and 25 of the Constitution and is 
liable to be struck down; 
 
Restrain the  Respondents from proceeding  further 
with  the  Impugned  Recruitment  Process,  during  the 
pendency of the titled petition.” 
2. 
Basically, the Petitioner is alleged to be a national professional 
body  of  the  Pharmacists  and  filed  this  petition  through  the  duly 
authorized  signatory  of  the  Petitioner  being  aggrieved  by  the 
recruitment  process  initiated  by  the  Respondent  No.2  for  the 
appointment  of  Pharmacists  (Field  Force)  in  BSP-17  on  contract 
basis for two years. 
3. 
In reply to the petition, the Respondents No.2 and 3 duly filed 
their  report  and  parawise  comments  denying  all  the  allegations 
levelled in the petition. 
4. 
Learned counsel for the Petitioner inter alia  submitted that the 
impugned  recruitment  process  is  totally  illegal  as  the  Respondent 
No.2 has not been empowered under the law  to create such classes of 
Pharmacists  i.e.  (Field  Force);  that  the  Respondents  have  not  duly 
fulfilled the requirements under the law for appointment on a specific 
post/category  e.g.  Pharmacists  (Field  Force)  either  on  regular  or 
contract  basis;    that  it  was  mandatory  for  the  Respondents  to  create 
specific  post  for  a  specific  time  period  which  has  not  been  done  in 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
3 
accordance with law; that the recruitment process is being conducted 
against  the  Contract  Appointment  Policy,  2004    (the  “Policy”);  that 
according to the Policy minimum period for the contract appointment 
should  be  three  years  to  five  years  but  the  Respondents  are  making 
appointment  only  for  a  period  of  two  years;  that  the  assignments  of 
the  posts  which  are  being  filled  by  the  Respondents  are  purely 
permanent nature; that there was no need to make fresh appointments 
on  contract  basis  as  already  the  members  of  the  Petitioner  are 
performing  duties  with  due  diligence;  that  the  persons    already 
appointed    have  a  legitimate  expectancy  to  be  able  to  perform 
functions as a part of the field force, which shall be a determinative 
factor  in  their  future  promotions.  To  fortify  his  contentions  learned 
counsel for the Petitioner has placed reliance on the case titled Parvez 
Aslam  Mian  Muhammad  Aslam  v.  Synthetic  Chemical  Company 
Limited, Karachi and others (PLD 1980 Karachi 401), Muhammad 
Yasin  Fecto  v.  Muhammad  Raza  Fecto  (1998  CLC  237),  Lahore 
Development  Authority  through  D.G.  and  others  v.  Ms.  Imrana 
Tiwana  (2015 SCMR 1739) and  Muhamamd Yasin v. Federation 
of Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 132).   
5. 
On 
the  other  hand 
learned  Law  Officers  vehemently 
controverted  the  arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
Petitioner and prayed for dismissal of the petition on the grounds that 
the  petition  is  not  maintainable  in  its  present  form  as  the  Petitioner 
has concealed  the actual facts of the case; that the Petitioner has not 
come to the Court with clean hands; that the Petitioner has no  locus 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
4 
standi  to  file    this  petition  as  it  cannot  claim  any  grievance  against 
the  recruitment  process  which  is  being  carried  out  strictly  in 
accordance  with  law;  that  the  Petitioner  never  remained  part  of  the 
under  challenged  recruitment  process, as such it  is not  an  aggrieved 
person; that this petition has been filed on the basis of mala fide mere 
to  blackmail  the  Respondents;  that  actually  the  Government/ 
Respondents have adopted a zero tolerance policy against adulterated 
and  spurious  drugs  and  malpractices  and  has  reiterated  his 
commitment  in  weeding  out  evil  trade  of  counterfeit,  forged  and 
substandard medicines from the Province of Punjab as directed by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan; that for the achievement of the 
said  object  the  said  recruitment  process  has  been  conducted  for  the 
appointment  of  best  suitable  professionals  in  the  field  formation  for 
provisions of safe and standardized drugs to the public at large; that 
all  the  posts  are  being    filled  by  the  Respondents  after  fulfilling  all 
the  legal  requirements;  that  the  said  recruitment  process  has  been 
initiated  after  recommendations  of  the  competent  authority;  that  the 
appointments are being made as per the Policy; that as the Petitioner 
is  disqualified  to  file  this  petition,  therefore,  to  fill  this  lacunae 
application by some of its members have been filed to be impleaded 
as co-Petitioners which cannot be allowed in any circumstances as an 
after thought. Learned Law officer also laid much stress on the point 
that the Petitioner is a disputed registered body and has nothing to do 
with the recruitment process and not aggrieved by any act or order of 
the  Respondents.  In  support  of  their  contentions,  reliance  has  been 
placed  on  the  case  titled  Kamran  Martim  v.  Mst.  Siera  Bibi  and  4 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
5 
others  (2017  PLC  (C.S.)  597),  Fida  Hussain  and  another  v.  Mst. 
Saiqa  and  others  (2011  SCMR  1990),  Muhammad  Amir  v.  Umer 
Hayat and 5 others (2010 CLC 1798), Anjuman Fruit Arhtian and 
others  v.  Deputy  Commissioner,  Faisalabad  and  others  (2011 
SCMR  279)  and  Haseeb  Raza  Khan  v.  Sub  Registrar  and  others 
(2017 PTD 1064). 
6. 
In rebuttal, the learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that 
the Petitioner is the national professional body of Pharmacists and its 
members  are  registered  in  accordance  with  the  Pharmacy  Act,  1967 
as  Pharmacists  hence,  it  is  fully  competent  to  file  this  petition, 
therefore, this petition is maintainable; that the impugned recruitment 
process  threatens  and  obstructs  the  regulatory  functions  and  powers 
conferred on the members of the Petitioner under the law, as such the 
Petitioner is aggrieved of the impugned recruitment process.  
7. 
I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  both  the  sides  at  length  and 
perused the record minutely.   
8. 
From the perusal of record it reveals that the Respondent No.2 
in its report and parawise comments alleged that  the Government of 
the Punjab has adopted a zero tolerance policy against adulterated & 
spurious  drugs  &  malpractices  as  directed  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 
Court of Pakistan and has reiterated his commitment in weeding out 
evil trade of counterfeit, forged and sub-standard medicines from the 
Province  of  Punjab;  that  to  achieve  the  said  objective,  the 
Respondents has decided to recruit best suitable professionals in  the 
field  formation  for  provisions  of  safe  and  standardized  drugs  to  the 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
6 
public  at  large  in  Province  of  Punjab,  consequently,  the  under 
challenged recruitment process has been initiated for appointment of 
suitable persons as Pharmacists (Field Force). The said fact has also 
been  reiterated  by  Mr.  Ashfaq  Ahmed  Kharal,  learned  Assistant-
Advocate  General  and  further  adds  that  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 
of  Pakistan  on  various  health  issues  including  Suo  Motu  Case 
No.623/P  of  2017  has  issued  various  directions  to  the  concerned 
authorities  through  Attorney  General  and  Advocate  General  to 
overcome the said issues.   
9.  Whereas  on  the  other  hand  Mr.  Mansoor  Usman  Awan, 
Advocate for the Petitioner contended that the impugned recruitment 
process  suffering  from  various  legal  infirmities  is  liable  to  be 
declared  illegal;  recently  the  Respondent  No.2  has  completed  and 
notified  appointment  of  Pharmacists  on  regular  basis;  that  the 
appointments notified on 03.04.2017 are made through a competitive 
and much more credible examination and testing process carried out 
by the Punjab Public Service Commission; that the Respondent No.2 
has chosen to appoint Pharmacist, and that too in specific districts, on 
contract  basis  merely  a  little  over  a  month  after  the  regular 
recruitment;  that  the  persons  already  appointed  have  a  legitimate 
expectancy to be able to perform functions as a part of the field force, 
which shall be a determinative factor in their future promotions.    
10. 
In order to examine the locus standi of the Petitioner it is noted 
that 
the  Petitioner/Pakistan  Pharmacists  Association 
is  an 
Association;  neither  it  nor  any  its  member  has  participated  in  the 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
7 
recruitment  process  under  challenged.  Furthermore,  the  impugned 
recruitment process is not directly or indirectly effecting the services 
of the members of the Petitioner, therefore, nowhere from the record, 
it  is  established  that  the  Petitioner  is  aggrieved  of  the  recruitment 
process  initiated  by  the  Respondents  for  the  appointment  of  the 
Pharmacists (Field Force) on contract basis or its fundamental rights 
have  been  infringed  through  the  under  challenged  recruitment 
process.  The  recruitment  process  was  initiated  by  the  Respondents 
through  the  advertisement  dated  14.05.2017  with  certain  terms  and 
conditions.  The  Petitioner,  through  the  instant  petition  has  invoked 
the Constitutional jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the 
Constitution, therefore, it has to establish that its legal or fundamental 
rights  guaranteed  under  the  Constitution  have  been  violated. 
Similarly, the Petitioner has to prove its locus standi to seek direction 
for initiation of action against the Respondents under the denial of its 
legal rights, if any.  
11. 
 
It  is  sine  qua  non  for  initiation  of  proceedings  under 
Article 199 of the Constitution that the Petitioner should have a locus 
standi  to  institute  the  proceedings  or  in  other  words  the  Petitioner 
should  be  an  aggrieved  party  from  the  action  of  the  Respondents. 
Pivotal judgment of the apex Court on this issue is Mian Fazal Din v. 
Lahore  Improvement  Trust,  Lahore  (PLD  1969  SC    223)  and  the 
Lahore High Court titled Montgomery Flour and General Mills Ltd., 
Montgomery v. Director, Food Purchases, West Pakistan etc.  (PLD 
1957 (W.P) Lahore 914) wherein it was observed that for a person to 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
8 
have  locus  standi    to  initiate  a  petition  for  issuance  of  writ,  he  must 
have  some  right  in  the  matter  and  he  needs  not  have  a  right  in  that 
strict  sense  of  the  term  which  is  provided  in  Article  170  of  the 
Constitution. In the case titled Dr. Imran Khattak and another v. Ms. 
Sofia  Waqar  Khattak,  PSO  To  Chief  Justice  and  others  (2014 
SCMR 122) the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan held as follows: 
“It  would  exercise  such  jurisdiction  under  Article 
199(1)(a)(i),  (ii)  and  (c)  on  the  application  of  an 
aggrieved  person  while  under  199(1)(b)(i)  &  (ii)  on  the 
application of any person whether aggrieved or not, and 
not  on  an  information  or  on  its  own  knowledge.  In  the 
case of "Tariq  Transport Company, Lahore v. Sargodha 
Bhera  Bus  Service  and  others"  (PLD  1958  SC  (Pak) 
437),  this  Court  held  that  a  High  Court  was  not 
competent  merely  on  an  information  or  on  its  own 
knowledge  to  commence  certiorari proceedings or other 
proceedings of a similar nature under Article 170 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1956. In the 
case of "Fazl-e-Haq, Accountant General, West Pakistan 
v.  The  State"  (PLD  1960  SC  (Pak)  295),  this  Court 
reiterated  the  view  by  holding  that  the  extraordinary 
jurisdiction relating to a writ could only be exercised by 
the  High  Court  when  moved  by  a  party  whose  legal 
rights have been denied” 
Moreover, in Hafiz Hamadullah v. Saifullah Khan and others (PLD 
2007 SC 52) the apex Court held as follows: 
“With  regard  to  the  first  objection  it  may  be  noted  that 
under Article 199(1)(a) of the Constitutional jurisdiction 
of the High Court can be invoked by an aggrieved person 
which  denotes  a  person  who  has  suffered  a  legal 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
9 
grievance,  against  whom  a  decision  has  been 
pronounced  which  has  wrongfully  deprived  him  or 
wrongfully  refused  him  something  which  he  was  legally 
entitled  to.  It  is  also  the  requirement  that  the  person 
invoking the constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 
of the  Constitution  has to  establish that  any  of  his  legal 
or  fundamental  right  guaranteed  under  the  Constitution 
has been violated resulting in legal loss” 
 
Further,  in  N.W.F.P.  Public  Service  Commission  and  others  v. 
Muhammad  Arif  and  others  (2011  SCMR  848)  it  was  observed  as 
follows: 
“The  right  which  is  the  foundation  of  an  application 
under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  is  a  personal  and 
individual right. The legal right may be a statutory right 
or a right recognized by the law. A person can be said to 
be aggrieved only when a person is denied a legal right 
by someone  who  has  a legal  duty to  perform relating to 
the right. There must not only be a right but a justiciable' 
right in existence, to give  jurisdiction to the High Court 
in  the  matter.  Unless  whatever  right  personal  or 
otherwise,  on  which 
the  application 
is  based 
is 
established, no order can be issued under Art.199.”     
12. 
In  view  of  the  above  judgments  of  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan and from the facts of the case, it is evident that the Petitioner 
is  not  aggrieved  of  any  orders,  acts  or  proceedings  done  or  taken 
against  it  by  the  Respondents.  Infact,  the  impugned  recruitment 
process  is  only  between  the  Respondents  and  the  candidates  for 
Pharmacists (Field Force) which has nothing to do with the Petitioner, 
therefore,  the  Petitioner  is  not  an  aggrieved  person  to  approach  this 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
10 
Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  The  Petitioner  has  only 
written the Respondents on 20.05.2017 with the prayer that to kindly 
review  process  but  without  showing  any  grievances  or  denial  of  the 
rights to its members. Reliance is also placed on the case titled Ishaq 
Masih  v.  District  Coordination  Officer  etc.  (2017  PLC  (C.S.)  528) 
wherein it has been observed as under: 
“Hon’ble Justice  Fazal Karim in his book “Judicial Review of 
Public  Actions”  has  elaborated 
the  distinction  between 
“Aggrieved  Party”  and  “Aggrieved  Person”  at  page-977 
Volume-2 which reads as follows: 
“Distinction 
between 
“Aggrieved  Party” 
and 
“Aggrieved Person” 
It  will  be  noticed  that  sub-clause  (a)  of 
clause (1) of Article 199 of the Constitution 
uses the expression “aggrieved party” while 
sub-clause  (c)  of  clause  (1)  of  that  Article 
uses the expression “aggrieved person”. On 
general principle, when the Legislature uses 
two different expressions, the intention is to 
convey  different  meanings.  The  word 
“party”  can assume importance  in  cases in 
which there had been proceedings under the 
relevant statute to which the applicant under 
Article 199 was not a party, as it did in Haji 
Adam  v.  Settlement  and  Rehabilitation 
Commissioner.  But  the  word  “party”  as 
used in Article 199, clause (1)(a) means one 
who  is  competent  to    maintain  an  action, 
and  a  person not  a Party to the proceeding 
under  the  relevant  statute,  can  seek  relief 
under  Article  199,  if  he  shows  that  the 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
11 
decision  is  directed  against    him  or  his 
property in the sense that the enforcement of 
the 
decision  would 
involve 
special, 
immediate and in its effect a direct injury to 
his  interest.”  (Tariq  Transport  Company 
Case- PLD 1958 SC (Pak) 437).  
Similarly  at  page-980  of  the  “Judicial  Review  of  Public 
Actions” Locus Standi is elucidated in the following terms: 
“Locus Standi is a Question for Decision, not of 
Discretion. 
The  question  whether  an  applicant  is  or  is 
not an aggrieved party or person within the 
meaning of Article 199 is not a matter in the 
discretion  of  the  Court.  “The  matter  is  one 
for  decision,  a  mixed  decision  of  fact  and 
law,  which  the  Court  must  decide  on  legal 
principles”  (Lord  Wilberforce  in  IRC  v. 
Fed of Self Employed (1981) 2 All ER 93). 
Object of this Provision 
The  right 
to  be  satisfied  about 
the 
applicant’s locus standi, said Lord Scarman 
in  IRC  v.  Fed.  Of  Self  Employed  [(1981)2 
All  ER  93]  enables  the  Court  to  prevent 
abuse  by  busy  bodies,  cranks  and  other 
mischief-makers.  It  is  as  Lord  Wilberforce 
said 
in 
the  same  case,  an 
important 
safeguard  against  the  Court  being  flooded 
and public bodies harassed by irresponsible 
applications.”    
13.  From the perusal of record it is evident that the Petitioner is not 
aggrieved and has no  locus standi to file this petition.  The Petitioner 
has not been able to disclose anything which shows that the Petitioner 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
12 
is aggrieved by the action of the Respondents. The grounds, taken by 
it for disqualification of new recruitees and affecting the fundamental 
rights of the Petitioner in any manner, do not satisfy and convince the 
Court.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  Petitioner  neither  has  stated  in 
the  petition  nor  attached  any  document/order  of  the  Respondents  to 
show that it is aggrieved of the acts/proceedings of the Respondents. 
In  this  regard  the  Petitioner  has  only  prayed  that  the  impugned 
recruitment  process  be  declared  illegal,  unlawful  and  of  no  legal 
effect.  
14.  Admittedly,  the  petition  is  filed  by  the  Association  (Pakistan 
Pharmacists Association) and the question arises here that whether, in 
service  matters  of  appointment  or  transfer,  associations  can  file  writ 
petitions?  The  action  of  the  Government  in  appointing/transferring 
certain  people  are  actions  in  personam,  not  in  rem  because  it  is  for 
only those candidates who applied. In this case, neither the Petitioner 
shown  that  its  members  have  applied  nor  it  shown  that  such 
appointments will affect the rights of the members of the Petitioner or 
the  Petitioner.  Therefore,  associations  are  not  aggrieved  persons 
within  the  meaning  of  Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  In  this  regard 
this  Court  has  recently  held  in  Pakistan  Medical  Association  v. 
Pakistan 2016 PLC (CS) 676 that an association does not have locus 
standi  to  file  a  writ  petition  with  regards  to  appointments  and 
transfers.  It has been held therein after considering the case law on 
this  point  that  the  right  which  is  the  foundation  of  an  application 
under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution,  is  a  personal  and  individual 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
13 
right.  The  legal  right  may  be  statutory  right  or  a  right  to  be 
recognized  by  the  law.  A  person  can  be  said  to  be  aggrieved  only 
when  a  person  is  denied  a  legal  right  by  someone  who  has  a  legal 
duty to perform relating to the right. In the instant case only a prayer 
has  been  made  by  the  Pakistan  Pharmacists  Association  that  the 
Impugned  Recruitment  Process  is  ultra  vires  the  provisions  of  the 
Drugs Act, and the Punjab Drugs Rules, 2007, amounts to abdication 
and outsourcing of regulatory functions and  is, therefore, liable to be 
declared illegal, unlawful and of no legal effect. Any Member of the 
Association  individually  could  challenge  the  same  if  he  was 
aggrieved,  which  infact  he  was  not,  but  he  has  not  come  forward  to 
challenge the same. The Petitioner/Association being a third party, in 
my  view,  had  no 
locus  standi 
to  challenge 
the 
impugned 
advertisement  nor  it  falls  within  the  ambit  of  aggrieved  party. 
Recently  the  Hon’ble  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  in  case    titled 
Kamran  Martin  v.  Mst.  Siera  Bibi  and  4  others  (2017  PLC  (C.S.) 
597) has held that “it is not the case of the Respondent No.1/Petitioner 
that along with the Appellant she also qualified and would be the next 
candidate, in case the Appellant is declared disqualified, rather she did 
not  pass  the  interview  and  admittedly  exiled  from  the  recruitment 
process.  Therefore,  the  Petitioner  cannot  be  said  to  be  an  aggrieved 
person  and  has  locus  standi  to  file  the  writ  petition  based  on  the 
principle  laid  down  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan. 
Furthermore,  the  Respondent  No.1/Petitioner  has  not  attached  any 
document/order  of  the  Respondents  Nos.2  to  5  to  show  that  she  has 
been  aggrieved  of  the  acts/proceedings  of  the  said  Respondents.  In 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
14 
this  regard  the  Petitioner  has  only  prayed  that  the  writ  petition  be 
accepted  and  the  recommendations  of  the  Respondent  No.4  may  be 
declared  illegal,  discriminative,  without  following  the  merit  policy 
and may be declared null and void.”  
15.  The  Sindh  High  Court  in  two  judgments  (EOBI  Officers 
Association of Pakistan v. EOBI  2011 PLC (CS) 336 and Mutual 
Funds  Association  of  Pakistan  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  2010 
PLC  306)  has also  held  that  writ  petitions in  such  circumstances are 
not  maintainable.  The  Petitioner  is  an  Association  of  Pharmacists 
working  under  the  surveillance  of  the  Respondents  and  the  reliefs 
prayed for are not in respect of any of the rights of the Association but 
rights  of  individual  employees.  Whether  an  association  can  maintain 
petition  in  respect  of  rights  of  its  individual  members  is  a  question 
which  was  extensively  considered  by  the Hon’ble  Division  Bench  of 
this  Court  in  case  titled  Messrs  Mutual  Funds  Association  of 
Pakistan  (MUFAP)  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary, 
Ministry  of  Finance,  Government  of  Pakistan  and  another  (2010 
PLC 306) and it was held as under:--- 
"10. In  Pakistan  Steel  Re-rolling  Mills  Association  v. 
Province  of  West  Pakistan,  PLD  1964  Lahore  138,  it 
was  argued  by  the  respondent  that  petitioner  being  an 
association  of  Re-rolling  Industry  is  not  an  aggrieved 
person for the purpose of Articles 98 of the Constitution 
of 1962 (corresponding to Article 199 of the Constitution 
of 1973). The subject-matter was that certain notification 
for  declaration  of  minimum  wages  was  made  and  the 
association  challenged  this  notification.  Division  Bench 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
15 
of the West Pakistan High Court which was seized of the 
matter held as under:-- 
"It was said that the association is an "aggrieved party" 
because  it  enjoys  a  consultative  status  for  operating  the 
Ordinance, and that the grievance made in the petition is 
that  in  the  process  of  setting  up  of  the  minimum  Wages 
Board  and  the  recommendations  made  by  the  Board, 
there  has  been  a  departure  from  the  provisions  of  the 
Ordinance.  An  added  strength  was  given 
to 
this 
contention by the fact that there was no other association 
representing  the  Steel  Mills  Owners  and  that  the 
petitioner-Association  was  a  registered  body  under  the 
Trade Organization Ordinance of 1961. We consider that 
none  of  these  considerations  confers  on  the  association 
the  character  of  an  aggrieved  party  within  the  meaning 
of  Article  98  of  the  Constitution,  as  the  grievance 
complained  of  must  in  its  effect  entail  a  direct  injury  to 
the  petitioner  to  make  it  an  aggrieved  party,  and  the 
injury  has  to  be  co-related  to  the  relief  sought  in  the 
petition to avoid that injury." 
 
16.    Moreover,  in  case  titled  Democratic  Workers'  Union  C.B.A. 
v. State Bank of Pakistan, 2002 PLC (C.S.) 614, the Petitioner was 
a Collective Bargaining Agent and it filed petition seeking prayer for 
formulation  of  recruitment  policy  and  also  against  appointment  of 
certain  persons.  The  Division  Bench  held  that  the  Petitioner  being  a 
Collective  Bargaining  Agent  could  not  claim  locus  standi  to  invoke 
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the Constitution, for the 
alleged violation of statutory or fundamental rights of its members.  
17.    Furthermore,  in  case  titled  Province  of  Balochistan  through 
Secretary  Excise  and  Taxation  Department,  Civil  Secretariat, 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
16 
Quetta  and  2  others  v.  Murree  Brewery  Company  Ltd.  through 
Secretary PLD 2007 SC 386, a notification issued by the Provincial 
Excise  Department  imposing  new  duties/fees  on  distributors  of 
alcoholic beverages was challenged. The Petitioner was manufacturer 
of such alcoholic beverages. It was contended that the permit fee was 
imposed not on the manufacturer but on its distributors and therefore 
it  is  not  the  manufacturer  who  can  be  considered  to  be  an  aggrieved 
person  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  Constitutional  petition.  The 
Supreme  Court  after referring to  a number  of  cases  from  Pakistan  as 
well as from Indian jurisdiction held that even if imposition of the fee 
made  products  of  the  Petitioner  more  expensive,  the  Petitioner  was 
not  an  aggrieved  person  within  contemplation  of  Article  199  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan. Therefore,  as  far  as 
Petitioner  is  concerned,  it  is  not  entitled  to  maintain  this  petition,  in 
any case. 
18.  Mr. Ashfaq Ahmed Kharal, learned Assistant-Advocate General 
states  that  there  is  a  dispute  regarding  Election  issues  between  the 
Petitioner and its other members pending adjudication before the Civil 
Court,  Lahore.  The  Respondents  contend  that  the  Petitioner  is  a 
disputed  registered  body  whose  management  is  under  dispute,  hence 
this  petition  is  not  competent  because  the  Petitioner  does  not  fall 
within the definition of an aggrieved person under Article 199 of the 
Constitution and has nothing to do with the recruitment process. It is 
also  contended  that  regarding  the  legal  status  of  the  Petitioner  civil 
suits  are  also  pending  before  the  Court  of  competent  jurisdiction 
between its members. The pendency of litigation in this regard before 
W.P. No.30958 /2017 
17 
the  Civil  Courts is not denied  but  the  Petitioner  contended  that  mere 
filing  of  civil  suits  does  not  affect  its  veracity.  Admittedly,  the 
litigation qua the legal status of the Petitioner is pending adjudication 
before  the  Civil  Court,  therefore,  the  matter  involves  disputed 
question  of  facts  which  cannot  be  resolved  through  Constitutional 
jurisdiction of this Court. In this regard reliance is placed on the case 
titled  Fida  Hussain  and  another  v.  Mst.  Saiqa  and  others  (2011 
SCMR 1990). 
19.  On the touchstone of the above principles of the apex Court and 
the  foregoing  reasons,  the  instant  petition  is  not  maintainable  and 
accordingly dismissed. 
20.  During  the  pendency  of  this  petition,  the  Respondents  filed 
Application  under  Order  VII  Rule  11  of  Code  of  Civil  Procedure, 
1908  (CPC)  (C.M.  No.4/2017)  which  was  duly  replied  by  the 
Petitioner. Some Applicants also filed application Under Order I Rule 
10  CPC  (C.M.  No.6/2017)  to  be  impleaded  as  Co-Petitioners  in  the 
main petition reply of which has also been filed by the Respondents. 
As the main case has been dismissed on merit being not maintainable, 
therefore, the above referred applications are disposed of accordingly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*M.NAVEED* 
 
 
       
 
   
 
      (JAWAD HASSAN) 
                                       JUDGE 
Approved for reporting  
 
        
 
                                       JUDGE 
