JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
           
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
Expo Lahore (Private) Limited 
Versus   
Excise & Taxation Department, Government of the Punjab & others 
 
 
Date of Hearing. 
PETITIONERS BY: 
J U D G M E N T 
24-5-2018 
 
M/s  Syed  Shahab  Qutab,  Mian  Tariq  Hassan  and 
Ch. Amjad Iqbal Sandhu, Advocates. 
RESPONDENTS BY:  M/s  Waqar  A.  Sheikh  and  Mian  Tahir  Maqsood, 
Advocates for LDA. 
Barrister  Khalid  Waheed,  Addl.A.G.  along  with 
Abid Zia, Law Officer. 
Mr. Tahir Mahmood Ahmad Khokhar, D.A.G. 
 
Shahid Karim, J:-  This  petition  under  Article  199 
of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973 challenges the demand for property tax from the 
petitioner.  In the beginning the challenge was made to 
the  demand  of  an  amount  of  Rs.10,693,881/-  for  the 
year 2014-15.  During the course of the proceedings in 
the  instant  constitutional  petition,  another  show  cause 
notice  under  Section  16  of 
the  Punjab  Urban 
Immovable Property  Tax Act, 1958  (Act, 1958) dated 
13.12.2017  was  produced  by  the  respondents  wherein 
a  sum  of  Rs.356,944,90/-  has  been  alleged  to  be  due 
from  the  petitioner  on  account  of  property  tax  and  its 
arrears. 
2. 
The petitioner, Pakistan Expo Centers (Pvt) Ltd. 
(Expo)  is  a  company  jointly  owned  by  the  Federal 
Government  and  Government  of  the  Punjab.    The 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
2 
 
 
Federal  Government  approximately  owns  98%  shares 
whereas  Government  of  the  Punjab  owns  2%  shares.  
The scheme of investment in Expo envisioned that the 
Government  of  the  Punjab  would  make  available  the 
land  for  the  construction  of  an  Expo  Centre.    The 
Punjab Government would periodically pay an amount 
equivalent  to  the  lease  money  for  the  land  to  Expo 
Lahore  as  share  subscription  money  against  which 
shares  would  be  issued  to  the  Punjab  government.    In 
this  manner,  the  shareholding  of  the  Government  of 
the  Punjab  would  gradually  increase  in  the  company.  
This 
is  encapsulated 
in 
the  memorandum  of 
association  of  Expo  and  the  description  of  land  to  be 
leased out to Expo was also given in the memorandum 
of association.  The primary purpose of company is to 
provide  export  oriented  companies  a  facility 
to 
promote their products.  It is the case of Expo that the 
company serves an important national purpose, that is, 
the  promotion  of  exports  and  the  following  objects 
given in the memorandum of association lend actuality 
to the purpose of Expo: 
iv. 
v. 
a 
and 
traders 
provide 
platform 
companies, 
“to 
on 
International standards to enable the 
exporting 
foreign 
manufacturers 
to 
effectively introduce and market their 
producers,  services  and  business, 
particularly  relating 
to,  but  not 
limited to exports from Pakistan. 
to  contribute  to  the  improvement  of 
economic  situation  of  the  country  in 
general  and 
improve  export 
related  initiative  and  activities  in 
adopting 
particular, 
and 
supporting different measures; 
by 
to 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
3 
 
 
vi. 
to essentially cater for the promotion 
of exports from Pakistan, inclusive of 
but not  limited to goods and  services 
originating  in  Pakistan  or  imported 
for  export,  with  or  without  value 
addition  and  other  related  economic 
activities.” 
 
3. 
It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the  land  on 
which  Expo  is  constructed  is  owned  by  the  Lahore 
Development  Authority  (LDA)  (approximately  400 
Kanals).    LDA  has  leased  the  said  land  to  the  Punjab 
Government  and  the  Punjab  Government  has,  in  turn, 
sub-leased  it  to  Expo.    The  agreement  between  the 
Industries  Department,  Government  of  the  Punjab  is 
dated 09.08.2005 whereas the prior agreement between 
LDA  and  the  Industries  Department,  Government  of 
the Punjab is also dated 09.08.2005 by which the land 
was  leased  by  LDA  to  the  Industries  Department, 
Government of the Punjab.  The cause of action for the 
instant  petition  arose  out  of  the  demand  raised  by 
Excise  &  Taxation  Department  with  regard  to  the 
payment  of  property  tax  from  Expo.    The  petition 
makes  a  reference  to  the  controversy  having  been 
agitated  and  dilated  upon  at  various  forums  from  the 
period of the first demand till the filing of the present 
petition.    On  4.10.2011,  the  issue  was  raised  with  the 
Punjab  Government  which  constituted  a  high  level 
committee to examine  the issue.  The summary of the 
committee  has  been  attached  with  this  petition.    A 
meeting of the committee was held on 09.01.2012 and 
after  detailed  deliberations,  it  was  decided  that  the 
property  tax  be  paid  by  the  Industries  Department, 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
4 
 
 
Government  of  the  Punjab.    Subsequently  an  amount 
was sanctioned in favour of the Industries Department 
for the payment of property tax and the payment of the 
tax  was  made  by  Industries  Department  and  the  proof 
of  which  has  also  been  brought  on  record  by  Expo.  
Expo asserts that for the following  years 2012-13, the 
demand  of  property  tax  was  once  again  raised  from 
Expo despite knowing that during the previous year, a 
decision  had  been  taken  for  the  payment  of  the 
property tax by the Industries Department. 
4. 
The Act of 1958 is the statute at the heart of the 
controversy.    Section  3  levies  a  tax  upon  urban  areas 
which  the  government  may  notify.    The  tax  shall  be 
due  from  the  owner  of  buildings  and  lands.    In  this 
case Expo is  the owner of building on the leased land 
and  in  that  capacity  has  been  served  with  a  demand 
regarding  imposition  of  property  tax.    Expo  takes 
refuge  in  the  provisions  of  section  4  which  relates  to 
exemptions  and  which,  so  far  as  relevant,  reads  as 
under:- 
Exemptions.—The  tax  shall  not  be  leviable 
“4. 
in respect of the following properties, namely:- 
(a) 
in perpetuity, owned by the Federal Government.” 
buildings and lands other than those leased 
 
5. 
Thus, the Act of 1958 exempts from the levy of 
property  tax  on  buildings  and  lands  owned  by  the 
Federal Government.  It is not the case of the either of 
the parties that the land on which the building has been 
constructed, has been leased in perpetuity.  Therefore, 
the  simple  proposition  which  engages  this  Court  is 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
5 
 
 
whether  the  building  in  respect  of  which  the  property 
tax  is  being  demanded,  is  a  building  owned  by  the 
Federal Government or not.   In this regard Expo filed 
C.M  No.1  of  2018  and  attached  certain  documents  in 
order to demonstrate that the building is indeed owned 
by  the  Federal  Government.    The  first  document  to 
which  a  reference  may  be  made 
is  an  office 
memorandum  on  19.12.2006  and 
the  following 
decision  taken  by  the  ECNEC  in  its  meeting  held  on 
30.11.2006: 
“The undersigned is directed to refer to Ministry of 
Commerce, Government of Pakistan, vide their O.M 
No.14(2)/2006-ITO  (PPC)  dated  24th  March,  2006 
on the above subject and to say that the ECNEC in 
its  meeting  held  on  30-11-2006  considered  the 
subject project and took the following decision: 
“The  Executive  Committee  of  the  National 
Economic Council (ECNEC) considered the 
Summary  dated  30th  September,  2006 
submitted  by  the  Planning  Commission  / 
Planning  and  Development  Division  on 
“EXPO  Centre  Lahore”  and  approved  the 
project at a total cost of Rs.1970.00 million 
without FEC.” 
2. 
It is requested that steps may kindly be taken 
for  issuing  necessary  administrative  approval  as 
well  as  expenditure  sanction  in  respect  of  the 
subject  scheme  in  accordance  with  the  above 
quoted decision of the ECNEC. 
It  is  further  stated  that  guidelines  approved 
3. 
by 
regarding 
implementation of the project may please be kept in 
view, while executing the project.” 
the  ECNEC 
(April, 
2000) 
 
6. 
On  4.7.2011,  the  executive  committee  of  the 
National  Economic  Council  in  its  meeting  dated 
26.5.2014 granted an approval for the up-gradation and 
additional  works  of  Expo  Centre,  Lahore.    The 
decision was to the following effect: 
“The  Executive  Committee  of  National  Economic 
Council  (ECNEC)  considered  the  summary  dated 
17th  March,  2011,  submitted  by  the  Planning 
Commission  on  “Up  Gradation  and  Additional 
Works  of  Expo  Centre,  Lahore”  and  accorded  ex-
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
 
 
facto  approval  of 
post 
the  project  at 
revised/completed cost of Rs.3415.00 million..” 
6 
the 
 
7. 
Expo  further  brought  documents  on  record  to 
show that the accounts of the company are audited by 
the Auditor General of Pakistan as per the mandate of 
Article 169 and 170(2) of the Constitution as also that 
the  company  has  taken  out  an  insurance  policy  from 
National  Insurance  Company  Ltd.  owned  by  the 
Government  of  Pakistan  and  which 
too 
is  a 
requirement  for  all  government  companies  under  the 
Insurance  Ordinance,  2000.  Further  that  Board  of 
Directors  is  headed  by  the  Prime  Minister  of  Pakistan 
and the entire composition of the Board of Directors is 
such  that  its  members  consist  of  nominees  of  Federal 
Government.  The Board of Directors is also approved 
by  the  Prime  Minister  and  this  is  evident  from  a 
document  dated  08.11.2004  which 
is  an  office 
memorandum  and  relates  to  the  formation  of  the 
company  for  Expo  Centre  Lahore. 
  Additional 
documents  have  been  placed  on  record  which  clearly 
show  that  the  funds  for  Expo,  not  only  for  its  initial 
construction but also up-gradation are being disbursed 
by  the  Federal  Government  as  approved  by  ECNEC.  
All  of  these  facts  clearly  bring  forth  the  ineluctable 
conclusion  that  the  building  in  respect  of  which  the 
construction  is  being  raised  is  owned  by  the  Federal 
Government  and  this  fact  was  not  seriously  disputed 
by  the  respondents.    Moreover,  no  documents  were 
brought  on  record  which  would  rebut  the  stance  of 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
7 
 
 
Expo  that  not  only  that  its  Board  of  Directors  is 
appointed  by  the  Prime  Minister  but  also  that  it  is 
funded  by  the  Federal  Government.    A  reference  may 
also be made to section 183(3) of the Companies Act, 
2017  according  to  which  the  Board  of  Directors  of  a 
company  shall  not  sell  or  otherwise  dispose  of  the 
undertakings  of  a  company  unless  the  consent  of  the 
general meeting has been taken.  This would also mean 
that Expo cannot deal with the property on its own and 
the consent of the Federal Government will have to be 
given.    This  aspect  need  not  be  dilated  upon  any 
further  since  the  entire  shareholding  of  Expo  vests  in 
the Federal Government and the Board of Directors is 
also chaired by the Prime Minister.  For all intents and 
purposes,  Expo 
is 
thus  a  Federal  Government 
institution  and  its  property  vests  in  the  Federal 
Government and by a necessary corollary therefore the 
building of Expo is owned by the Federal Government. 
8. 
The  Excise  and  Taxation  Department  of  the 
Government  of  the  Punjab  primarily  relies  on  the 
terms  of  the  lease-deed  and  in  particular  section  6 
which  obliges  the  lessee  to  pay  all  taxes  in  respect  of 
the  demised  premises.    However,  the  reliance  on  this 
plea  is  clearly  flawed  as  Expo  does  not  argue  that  it 
should  be  paid  by  the  lessor  in  its  stead  but  denies  its 
liability  to  pay  property  tax,  in  any  case.    No  specific 
reply to the case of exemption set up by Expo has been 
made  apart  from  the  general  contention  that  the 
building  is  being  used  for  commercial  purposes  as  if 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
8 
 
 
that purpose by itself denudes Expo of its status of an 
exemptee. 
9. 
The stance put forth by the Commerce Division, 
Government  of  Pakistan  is  an  affirmation  of  Expo’s 
defence  that  the  building  is  owned  by  the  Federal 
Government.    The  following  paragraphs  of  its  reply 
clear the cobwebs surrounding this aspect: 
be 
and 
exports 
through 
developed 
of  Pakistani 
the  Federal  Government 
That on of the key functions of the commerce 
“1. 
Division  under  the  Rules  of  Business,  1973  is 
promotion  of  foreign  trade  and  export  promotion.  
To  enable 
to  more 
effectively  carry  out  this  function,  the  Ministry  of 
Commerce  decided  to  develop  Expo  Centers  in 
various  cities  in  all  provinces  of  Pakistan  for  the 
promotion 
the 
enhancement  of  trade  and  commerce  with  foreign 
countries.    It  was  decided  that  the  Expo  Center  in 
Lahore  would 
an 
instrumentality  of  the  Federal  Government  i.e.  a 
company  owned  and  controlled  by  the  Federal 
Government,  in  collaboration  with  the  Provincial 
Government. 
That the share capital of the Company is to 
“4. 
be  provided  by 
the  Government  of  Pakistan 
represented through Ministry of Commerce and the 
Government  of  the Punjab represented through the 
Industries,  Commerce  and  Investment  Department.  
The  initial  share  capital  of  the  Company  was 
provided  by  the  Federal  Government  while  the 
Punjab  Government  arranged  for  a  piece  of  land 
(the  “Expo  Land”)  measuring  400  kanals  (out  of 
1400 kanals already reserved for the Trade Centre) 
situated in Johar Town, Lahore for purposes of the 
construction  of 
the  Expo  Centre  building 
(hereinafter  the  “Expo  Centre  Building”).    The 
Expo  Land  is  in  the  ownership  of  the  Lahore 
Development Authority that has leased the said land 
to the Government of the Punjab through Principle 
Lease  Agreement  dated  09.08.2005. 
  The 
Government  of  the  Punjab  has  further  sub-leased 
the  said  land  to  the  Company  through  sub-lease 
agreement  dated  09.08.2005  for  purposes  of  the 
construction of the Expo Centre Building.” 
That  it  is  the  position  of  the  Ministry  of 
“8. 
Commerce 
that  Pakistan  Expo  Centers  (Pvt.) 
Limited  acts  as  an  instrumentality  of  the  Federal 
Government and the property of the Company vests 
in the Federal Government.  It is worth mentioning 
that no property tax is payable on the Expo Center 
in Karachi.  It is also significant that the Company 
performs an important state function in providing a 
platform  of 
the 
promotion  of  Pakistani  Exports  and  export  related 
activities and initiatives.  While the activities of the 
international 
standards 
for 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
9 
 
 
profit 
oriented 
commercial 
Company,  owing  to  its  purpose  and  objects,  are 
related  to  commerce,  the  entire  revenue  generated 
by  the  Company  is  re-utilized  for  the  Company’s 
objectives and as such the Company is not acting as 
a 
enterprise.  
Furthermore  the  Company  does  not  compete  with 
other  private  sector  entities  in  the  area  of  its 
operations  since  there  are  no  other  private  entities 
providing  the  same  facilities  and  services  as  Expo 
Centre.    The  Expo  Centre  Building  was  also 
constructed exclusively out of funds provided by the 
Federal Government and the Company cannot deal 
with the property  (save in respect of  its day to day 
operations) without prior approval  and sanction of 
the  Federal  Government.    As  such  the  property  of 
the Company vests in the Federal  Government  and 
is  entitled  to  the  inter-governmental  immunity 
enshrined  in  Article  165  of  the  Constitution,  which 
renders 
taxation.  
Therefore  the  impugned  demand  raised  by  the 
Excise  &  Taxation  Department,  Government  of  the 
Punjab,  under 
the  Punjab  Urban  Immovable 
Property  Tax  Act,  1958  against  the  Expo  Centre 
Building is unconstitutional and unlawful.” 
from  Provincial 
it  exempt 
 
10. 
The above reply should be sufficient to put paid 
to any doubts as to the true ownership of the building 
in  question.    The  Excise  and  Taxation  Department 
invokes  to  its  aid  the  holding  in  Union  Council  v. 
Associated  Cement  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  (1993  SCMR  468)  in 
pressing its demand of property tax against Expo. 
11. 
The  Associated  Cement  case  turned  on  the 
doctrine  of  lifting  the  veil  of  incorporation  so  as  to 
conclude whether the property is owned by the Federal 
Government.    That  need  does  not  arise  in  this  case.  
This is because a resort to that doctrine is not required 
to  be  undertaken  by  this  Court  in  the  peculiar 
circumstances  of  this  case.    Piercing  the  veil  of 
incorporation  will  only  be  done  where  doubts  are 
raised  regarding  the  real  ownership  of  a  corporate 
entity.    In  the  instant  case,  Federal  Government  has 
stated  that  it  owns  the  property  of  Expo  and  the 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
10 
 
 
Government of Punjab or the Excise department do not 
quarrel that the Federal Government is the owner.  At 
least  no  proof  has  been  produced  to  discountenance 
that claim.  There must be compelling circumstances to 
require  the  Court  to  invoke  the  doctrine  in  order  to 
extend  the  benefit  of  an  exemption.    Moreover,  a 
clarion  call  to  the  high  constitutional  enumeration  is 
also not required as in this case we are concerned with 
more mundane challenge on the basis of section 4(a) of 
the Act, 1958.  It clearly provides that the property tax 
shall  not  be  leviable  in  respect  of  the  properties 
(buildings)  owned  by  the  Federal  Government.    It  is 
nobody’s  case  that  Federal  Government  cannot  own 
property  through  a  corporation  incorporated  as  a 
separate  juristic  entity.    Carrying  out  the  executive 
functions of the Federal Government through a limited 
liability  company  is  a  modern  phenomenon  and  has  a 
sound  constitutional  basis.    Neither  the  Constitution 
nor the Act, 1958 draws a line between property of the 
Federal Government held directly or through a private 
limited company.  If both are properties of the Federal 
Government then it is  otiose to create a distinction on 
that basis.  The question that the benefit under Article 
165 is not merely available to a property owned by the 
Federal  Government  but  also  extends  to  properties 
owned  through  corporations  has  been  settled  in 
National Bank of Pakistan v. Executive District Officer 
(Revenue), Multan (2015 CLC 1618). 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
11 
 
 
12.  Corporatisation of the  Federal Government is a 
constitutional  concept  and  entries 
in 
the  fourth 
schedule  attest  to  the  fact  that  the  Parliament  is 
empowered to legislate on the subject of corporations, 
that  is  to  say,  the  incorporation,  regulation  and 
winding-up  of  corporations,  whether  trading  or  not.  
Reference  may  be  made  to  two  entries  in  the  fourth 
schedule which delineate such areas of legislation viz. 
entry 31 and entry 3 (of Part II): They read as follows: 
insurance  and 
“31. Corporations, that is to say, the incorporation, 
regulation and winding-up of trading corporations, 
including  banking, 
financial 
corporations, but not including corporations owned 
or  controlled  by  a  Province  and  carrying  on 
business  only  within  that  Province,  or  cooperative 
societies,  and  of  corporations,  whether  trading  or 
not, with objects not confined to a Province, but not 
including universities.” 
 
bodies 
“3.  Development  of  industries,  where  development 
under Federal control is declared by Federal law to 
be  expedient  in  the  public  interest;  institutions, 
establishments, 
and 
corporations 
administered  or  managed  by 
the  Federal 
Government  immediately  before  the  Commencing 
day,  including  the  1[Pakistan  Water  and  Power 
Development  Authority  and  the  Pakistan  Industrial 
Development  Corporation];  all  undertakings, 
projects  and 
institutions, 
establishments, bodies and corporations, industries, 
projects  and  undertakings  owned  wholly  or 
partially by the Federation or by a corporation set 
up by the Federation.” 
schemes  of 
such 
 
13. 
Thus  corporations  owned  by 
the  Federal 
Government  have  a  constitutional  basis. 
  The 
Parliament  may  also  enact  laws  in  respect  of  “all 
undertakings, 
projects 
and 
schemes 
of 
such…..corporations….  or  by  a  corporation  set  up  by 
the Federation”.  Doubtless, Expo is a corporation set 
up  by  the  Federation  to  carry  out  a  purpose  given  in 
entry 27 of the fourth schedule which provides that: 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
12 
 
 
the  Federal  Government, 
“27. Import and export across customs frontiers as 
defined  by 
inter-
provincial 
trade  and 
commerce  with  foreign  countries;  standard  of 
quality of goods to be exported out of Pakistan.” 
trade  and  commerce, 
 
14. 
Expo serves the purpose spelt out in entry 27 of 
trade  and  commerce  with  foreign  countries  as  well  as 
ensuring  standard  of  quality  of  goods  to  be  exported 
out  of  Pakistan.    Federal  Government  achieves  these 
objects through Expo and which are also mentioned in 
the Articles of Association which say that: 
to 
to  enable 
to  contribute 
to  provide  a  platform  on  International 
“(iv) 
standards 
the  exporting  companies, 
foreign  manufacturers  and  traders  to  effectively 
introduce and market their producers, services and 
businesses,  particularly  relating  to,  but  not  limited 
to exports from Pakistan; 
(v) 
improvement  of 
economic situation of the country in general and to 
improve 
in 
particular,  by  adopting  and  supporting  different 
measures; 
(vi) 
to  essentially  cater  for  the  promotion  of 
exports  from  Pakistan,  inclusive  of  but  not  limited 
to  goods  and  services  originating  in  Pakistan  or 
imported for export, with or without value addition 
and other related economic activities.” 
initiative  and  activities 
export 
the 
 
15. 
Thus Expo performs the sovereign functions of 
the  State  and  is  a  virtual  monopoly  in  the  area  of 
activity.    It  is  also  an  extended  department  of  the 
Federal  Government  and  is  covered  by  the  test  laid 
down  in  Central  Board  of  Revenue  and  another  v. 
S.I.T.E (PLD 1985 SC 97).   Performance or otherwise 
of 
‘constitutional  functions’  was  a  key 
factor, 
according to the Supreme Court in Associated Cement, 
which ought to determine the outcome of the claim of 
exemption  in  respect  of  property  of  the  Federal 
Government.    As  adumbrated,  this  factor  is  pre-
eminently  satisfied  in  the  instant  case  and  it  is  clear 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
13 
 
 
that Expo performs a constitutional function so as to be 
entitled to exemption. 
16. 
In  a  recent  judgment  of  this  Court  reported  as 
WAPDA  v.  Excise  and  Taxation  Department  (2017 
PTD  517)  the  levy  of  property  tax  on  WAPDA,  a 
Federal  Government  instrumentality,  was  in  question 
and WAPDA was held entitled to the exemption.  The 
entire cluster of case-law was considered and some of 
the  extracts,  relevant  to  the  instant  case,  are  being 
reproduced: 
“9.  It can be seen from the conclusion made 
in the case of NBP above that the benefit of 
Article 165 is not limited to the property owned 
directly by the Federal Government but also 
extends to properties owned by the Federal 
Government through its instrumentalities and 
body corporate.  On this touchstone, WAPDA 
ostensibly  qualifies  to  the  exemption  under 
Article 165.  This alone is not enough to extend 
the benefit of the exemption to WAPDA.  The 
other qualification which was culled out in the 
case of NBP and which could be made use of by 
WAPDA is regarding the rule that a corporation 
or industry of the Federal Government having a 
monopoly in the area of its operation will be 
deemed a department of the Government and 
hence entitled to the exemption under Article 
165 of the Constitution.  The two judgments 
which expound these rules were Union Council 
Ali Wahan, Sukkur v. Associated Cement (Pvt.) 
Ltd.  (1993  SCMR  468)  and  Province  of 
NWFP through Secretary Local Government 
and Rural Development Peshawar etc. v. Pak 
Telecommunication through its Chairman and 
others (PLD 2005 SC 670).  The discussion 
with regard to these two precedents in the 
judgment of NBP and reproduced above, brings 
forth  ineluctably  that  these  rules  have  been 
recognized to exist by the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan and if the test laid down with regard 
thereto in these precedents is fulfilled by a 
statutory  corporation,  the  exemption  under 
Article 165 must be extended to it and the 
property held by such statutory corporations 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
14 
 
 
must be held to be owned by the Federal 
Government so as to be entitled for the benefit.” 
“11.  Therefore, although the shareholding of 
Associated Cement entirely vests in the Federal 
Government, this did not convince the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan in extending the benefit of 
Article 165 to the company.  It refused to lift the 
veil of incorporation on the ground that doing so 
will unduly discriminate against other similarly 
placed  corporations  which  were  competing 
against Associated Cement and were engaged in a 
similar commercial activity.  The Supreme Court 
held that this could not be countenanced and the 
corporation owned by the Federal Government 
could hardly claim any privilege or immunity to 
the utter disadvantage of its competitors.  This 
was the basis on which the benefit of Article 165 
was denied in the Associated Cement case.  The 
observations of the Supreme Court of Pakistan 
which went to the heart of the matter were that a 
corporate  entity  owned  by  the  Federal 
Government which was run as a commercial 
entity  could  not  be  equated  with  an 
instrumentality which carries on the sovereign 
functions of the State as that would place those 
companies  in  an  elevated  position  to  the 
detriment of similar companies.  Therefore, a 
window was kept open by the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in Associated Cement with regard to the 
instrumentalities  which  carry  on  sovereign 
functions of the State.  Thus, the Supreme Court 
of Pakistan applied what can be termed as the 
functions test in the application of Article 165 
and the determination of the question regarding 
the grant or refusal of exemption.  The first test 
was whether the instrumentality was carrying on 
the sovereign functions of the State.” 
“…It is also not in doubt that the Federal 
Government  may  either  acquire  an  own  a 
property directly or through its instrumentalities 
and this makes little or no difference.  For the 
purposes of invoking Article 165, what has to be 
shown is that the instrumentality which owns the 
property  performs  functions  of  the  Federal 
Government and is a virtual monopoly and a 
department of the Federal Government.” 
“…We are in the twilight of the era of large 
government and lean and efficient government is 
the requirement of the day.  It was precisely these 
considerations  which  prompted  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  to  draw  a  line  between 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
15 
 
 
corporate entities of the Federal Government 
competing in the commercial arena and free 
market  and  the  ones  which  are  virtual 
departments of the Government and exercise 
functions which are exclusive and sovereign and 
which are not performed by private commercial 
entities.  In my opinion, WAPDA still retains the 
character of a monopoly and a department of the 
Federal Government and undoubtedly exercises 
the  sovereign  functions  of  the  Federal 
Government.” 
 
17. 
Some  of  the  tests  like,  performing  sovereign/ 
constitutional  functions,  acting  as  a  monopoly  and 
ability to deal with property were applied to WAPDA.  
However, to reiterate, these tests are not required to be 
applied  in  each  case  and  like  the  present  one,  if  the 
grant of exemption is clear and unqualified, it must be 
extended  without  further  ado  and  to  insist  that  these 
tests be applied before doing so will be tantamount to 
nullifying  the  statutory  scheme.    This  will  mean  that 
the  executive  can  take  away  what  the  legislature  has 
given.    Certainly,  this  cannot  be  countenanced  and 
tests credulity of the credulous.  The shifting sands of 
modernity 
require  Federal  Government 
to  hold 
property though corporations.  By denying exemption, 
the  Excise  department  is  in  fact  creating,  at  its  whim, 
two  categories  of  properties  belonging  to  Federal 
Government, 
that 
is,  one  held  by 
the  Federal 
Government 
directly 
and 
the 
other 
through 
corporations wholly owned by it.  The central question 
is: does the law permit this categorization to be carved 
out? The answer is a resounding no. 
W.P No.11802 of 2015 
16 
 
 
18. 
Learned Addl. A.G relied upon the judgment of 
the  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  reported  as  Central 
Board  of  Revenue  Islamabad  and  another  v.  WAPDA 
and  another  (PLD  2014  SC  766)  in  support  of  the 
argument  that  Expo  is  not  entitled  to  an  exemption 
from  payment  of  property 
tax. 
  However, 
this 
judgment  is  utterly  not  applicable  to  the  facts  and 
circumstances  of  the  instant  case  and  is  not  a  good 
precedent as far as the instant case is concerned.  In the 
judgment  cited  by  the  learned  Addl.  A.G  the  question 
related  to  the  imposition  of  excise  duty  under  the 
Central Excise Act, 1944 on WAPDA.  Excise duty is 
a Federal Government levy and the question relating to 
an exemption under the provincial law did not arise in 
the said judgment.  Clearly the said precedent is inapt 
and cannot be relied upon. 
19. 
In  view  of  the  above,  this  petition  is  allowed.  
The impugned notices issued by the respondents No.1, 
2 and 3 for the payment of property tax by Expo on the 
building  of  Expo  are  without  lawful  authority  and  are 
struck down. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (SHAHID KARIM) 
          JUDGE 
                    
 
 
Announced in open Court on 05.06.2018 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
                * 
Rafaqat Ali 
 
 
