Stereo. HCJDA 38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Murder Reference No. 4 of 2014/BWP 
(The State v. Muhammad Anwar) 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52 of 2014/BWP 
(Muhammad Anwar  v. The State) 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 80 of 2014/BWP 
(Muhammad Sarwar v. Noor Ahmad etc.) 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
26-04-2018 
Syed Zeeshan Haider, Advocate. 
Ch.  Asghar  Ali  Gill,  Deputy  Prosecutor 
General.  
Mr. Sadiq Mehmood Khurram, Advocate 
DATE OF 
HEARING 
Appellant 
by: 
State by: 
Complainant 
by: 
 
 
 
Tariq Saleem Sheikh,J:- By this consolidated 
judgment  we  propose 
to  decide  Murder  Reference  
No.  4/2014/BWP,  Crl.  Appeal  No.  52/2014/BWP  and  Crl. 
Appeal  No.  80/2014/BWP  arising  from  case  FIR  No. 
340/2012  dated  20-07-2012  registered  at  Police  Station       
A-Division,  Bahawalnagar,  for  offences  under  Sections 
302/34/109 PPC.       
2. 
 
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  on  20-07-2012 
Muhammad  Ahmad  (deceased)  got  recorded  his  statement 
Exh.PO  to  Inamullah/SI  (PW-16)  to  the  effect  that  on  the 
same day at 06:15 a.m. he was returning home after picking 
up  some  groceries  from  his  shop  situated  at  Fordwah  Canal 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 2 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
Bridge. When he reached near his house, Muhammad Anwar 
 
alias  Anwari  (Appellant  in  Crl.  Appeal  No.  52/2014)  and 
Akbar  Ali  (tried  separately  as  juvenile)  alongwith  an 
unknown  person 
suddenly  came  on  a  motorcycle. 
Muhammad Anwar shot at him with a .12 bore gun which hit 
right side of his back. Then Akbar Ali, who was armed with 
.30 bore pistol, fired two shots one of which hit right side of 
his  abdomen  while  the  second  struck  his  right  leg  owing  to 
which he fell down. On his hue and cry and report of firing 
Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1),  Nazir  Ahmad  (PW-2)  and  some 
other  people  were  attracted  to  the  spot  who  witnessed  the 
occurrence.  They  tried  to  apprehend  the  accused  but  they 
managed  to  escape.  Muhammad  Ahmad  alleged  that  the 
accused  attacked  him  at  the  instance  of  Maqsood  Ahmad 
alias  Soodi  and  Noor  Ahmad  who  were  involved  in  the 
murder  of  his  paternal  uncle  Allah  Ditta.  They  were 
absconders in that case and wanted to eliminate him because 
he  was  pursuing  it.  He  was  taken  to  the  DHQ  Hospital, 
Bahawalnagar, where he was admitted for treatment.  
3. 
 
According  to  ‘Karwai  Police’  appended  to  
Exh. PO, Rao Inamullah/SI (PW-16) reached the Emergency 
Room  of  the  DHQ  Hospital  on  receiving  information  
about  the  incident.  He  made  an  application  Exh.  PO/2  to  
the  Medical  Officer  to  inquire  whether  he  could  record  
the 
statement 
of  Muhammad  Ahmad 
on  which 
Dr.  Habib  Khan  Shamsi  (PW-19)  certified  that  he  was  fit. 
Thereupon, at 8:10 a.m., he recorded his statement (Exh. PO) 
in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Habib  Khan  Shamsi  and  PWs 
Muhammad  Adil  and  Nazir  Ahmad  and  sent  it to the police 
station  through  Muhammad  Safdar  981/C  on  the  basis  of 
which  FIR  No.  340/2012  (Exh.  PO/1)  was  chalked  out  at 
9:00  a.m..  It  is  pertinent  to  note  that  the  FIR  was  initially 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 3 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
registered  under  Sections  324/34/109  PPC.  However,  on   
 
06-08-2012, Muhammad Ahmad succumbed to his injuries at 
the  Jinnah  Hospital,  Lahore,  whereafter  offence  under 
Section 302 PPC was added.  
4. 
The investigation of the case was also entrusted 
to Rao Inamullah/SI (PW-16). He prepared Injury Statement 
(Exh.PJ/1) and then proceeded to the place of occurrence. He 
prepared  rough  site  plan  (Exh.PP),  collected  blood  stained 
earth  from  the  place  where  Muhammad  Ahmad  injured  fell 
down and secured it vide Recovery Memo Exh.PA, took into 
possession two  crime  empties of  .12 bore (P-1/1-2)  and  two 
of pistol .30 bore (P-2/1-2) vide Recovery Memo Exh.PB. He 
raided  the  house  of  the  accused  but  did  not  find  them. 
Thereafter, he went to the DHQ Hospital again where Arbab 
Jahangir  1369/C  (PW-3)  handed  over  to  him  blood  stained 
Qameez  (P-3)  which  he  secured  vide  Recovery  Memo 
Exh.PC.  On  23-07-2012,  he  went  to  the  Jinnah  Hospital, 
Lahore,  where  he  recorded  supplementary  statement  of 
Muhammad  Ahmad  injured  as  well  as  the  statements  of 
Javed  (PW-7)  and  Habib  (PW-8)  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C. 
On  6.8.2012,  Muhammad  Ahmad  died  and  his  body  was 
taken to the DHQ Hospital, Bahawalnagar, Rao Inamullah/SI 
reached  the  hospital,  prepared  Injury  Statement  (Exh.PJ/1), 
Inquest  Report  (Exh.PJ)  and  dispatched  the  corpse  to  the 
mortuary  for  autopsy  under  the  escort  of  Safdar  981/C.  On 
08-08-2012, Muhammad Latif (PW-12) and PW Muhammad 
Anwar (given up) joined investigation and he recorded their 
statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. regarding extra-judicial 
confession  allegedly  made  by  Zubair  alias  Bhalli.  On  
13-08-2012, Noor Ahmad while on bail joined investigation. 
He interrogated him and prepared incomplete challan against 
him. Then he was transferred. 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 4 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
5. 
 
On  05-10-2012,  the  investigation  was  entrusted 
to  Javed  Iqbal/SI  (PW-15).  He  obtained  proclamation  under 
Section  87  Cr.P.C.  against  Anwar,  Akbar,  Maqsood  and 
Zubair alias Bhalli from the Court and handed over the same 
to  Muhammad  Aslam  335/C  (PW-5)  for  service  and 
thereafter  challan  under  Section  512  Cr.P.C.  was  prepared. 
He got prepared scaled site plan (Exh.PD & Exh.PD/1) of the 
place  of  occurrence  from  Patwari  Muhammad  Aslam  (PW-
4). On 30-12-2012, he received information that Muhammad 
Anwar  was  arrested  in  case  FIR  No.382/2011  registered 
under Sections 395/412 PPC at Police Station McLeod Ganj 
whereupon  he  filed  an  application  before  the  learned  Area 
Magistrate Minchanabad, for his custody which was allowed. 
On  02-11-2012,  he  produced  Muhammad  Anwar  before  the 
Area  Magistrate  and  obtained  his  physical  remand.  On 
2.11.2012, during interrogation Muhammad Anwar led to the 
recovery  of  .12  bore  gun  (P-4)  along  with  four  cartridges  
(P-5/1-4),  which  he  secured  vide  Recovery  Memo  Exh.PK. 
He handed over the file to the SHO for preparation of report 
under  Section  173  Cr.P.C.  against  him.  On  08-12-2012,  he 
arrested Muhammad Zubair alias Bhalli and sent him to jail 
for  identification  parade.  On  12-12-2012,  identification 
parade  was  conducted  in  which  the  PWs  identified  Zubair 
alias  Bhalli.  On  the  same  day  he  obtained  his  physical 
remand.  On  14.12.2012,  Zubair  alias  Bhalli  got  recovered 
motorcycle  CG-125  from  his  Bethak  in  presence  of  Majid 
Jameel (given up PW) and Muhammad Jaffar 997/C (PW-13) 
which  he  secured  vide  Recovery  Memo  Exh.PM.  On         
17-12-2012,  he  arrested  accused  Akbar  Ali  who  claimed 
juvenility  and  moved  an  application  before  the  Area 
Magistrate for his medical examination which was conducted 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 5 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
on  21-12-2012  and  his  age  was  declared  17/18  years. 
 
Thereafter, he was transferred. 
6. 
On  23-12-2012  the  investigation  was  entrusted 
to  Naseer-ud-Din/SI  (PW-17).  He  interrogated  Akbar  Ali 
who led to the recovery of pistol .30 bore (P-6) with fifteen 
live bullets (P-7/1-15) from the Bethak of his house which he 
secured vide Recovery Memo Exh.PL. He prepared separate 
challan under Section 173 Cr.P.C. against Akbar Ali.  
7. 
 
The 
learned  Additional  Sessions 
Judge 
summoned  Muhammad  Anwar,  Muhammad  Zubair  alias 
Bhalli  and  Noor  Ahmad  for  trial  and  indicted  them  on  
21-01-2013.  They  denied  the  charge  and  claimed  trial.  In 
order  to  prove  its  case  the  prosecution  examined  20 
witnesses in all. Muhammad Adil (PW-1) and Nazir Ahmad 
(PW-2) proved the statement Exh.PO of Muhammad Ahmad 
deceased  and  provided  the  ocular  account.  They  also 
witnessed recovery of blood stained earth and crime empties 
from the place of occurrence. Dr. Atif Mehmood (PW-6) and 
Dr.  Muhammad  Tahir  (PW-14)  furnished  medical  evidence. 
Dr. Habib Khan Shamsi (PW-19) proved his endorsement on 
the  statement  (Exh.PO)  of  Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased. 
Muhammad Riaz (PW-11) testified about the recovery of .12 
bore  gun  with  four  cartridges  at  the  instance  of  Muhammad 
Anwar  while  Muhammad  Latif  (PW-12)  deposed  about 
extra-judicial  confession  of  Zubair  alias  Bhalli.  Muhammad 
Jaffar  997/C  (PW-13)  appeared  to  prove  recovery  of 
motorcycle  CG-125  at  the  instance  of  Muhammad  Zubair. 
The  Investigation  Officers,  Javed  Iqbal/SI  (PW-15),  Rao 
Inamullah/SI  (PW-16)  and  Naseer-ud-Din/SI  (PW-17),  gave 
details of their investigation and the evidence they collected 
in  this  case.  Magistrate  Muhammad  Masroor  Anwar  Khan 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 6 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
(PW-20) deposed about the proceedings of the identification 
 
test  parade  of  Muhammad  Zubair.  The  remaining  witnesses 
were  formal  in  nature.  The learned prosecutor  gave  up PWs 
Muhammad  Asad,  Muhammad  Sarwar,  Muhammad  Munir, 
Muhammad  Anwar,  and  Muhammad  Majid  Jamil  382/HC 
being unnecessary. On 09-01-2014 he closed the prosecution 
evidence  after  tendering  reports  of  the  Punjab  Forensic 
Science Agency Exh.PZ & Exh.PAA.                                                       
8. 
 
After  the  close  of  prosecution  evidence  the 
learned  trial  Court  examined  the  accused  under  Section  342 
Cr.P.C. They all refuted the allegations levelled against them 
and  professed  innocence.  When  Muhammad  Anwar  was 
asked  as  to  why  he had been implicated in this  case he said 
that  the  complainant  party  was  a  notorious  land  mafia  and 
they wanted to grab his house. In reply to the same question, 
Zubair  alias  Bhalli  stated  that  they  involved  him  due  to 
previous enmity and to grab his property situated at Fordwah 
Canal  Bridge,  Bahawalnagar.  On  the  other  hand,  Noor 
Ahmad maintained that he had been roped in due to previous 
enmity. The accused neither got their statements recorded on 
oath under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C. nor examined any witness 
in  their  defence.  However,  they  produced  copies  of  various 
FIRs which were placed on the record.   
9.  
On  the  conclusion  of  the  trial,  vide  judgment 
dated  23-01-2014,  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge 
acquitted  Noor  Ahmad  and  Muhammad  Zubair  alias  Bhalli. 
However,  he  convicted  Muhammad  Anwar  under  Section 
302(b)  PPC  and  sentenced  him  to  death  with  a  direction  to 
pay  Rs.3,00,000/-  as  compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of 
Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased  in  terms  of  Section  544-A 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 7 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
Cr.P.C.  and 
in  default 
 
thereof 
to  undergo  simple 
imprisonment for a further period of six months.  
10.  
 
Muhammad  Anwar  has  filed  Crl.  Appeal  
No.  52/2014/BWP  against  his  conviction  and  sentence 
whereas  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  has  sent 
Murder  Reference  No.  4/2014/BWP  to  this  Court  under 
Section  374  Cr.P.C.  for  confirmation  of  his  death  sentence. 
On the other hand, deceased’s father Muhammad Sarwar has 
filed  Criminal  Appeal  No.80/2014/BWP 
to  assail 
the 
acquittal of Noor Ahmad and Muhammad Zubair.     
11. 
 
In  support  of  Crl.  Appeal  No.  52/2014/BWP, 
Syed  Zeeshan  Haider,  Advocate,  contended 
that 
the 
prosecution  had  failed  to  prove  its  case  against  Appellant 
Muhammad  Anwar  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  The  learned 
trial Court had failed to appraise the evidence properly which 
had  caused  serious  miscarriage  of  justice.  He  argued  that, 
firstly,  the  statement  (Exh.  PO)  attributed  to  Muhammad 
Ahmad deceased was false and concocted. He was critically 
injured  in the  occurrence  and  was  not  in a  position  to  make 
it.  Secondly,  Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  and  Nazir  Ahmad 
(PW-2) were not present at the spot at the time of occurrence 
and the police had planted them to strengthen the prosecution 
case.  Thirdly,  the  said  witnesses  were  interested  and  made 
dishonest  improvements  over  their  previous  statements 
which made them untrustworthy. Fourthly, there was conflict 
in  the  medical  evidence  and  the  ocular  account.  Fifthly, 
Javed  (PW-7)  and  Habib  (PW-8)  had  given  false  evidence 
that  they  had  heard  the  Appellant  and  his  co-accused 
conspiring/abetting  to  murder  Muhammad  Ahmad.  Their 
story did not appeal to a prudent mind. Sixthly, .12 bore gun 
was not recovered from the Appellant and the same had been 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 8 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
foisted  on  him.  Lastly,  the  motive  was  also  not  proved.  He 
 
prayed 
that 
this  appeal  be  accepted  and  Appellant 
Muhammad Anwar be acquitted of the charge.  
12. 
 
On 
the  other  hand, 
the 
learned  Deputy 
Prosecutor  General  vehemently  opposed 
the  above-
mentioned  appeal.  He  argued  that  the  FIR  was  promptly 
lodged on the statement of the victim himself who nominated 
the  Appellant  in  the  instant  case  with  a  specific  role. 
Although  he  was  badly  injured  in  the  incident,  Dr.  Habib 
Khan Shamsi (PW-19) had opined that he was fit to make a 
statement at the time when he got it recorded. There was no 
chance  of  substitution  or  deliberation.  He  next  argued  that 
the  prosecution  case  was  based  on  dying  declaration  of 
Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased  as  well  as  the  evidence of the 
eye-witnesses  of  the  occurrence,  namely,  Muhammad  Adil 
(PW-1) and Nazir Ahmad (PW-2), and was reinforced by the 
medical  evidence,  recovery  of  weapons  of  offence  (gun  P-4 
and  pistol  P-6)  and  the  evidence  of  conspiracy  furnished  by 
Javed  (PW-7)  and  Habib  (PW-8)  and  the  absconding  of  the 
Appellant.  He  maintained  that  dying  declaration  could  be 
made  basis  of  conviction  even  if  the  same  was  not 
corroborated  while 
in 
the  present  case 
it  had  been 
corroborated  by  independent  and  trustworthy  evidence.  The 
learned Law Officer further argued that the motive was also 
established.  He  contended  that  the  learned  trial  Court  had 
rightly  awarded  death  penalty  to  Appellant  Muhammad 
Anwar and prayed that the same be maintained, his appeal be 
dismissed  and  the  Murder  Reference  be  answered  in  the 
affirmative.  
13. 
 
So far as Crl. Appeal No. 80/2014 is concerned, 
Mr.  Sadiq  Mehmood  Khurram,  Advocate,  argued  that 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 9 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
Muhammad  Zubair  alias  Bhalli  and  Noor  Ahmad  actively 
 
participated  in  the  occurrence.  The  learned  trial  Court  had 
misread the prosecution evidence qua them and had erred in 
acquitting  them.  He  prayed  that  they  be  punished  in 
accordance with law.  
14. 
 
We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
parties  and  have  examined  the  record  with  their  able 
assistance.  
15. 
 
The prosecution case is that the occurrence took 
place at Fordwah Canal Bridge within the territorial limits of 
Police  Station  A-Division,  Bahawalnagar,  at  6:15  a.m.  on  
20-07-2017.  Muhammad  Ahmad  was  injured  and  was  taken 
to the DHQ Hospital, Bahawalnagar. Rao Inamullah/SI (PW-
16) reached there on receiving information about the incident 
and  after  seeking  permission  from  the  Medical  Officer,  
Dr.  Habib  Khan  Shamsi  (PW-19),  recorded  his  statement  
Exh. PO whose details have been given in the earlier part of 
this  judgment  and  in  pursuance  thereof  FIR  No.  340/2012 
(Exh.  PO/1)  was  registered  at  9:00  a.m.  On  the  same  day 
Muhammad  Ahmad  was  shifted  to  the  Jinnah  Hospital, 
Lahore, where he remained under treatment for 16 days and 
eventually died on 06-08-2012. In order to prove the charge 
the  prosecution  relies  on  Muhammad  Ahmad’s  statement  
Exh.  PO  (which  is  stated  to  be  his  dying  declaration),  the 
eye-witness  account,  medical  evidence,  recovery  of  crime 
weapons,  evidence  of  abetment,  motive  and  absconding  of 
Muhammad Anwar and Muhammad Zubair.  
16. 
 
Rao  Inamullah/SI  (PW-16)  deposed  that  on  
20-07-2012 when he reached the DHQ Hospital he submitted 
application Exh. PO/2 to the Medical Officer for a certificate 
as  to  whether  Muhammad  Ahmad  was  able  to  make  a 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 10 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
statement. Dr. Habib Khan Shamsi (PW-19) certified that he 
 
was fit whereupon he recorded his statement Exh. PO which 
was  attested  by  the  said  Medical  Officer  and  Muhammad 
Adil  (PW-1)  and  Nazir  Ahmad  (PW-2).  When  Dr.  Habib 
Khan  Shamsi  came  to  the  witness-box  he  reaffirmed  these 
facts  and  his  endorsement  on  application  Exh.  PO/2.  PWs 
Muhammad  Adil  and  Nazir  Ahmad  corroborated  him.  As 
already  noted,  the  occurrence  took  place  at  6:15  a.m.  while 
Muhammad Ahmad was brought to the hospital at 6:30 a.m. 
and  his  statement  Exh.  PO  was  recorded  at  8:10  a.m. 
Keeping in view the fact he had suffered multiple injuries it 
can reasonably be presumed that he was expecting his death 
at  that  time.  As  such,  his  said  statement  can  be  regarded  as 
dying  declaration  which  is  admissible  in  evidence  under 
Article  46  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  (“QSO”). 
However, Courts are required to scrutinize it carefully before 
relying  on  it.  Some  of  the  vital  tests  for  determining  its 
genuineness are: 
(i)  Whether the maker had the physical capacity 
to make the dying statement; 
(ii)  Whether 
the  maker  had  opportunity 
to 
recognize the assailants; 
(iii)  Whether  there  were  chances  for  mistake  on 
the  part  of  dying  man  in  identifying  and 
naming his assailants;  
(iv)  Whether  it  was  free  from  prompting  from 
any outside quarter; and  
(v)  Whether the witness who heard the deceased 
making his statement heard him correctly and 
whether their evidence can be relied on. 
 
17. 
 
Courts  have  always  insisted  that  veracity  of 
dying  declaration  is  to  be  scrutinized  in  light  of  facts  and 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 11 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
surrounding  circumstances.  In  “Abdul  Razik  v.  The  State” 
 
(PLD 1965 SC 151), the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed: 
such 
“To  accept 
statement  without  considering 
‘surrounding  circumstances’,  ‘totally  inconsistent  with 
safe dispensation of justice’ – Accepting such statement 
on  considerations  of  opinions  expressed  in  precedent 
cases  regarding  similar  declarations,  accompanied  by 
words  indicating  reliance  on  ‘some  principle  of  law’, 
held,  to  be  ‘no  less  dangerous’  –  ‘Careful  scrutiny, 
applied  to  all  physical  circumstances’  appearing  from 
evidence,  only  way  of  arriving  at  conclusion  that 
statement is ‘worthy of belief’.”    
       
In  “Farman  Bi  v.  Ghulam  Farid  and  others”  (1994  SCMR 
1852), the Apex Court held: 
“For  proper  evaluation  of  the  dying  declaration,  the 
surrounding circumstances in which it was made and the 
contents thereof have to be kept in view.”  
The  above  principle  was  reiterated  in  “Mst.  Zahida  Bibi  v. 
The  State”  (PLD  2006  SC  255),  “Farman  Ahmed  v. 
Muhammad  Inayat  and  others”  (2007  SCMR  1825)  and 
“Tahir Khan v. The State” (2011 SCMR 646). 
18. 
 
In  the  instant  case,  Dr.  Muhammad  Tahir  
(PW-14)  deposed  that  Muhammad  Ahmad  was  brought  to 
the  DHQ  Hospital, Bahawalnagar, and  was  produced before 
him  by  the  police  for  medical  examination  at  6:30  a.m.  His 
clothes were stained with blood, pulse was 110/min and B.P. 
was  nil.  He  was  not  oriented  to  time  and  place  and  was 
referred 
to 
the  Jinnah  Hospital,  Lahore,  after  blood 
transfusion.  He had the following injuries on his person:  
1. 
Four  perforated  lacerated  nearly  circular  wounds 
on  supero  lateral  and  posterior  aspect  of  right 
shoulder  8  cm  x  8  cm  with  perfuse  bleeding  at 
inverted skin margins.  
2.  A  lacerated  wound  with  irregular  margins  of  skin 
on back of chest measuring 5 cm x 3 cm, muscles 
were cut and bleeding profusely.  
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
 
- 12 - 
3.  A 
lacerated  wound  with 
round  margins  
1.cm  x  1.cm  going  deep  to  chest  cavity  with 
inverted  margins  below 
left  breast,  bleeding 
profusely.  
4.  A  round  wound  0.8  x  1  cm  on  right  side  of 
abdomen. A lacerated  and inverted margins  going 
deep towards abdominal cavity and bleeding.  
5.  A lacerated wound on supero lateral aspect of right 
knee heavily bleeding. 
19.  
From  the  deposition  of  Dr.  Muhammad  Tahir 
(PW-14) it seems unlikely that Muhammad Ahmad was in a 
position  to  make  statement  Exh.PO  at  8:10  a.m.  We  are 
fortified in our view from the following portion of his cross-
examination: 
“The  injured  was  produced  before  me  at  6:30  a.m.  that 
day. It is correct that the injured was not conscious at the 
time  of  his  examination.  Volunteered  he  was  not 
oriented to time and place as I have already stated. It is 
correct that we used to obtain thumb-impressions in the 
relevant  column  of  MLC  Proforma  and  used 
to 
incorporate name,  I.D. Card number etc. after inquiring 
the same from  examinee. It is correct that in this case I 
had  not  obtained  thumb-impressions,  signature  or  other 
particulars  in  the  relevant  column  of  the  injured. 
Volunteered that injured was not in a position to sign or 
thumb-mark 
that  I  have 
incorporated  the  name,  caste  parentage  and  address  of 
the injured as reported by police since injured was not in 
a position to tell his age and occupation, so I did not fill 
the  relevant  columns.  It  is  correct  that  till  the  injured 
Muhammad Ahmad remained under my treatment and I 
referred him to  Jinnah Hospital  Lahore at  8:30  a.m.,  he 
had not gained senses due to severe injuries.” 
the  MLC.  It 
is  correct 
20. 
 
The  testimony  of  Dr.  Habib  Khan  Shamsi  
(PW-19)  appears  to  be  in  conflict  with  that  of  Dr. 
Muhammad  Tahir  (PW-14).  We  are  of  the  considered 
opinion  that  the  evidence  of  the  latter  is  to  be  preferred 
because  Muhammad  Ahmad  was  under  his  treatment. 
Reference  may  be  made  to  the  following  extract  from  the 
cross-examination of Dr. Muhammad Tahir: 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
 
- 13 - 
“It  is  correct  that  I  was  the  only  doctor  on  duty  at  the 
time  when  injured  was  produced  in  Emergency  DHQ 
Hospital, Bahawalnagar.” 
Dr.  Habib  Khan  Shamsi  himself  admitted  in  his  cross-
examination as under: 
“It  is  correct  that  the  then  injured  Muhammad  Ahmad 
was given treatment and was medically examined by Dr. 
Muhammad Tahir C.M.O. who was on duty at that time. 
I  had  endorsed  the  referring  letter  of  the  injured  for 
treatment  from  Lahore  only  and  had  not  given  any 
treatment.  Volunteered that  I had advised the doctor on 
duty for first aid treatment of the injured at that time.” 
21. 
 
The  prosecution  was  well  aware  of 
the 
aforementioned  contradiction.  It  could  have  easily  resolved 
the  controversy  by  producing  the  operation  notes  and  other 
medical record of the Jinnah Hospital but it did not do so. In 
the circumstances, an adverse inference under Illustration (g) 
of Article 129 of the QSO is liable to be drawn against it. In 
“Nawab  Ali  Biswas  and  others  v.  The  State”  (PLD  1962 
Dacca  278),  the  Court  was  confronted  with  difference  of 
opinion  between  the  doctor  recording  dying  declaration  and 
the one holding post-mortem examination with regard to the 
question  whether  the  deceased  was  able  to  talk  after 
receiving  fatal  injury  on  neck.  The  Court  left  out  of 
consideration dying declaration by way of caution.  
22. 
 
There are two other aspects of the matter which 
cannot  be  ignored.  Firstly,  perusal  of  Exh.  PO  shows  that 
Muhammad  Ahmad  gave  photographic  details  of 
the 
incident. It was not possible for him to make such a narration 
in  his  given  condition.  Secondly,  he  was  surrounded  by 
Muhammad Adil (PW-1) and Nazir Ahmad (PW-2). Record 
does not indicate that necessary steps were taken to keep him 
out  of  their  influence  at  the  time  of  making  the  declaration. 
These facts make the dying declaration all the more dubious 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 14 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
and we hold that it cannot be relied upon and in this respect 
 
we are guided by the cases reported as “Muhammad Banaras 
v. Shah Fakhar Zaman and others” (1985 SCMR 505) “Mst. 
Khurshid  Begum  and  2  others.  v.  Tariq  and  others”  (1988 
SCMR  1537),  “Farman  Bi  v.  Ghulam  Farid  and  others” 
(1994  SCMR  1852),  “Basharat  Ali  v.  Muhammad  Safdar 
and  another”  (2017  SCMR  1601)  and  “Muhammad  Anwar 
v. The State” (PLD 1984 Lahore 132).  
23. 
 
The  prosecution  next  relies  on  the  ocular 
account  furnished  by  Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  and  Nazir 
Ahmad (PW-2) to prove the charge.  Both of them reiterated 
the  contents  of 
the  FIR  (Exh.PO/1).  However, 
their 
testimony  does  not  inspire  confidence.  We  have  noted  that 
both these eye-witnesses were not resident of the place where 
the  incident  happened.  In  order  to  justify  his  presence, 
Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  stated  in  his  examination-in-chief 
that he was brother of Muhammad Ahmad (deceased) and on 
20-7-2012  at  about  06:15  a.m.  he  was  present  in  his  house 
and came out on hearing noise and saw the occurrence but in 
cross-examination   he  conceded  that he  was not  his  brother. 
The  relevant  part  of  his  statement  in  examination-in-chief 
and  the  one  made  during  cross-examination  is  reproduced 
hereunder:- 
 
 
Examination-in-chief of Muhammad Adil (PW-1): 
“Stated  that  on  20-7-2012  at  about  06:15  a.m.  I  was 
present  in  my  house  and  my  brother  Muhammad 
Ahmad was coming from shop after taking grocery. On 
hearing the noise, I came out of my house and saw that a 
Honda  motorcycle  red  colour  on  which  accused 
Muhammad  Anwar  alias  Anwari  armed  with  .12  bore 
gun  pump-action  and  Akbar  Ali  armed  with  pistol  .30 
bore  and  a  person  with  muffled  face  who  was  driving 
the motorcycle. They raised Lalkara to teach a lesson for 
pursuing the murder case of your uncle. Anwar accused 
made a  fire shot with  his pump-action  which hit on the 
right  side  of  the  back  of  Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased. 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
 
- 15 - 
Akbar Ali fired with his pistol .30 bore which hit on the 
right  side  of  abdomen  of  the  deceased  Muhammad 
Ahmad.  Akbar  made  second  fire  which  hit  on  the  right 
leg of Muhammad Ahmad deceased. I and Nazir Ahmad 
witnessed  the  occurrence  and  tried  to  apprehend  them 
but  the  accused  persons  threatened  to  kill  us  and  fled 
away on the motorcycle.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
Cross-examination: 
“It is correct that Muhammad Ahmad deceased was the 
son  of  Muhammad  Sarwar  while  my  father’s  name  is 
Muhammad  Younas.  It  is  correct  that  he  was  not  my 
brother.  It  is  incorrect  to  suggest  that  with  deliberation 
and consultation  I have stated him as my brother in my 
above statement.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
 
24. 
 
It  is  noteworthy  that  when  Muhammad  Adil 
(PW-1) conceded that he was not the brother of Muhammad 
Ahmad  deceased  he  himself  falsified  the  reason  that  he  had 
advanced  for  his  presence  at  the  spot.  Furthermore,  as 
already  noted,  the  said  witness  claimed  that  at  the  time  of 
occurrence  he  was  in  his  house  and  on  hearing  the  noise 
came  out  and  saw  the  incident  happen  but  in  the  site  plan 
(Exh.PD  and  Exh.PD/1)  his  house  has  not  been  shown.  As 
regards  Nazir  Ahmad  (PW-2),  it  is  observed  that  during  his 
cross-examination  he  also  conceded  that  his  house  was 
situated  in  Bhatta  Colony  which  was  at  a  distance  of  one 
kilometre  from  the  crime  scene.  In  the  circumstances,  both 
the  eye-witnesses  were  chance  witnesses  and  their  evidence 
requires  independent  corroboration  which  is  very  much 
lacking in this case. The august Supreme Court of Pakistan in 
the case of “Mst. Anwar Begum v. Akhtar Hussain alias Kaka 
and  2  others”  (2017  SCMR  1710)  was  pleased  to  observe 
that  independent  corroboration  of  the  testimony  of  chance 
witnesses  is  required  to  maintain  conviction  of  a  convict  on 
capital charge and in absence of such corroboration he was to 
be acquitted. Similarly, in  the cases  of  “Mst. Sughra Begum 
and  another  v.  Qaiser  Pervez  and  others”  (2015  SCMR 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 16 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
1142),  “Khalid  Javed  and  another  v.  The  State”  (2003 
 
SCMR 1419) and “Zafar Hayat v. The State” (1995 SCMR 
896),  it  was  held  that  “a  chance  witness  is  not  worthy  of 
reliance  when  the  reasons  given  by  him  for  his  presence  at 
the crime scene at the relevant time were not convincing.” 
25. 
 
It  is  significant  that  both  the  above-mentioned 
eye-witnesses  were  cited  as  prosecution  witnesses  in  other 
criminal  cases  lodged  by  the  complainant  party.  Relevant 
part  of  the  statement  of  Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  in  this 
respect reads as under: 
“I  am  also  witness  in  the  previous  murder  case  of 
abovementioned Allah Ditta. Nazir PW is also a witness 
of said previous murder case of Allah Ditta. I am as well 
as Nazir are witnesses of 2/3 other FIR cases lodged by 
Muhammad Anwar deceased party.” 
Similarly, Nazir Ahmad (PW-2) said: 
“It  is  correct  that  many  FIRs  have  been  registered 
against  Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased  which  have  been 
got  registered  by  his  opponents.  It  is  correct  that 
Muhammad  Anwar  and  Akbar  had  never  got  registered 
any  case  against  Muhammad  Ahmad  and  Allah  Ditta 
etc. I used to reside with Muhammad Ahmad deceased 
family as servant. I became witness of the cases which 
have  been  lodged  by  Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased 
etc.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
 
 
 
It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  the  above-mentioned  eye-
witnesses  are  either  professional  witnesses  or  stock 
witnesses. 
26. 
 
PWs  Muhammad  Adil  and  Nazir  Ahmad  both 
admitted that they were witnesses in the previous cases of the 
complainant  party, including  the  murder  case  of  Allah  Ditta 
(uncle  of  Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased),  whereas  the 
prosecution  case  was 
that  only  Muhammad  Ahmad 
(deceased)  was  pursuing  that  case.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 17 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
prosecution  evidence  that  Muhammad  Ahmad  (deceased) 
 
was  the  complainant  or  prosecution  witness  in  the  said 
murder  case  of  Allah  Ditta  or  was  otherwise  pursuing  it.  If 
the  above-mentioned  story  of  the  prosecution  is  taken  as 
gospel truth, then instead of Muhammad Ahmad (deceased), 
Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  and  Nazir  Ahmad  (PW-2)  being 
prosecution  witnesses  in  Allah  Ditta’s  murder  case  should 
have been the prime target of Muhammad Anwar and his co-
accused but despite their presence at the crime scene they did 
not receive even a single scratch on their bodies.  Hence, we 
are  of  the  view  that  the  above-mentioned  prosecution  story 
does  not  appeal  to  a  prudent  mind.  Reliance  in  this  context 
may be placed on the cases reported as “Muhammad Zaman 
Mangat  v.  Muhammad  Akhtar  and  others”  (2004  SCMR 
757) and “Rohtas Khan v. The State” (2010 SCMR 566). 
27. 
 
We  have  further  noted  that  the  evidence  of 
Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  and  Nazir  Ahmad  (PW-2)  is 
contradicted by the medical evidence. As per contents of the 
application  (Exh.PO),  on  the  basis  of  which  formal  FIR 
(Exh.PO/1)  was  lodged,  fire  shot  made  by  Muhammad 
Anwar  landed  on  the  right  side  of  the  waist  (      )  of 
Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased  whereas  both  the  above-
mentioned  eyewitnesses  stated  that  the  fire  shot  made  by 
Muhammad  Anwar  landed  on  the  right  side  of  the  back  of 
Muhammad  Ahmad.  According  to  the  evidence  of  Dr. 
Muhammad  Tahir 
(PW-14),  who 
initially  medically 
examined Muhammad Ahmad in injured condition, there was 
one  injury  on  the  back  of  the  chest  of  the  deceased  (i.e. 
Injury  No.2)  and  in  his  cross-examination  he  stated  that  he 
could not specify the nature of the said injury as to whether 
the  same  was  an  entry  or  exit  wound.  On  the  other  hand, 
according to the statement of Dr. Atif Mahmood (PW-6) who 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 18 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
conducted  postmortem  examination  and  as  per  pictorial 
 
diagrams  (Exh.PI/1), there  was no  injury  on  the  waist  or  on 
the  back  side  of  the  waist  of  Muhammad  Ahmad  and  there 
was only one injury (i.e. Injury No.2) on his right upper back 
region which was skin deep. Muhammad Akbar (co-accused) 
was assigned the role of making a fire shot on the right leg of 
Muhammad  Ahmad  deceased.  Although  Dr.  Muhammad 
Tahir  (PW-14)  noted  Injury  No.5  on  the  right  knee  of 
Muhammad  Ahmad  (deceased),  in  his  cross-examination  he 
also stated regarding the said injury that he could not specify 
whether  Injury  No.5  was  an  entry  wound  or  exit  wound, 
though he specifically  mentioned that Injuries No. 1,3 and 4 
were  entry  wounds.  As  per  evidence  of  Dr.  Muhammad 
Tahir  (PW-14),  there  were  found  perforated  wounds  on  the 
posterior aspect of the right shoulder  of Muhammad Ahmad 
(deceased)  i.e.  Injury  No.1.  There  was  another  entry  wound 
on  the  chest  of  the  deceased  i.e.  Injury  No.2.  The  said 
injuries  were  also  noted  in  the  postmortem  examination 
report  of  the  deceased  by  Dr.  Atif  Mahmood  (PW-6)  as 
Injuries No. 2 & 3 but the said injuries were not attributed to 
any  of  the  accused  in  this  case.  It  is  also  important  to  note 
that,  according  to  the  prosecution  case,  Muhammad  Akbar 
(co-accused)  was  armed  with  .30  bore  pistol  and  he  made 
two  fire  shots  out  of  which  one  landed  on  the  right  leg  and 
the other on the abdomen of Muhammad Ahmad (deceased) 
but  as  per  postmortem  report  (Exh.PI),  the  statement  of  Dr. 
Atif  Mahmood  (PW-6)  and  pictorial  diagrams  (Exh.PI/1) 
there  were  three  lacerated  wounds  on  the  lateral  aspect  of 
right thigh (Injury No.5), two lacerated wounds on the lateral 
aspect  of  right  knee  joint  (Injury  No.6)  and  two  lacerated 
wounds  on  the  lateral  aspect  of  right  leg  (Injury  No.7).  As 
such, there were a total three (or seven injuries) on the right 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 19 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
leg of Muhammad Ahmad deceased whereas according to the 
 
evidence  of  PWs  Muhammad  Adil  and  Nazir  Ahmad  only 
one  fire  shot  with  pistol  .30  bore  was  made  by  Muhammad 
Akbar  (co-accused)  on  the  right  leg  of  Muhammad  Ahmad. 
The  said prosecution  eye-witnesses  have not  mentioned two 
injuries on the chest and two injuries (or six injuries) on the 
right  leg  of  Muhammad  Ahmad  which  are  noted  as  Injuries 
No.  1,3,6  &  7  in  the  postmortem  report  of  the  deceased 
(Exh.PI)  and    pictorial  diagram  (Exh.PI/1).  Had  PWs 
Muhammad Adil and Nazir Ahmad been present at the crime 
scene  at  the  time  of  occurrence,  they  would  have  explained 
the aforesaid injuries on the body of the deceased. As there is 
glaring conflict between the number of injuries mentioned by 
the  eye-witnesses  of  the  prosecution  and  number  of  injuries 
mentioned  by  Dr.  Atif  Mahmood  (PW-6)  in  postmortem 
report and pictorial diagram, their testimony is not free from 
doubt.  Reliance  in  this  respect  may  be  placed  on  the 
judgments  reported  as  “Muhammad  Ali  v.  The  State”  (2015 
SCMR 137), “Irfan Ali v. The State” (2015 SCMR 840) and 
“Usman alias Kaloo v. The State” (2017 SCMR 622). 
28. 
 
In order to fill up the lacunas in the prosecution 
case, both the eye-witnesses made dishonest improvement in 
their statements in respect of a material point, i.e. the alleged 
dying  declaration  of  Muhammad    Ahmad  deceased.  They 
were  confronted  with  their  previous  statements  and  the 
dishonest  improvements  made  by  them  in  this  respect  were 
duly brought on the record. Relevant part of the statement of 
Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  is  reproduced  hereunder  for  ready 
reference: 
“I  had  recorded  in  my  statement  under  Section  161 
Cr.P.C.  that  we  carried  Muhammad  Ahmad  injured  to 
hospital  where  Rao  Inam  Ullah  SI  reached  in  the 
hospital he submitted a written application to the doctor 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
 
- 20 - 
the  I.O. 
in order to inquire about the condition of the injured for 
recording his statement. Confronted with Exh.DA where 
it  is  not  so  recorded.  I  had  also  stated  in  my  statement 
that doctor reported that Muhammad Ahmad was fit for 
making  statement.  Confronted  with  Exh.DA  where  it  is 
not  recorded.  I  had  stated  before 
that 
Muhammad  Ahmad  injured  got  recorded  his  statement 
to  the  I.O.  in  presence  of  doctor.  Confronted  with 
Exh.DA where it is not recorded. I had stated before the 
I.O. that Muhammad Ahmad singed and thumb marked 
the statement which was signed by the doctor as well as 
signed  by  the  I.O.  Confronted  with  Exh.DA  where  it  is 
not  recorded.  It  is  incorrect  to  suggest  that  in  order  to 
prove  concocted  and  fake  statement  of  Muhammad 
Ahmad, I have deposed falsely. It is incorrect to suggest 
that  Muhammad  Ahmad  never  made  any  statement  as 
stated by me.” 
The  statement  of  Nazir  Ahmad  (PW-2)  in  this  resepct  reads 
as under: 
“I  have  stated  before  the  I.O.  that  Rao  Inam  Ullah  SI 
came  at  hospital  who  submitted  an  application  to  the 
doctor  for  recording  the  statement  of  Muhammad 
Ahmad  injured  and  doctor  permitted  him  to  record  the 
statement  of  Muhammad  Ahmad.  Confronted  with 
Exh.DB  where  it  is  not  recorded.  I  had  recorded  in  my 
statement  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.  that  I.O.  recorded 
the  statement  of  Muhammad  Ahmad  in  presence  of  the 
doctor  which  was  signed  and 
thumb  marked  by 
Muhammad Ahamd as well as signed by the doctor and 
the I.O. in our presence. Confronted with Exh.DB where 
it  is  not  recorded.  I  had  recorded  in  my  statement 
Exh.DB  that  four  named  persons  and  one  unknown 
persons  had  committed  the  murderous  assault  upon 
Muhammad  Ahmad  then  injured  (deceased)  in  order  to 
restrain  him from pursuing the case of murder of Allah 
Ditta. It is incorrect to suggest that with deliberation and 
consultation I have made certain improvements.” 
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has  observed  in  a 
number of judgments that a witness is not worthy of reliance 
who  makes  dishonest  improvements  in  his  statement  on  a 
material aspect of the case in order to fill the lacunas of the 
prosecution  case  or  to  bring  his  statement  in  line  with  the 
other prosecution evidence. Reference in this respect may be 
made to the judgments reported as “Akhtar Ali and others v. 
The State” (2008 SCMR 6) and “Sardar Bibi and another v. 
Munir Ahmad and others” (2017 SCMR 344). 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 21 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
29. 
 
 
The  Investigation  Officer  Rao  Inamullah/SI 
(PW-16),  recovered  two  crime  empties  of  .12  bore  gun  
P-1/1-2  and  two  of  .30  bore  gun  P-2/1-2  from  the  place  of 
occurrence  and  secured  the  same  vide  Recovery  Memo 
Exh.PB.  During  the  course  of  investigation,  on  02-11-2012, 
Muhammad  Anwar  made  disclosure  and  while  on  physical 
remand  got  recovered  pump-action  gun  P-4  alongwith 
cartridges P-5/1-4 after digging earth near a tubewell situated 
on the Fordwah Canal which was taken into possession vide 
Recovery Memo Exh.PK. The crime empties and the weapon 
of offence were sent to the Punjab Forensic Science Agency 
(the  “PFSA”).  According  to  the  Forensic  Report  Exh.PZ, 
Parcel  No.  3  contained  one  12G  pump  action  (Item  S1) 
having  serial  number  obliterated,  marked  as  20778/12 
alongwith  its  item  number,  duly  signed.  The  report  further 
states that it was said to be recovered from Babar alias Babry 
son of Bashir Ahmad. It is thus evident that Parcel No. 3 did 
not  contain  gun  P-4  allegedly  recovered  from  Muhammad 
Anwar. The same was never sent to the PFSA. The positive 
report  qua  12G  pump-action  shot  gun 
is, 
therefore, 
inconsequential.  
30. 
 
The prosecution did not allege any direct motive 
against  Muhammad  Anwar 
(the  Appellant).  As  per 
prosecution  case,  Maqsood  Ahmad  alias  Soodi  (P.O.)  and 
Noor  Ahmad  were  involved  in  the  murder  of  Muhammad 
Ahmad’s  paternal  uncle  Allah  Ditta.  They  absconded  and 
wanted  to  eliminate  Muhammad  Ahmad  because  he  was 
pursuing that case. They hired Muhammad Anwar, Akbar Ali 
(juvenile  co-accused)  and  Zubair  alias  Bhalli  for  this 
purpose.  In  order  to  prove  the  above-mentioned  motive,  the 
prosecution  produced  Javed  (PW-7)  and Habib  (PW-8)  who 
testified  that  one  day  prior  to  the  fateful  day  at  Asar-Wela 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 22 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
they  were  taking  tea  at  the  hotel  of  Ismail  Deendar  when 
 
Maqsood  Ahmad  (since  PO),  Noor  Ahmad  along  with 
Muhammad  Anwar,  Akbar  Ali  and  Muhammad  Zubair  also 
came  there.  The  said  Maqsood  Ahmad  and  Noor  Ahmad  in 
their presence asked Muhammad Anwar and his afore-named 
co-accused  to  kill  Muhammad  Ahmad  and  they  would  pay 
them.  In  our  opinion,  this  piece  of  evidence  is  false  and 
concocted. To start with, it does not appeal to a prudent mind 
that  so  many  people  would  assemble  at  a  public  place  to 
hatch  a  conspiracy  for  a  murder.  Secondly,  PWs  Javed  and 
Habib claimed that they informed Muhammad Ahmad about 
the conspiracy on the same day. If that was so he would have 
mentioned  it  in  his  statement  Exh.PO.  Thirdly,  the  above-
mentioned  witnesses  did  not  state  that  any  money  was  paid 
by  Maqbool  Ahmad  alias  Sadi  etc.  to  the  Appellant  or  his  
co-accused  in  his  presence.  Even  otherwise,  there  is  no 
evidence to prove that any  money was paid to the Appellant 
and  his  co-accused  for  the  murder  of  the  deceased  and  no 
such  money  was  recovered  from  their  possession during  the 
investigation  of  this  case.  Lastly,  PWs  Javed  and  Habib  got 
recorded  their  statements  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.  three 
days after the incident for which there is no explanation. It is 
settled law that such delay impinges on the credibility of the 
witness. Reliance is placed on “Syed Saeed Muhammad Shah 
and another v. The State” (1993 SCMR 550), “Abdul Khaliq 
v.  The  State”  (1996  SCMR  1553),  “Muhammad  Khan  v. 
Maula Bakhsh and another” (1998 SCMR 570). Resultantly, 
alleged  conspiracy  and 
the  motive  set  forth  by 
the 
prosecution are not proved.  
31. 
 
We  have 
also 
considered 
the 
alleged 
abscondence  of  Muhammad  Anwar.  In  support  thereof, 
proclamation  &  report  Exh.PE  has  been  brought  on  record 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 23 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
through Muhammad Aslam 335/C (PW-5). It is by now well 
 
settled that abscondence by itself is not a conclusive proof of 
the  guilt  of  an  accused  person  and  in  absence  of  other 
convincing  evidence  an  accused  cannot  be  convicted  and 
sentenced merely on the basis of his abscondence. In “Liaqat 
Hussain and others vs. Falak Sher and others” (2003 SCMR 
611), the Apex Court held: 
“Disappearance  of  an  accused  person  could  have 
ordinarily  offered  useful 
the 
prosecution case. But this is so only in a situation where 
the  prosecution  case  is  reasonably  believable  to  some 
extent and requires some corroboration  for proof of the 
same.” 
corroboration 
to 
32. 
 
Having reappraised the evidence we have found 
that  the  prosecution  case  is  riddled  with  doubts.  It  is  a 
cardinal  principle  of  criminal  jurisprudence  that  it  is  not 
necessary  that  there  should  be  many  circumstances  which 
create  doubt  about  the  guilt  of  an  accused.  Even  a  single 
circumstance which creates reasonable doubt in the mind of a 
prudent  person  would  entitle  him  to  acquittal.  Reliance  is 
placed  on  “Tariq  Pervez  v.  The  State”  (1995  SCMR  1345), 
“Muhammad  Akram  v.  The  State”(2009  SCMR  230), 
“Muhammad Zaman v. The State and others”  (2014  SCMR 
749)  and  “Muhammad  Mansha  v.  The  State”  (2018  SCMR 
772).  Hence,  we  accept  Crl.  Appeal  No.  52/2014/BWP  and 
set aside the conviction and sentence awarded to Muhammad 
Anwar.  He  is  in  jail.  He  shall  be  released  forthwith  if  not 
required to be detained in any other case.  
33. 
 
Murder Reference No. 4/2014/BWP is answered 
in  the  NEGATIVE  and  the  death  sentence  awarded  to 
Muhammad Anwar is NOT CONFIRMED.  
34. 
 
We now take up Crl. Appeal No. 80/2014/BWP 
which assails the acquittal of Muhammad Zubair alias Bhalli 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 24 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
and  Noor  Ahmad.  So  far  as  the  former  is  concerned,  it  is 
 
observed that he was not nominated in the FIR which alleged 
that  Muhammad  Anwar  and  Akbari  came  on  a  motorcycle 
which  was  driven  by  their  accomplice  who  had  muffled  his 
face. The name of Muhammad Zubair was introduced by the 
prosecution 
for 
the  first 
time  on  08-08-2012  when 
Muhammad  Latif  (PW-12)  in  his  statement  Exh.DE  stated 
that  he  had  confessed  his  guilt  before  him  and  one 
Muhammad  Anwar 
(given  up  PW).  Subsequently, 
Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  and  Nazir  Ahmad  (PW-2) 
identified  him  in  the  identification  test  parade  held  on  
12-12-2012.    
35. 
 
It  is  settled  law  that  extra-judicial  confession 
should always be received with utmost caution for the reason 
that  it  can  be  procured  effortlessly  and  easily  concocted.  In 
“Sajid  Mumtaz  and  others  v.  Basharat  and  others”  (2006 
SCMR 231), the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed:  
Investigating  Officer  fails 
the  case,  he  resorts 
“As  observed  by  the  Federal  Court,  we  would  reiterate 
epically  referring  to  this  part  of  the  country,  that  extra-
judicial  confessions  have  almost  become  a  norm  when 
the prosecution cannot otherwise succeed. Rather, it may 
be  observed  with  concern  as  well  as  with  regret  that 
when 
to  properly 
the 
investigate 
to  padding;  and 
like  extra-judicial  confessions.  Such 
concoctions 
confession  by  now,  have  become 
the  signs  of 
incompetent  investigation.  A  judicial  mind,  before 
relying  upon  such  weak  type  of  evidence,  capable  of 
being effortlessly procured must ask a few questions like 
why the  accused should  at  all confess,  what  is  the time 
lag between the occurrence and the confession, whether 
the  accused  had  been  fully  trapped  during  investigation 
before  making  the  confession,  what  is  the  nature  and 
gravity of the offence involved, what is the relationship 
or  friendship  of 
the  maker  of 
confession  and  what,  above  all  is  the  position  or 
authority held by the witness.” 
the  witness  with 
36. 
 
Indubitably  the  phenomenon  of  confession  is 
not  altogether  unknown  but  in  order  to  determine  its 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 25 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
genuineness  the  Court  should  look  at  the  circumstances  in 
 
which  it  is  made  and  the  motivating  factors  behind  it.  In 
Sajid Mumtaz’s case, supra, Sardar Muhammad Raza Khan, 
J.  noted  that  an  accused  may  confess  (i)  to  boost  off,  (ii)  to 
ventilate  the  suffocating  conscience,  and  (iii)  to  seek  help 
when  actually  trapped  by  investigation  or  for  some  other 
reason. He further wrote: 
“Boasting off is  very rare in  such like heinous offences 
where  fear  dominates  and  is  always  done  before  an 
extreme  confident  as  well  as  the  one  who  shares  close 
secrets.  To  make  confession  in  order  to  give  vent  to 
one’s pressure on mind and conscience is another aspect 
of  the  same  psyche.  One  gives  vent  to  one’s  feelings 
only before a strong and close confident….Another most 
important  and  natural  purpose  of  making  extra-judicial 
confession  is  to  seek  help  from  a  third  person.  Help  is 
sought firstly, when a person is sufficiently trapped and 
secondly,  from  one  who  is  authoritative,  socially  or 
officially.”   
In the instant case, it is observed that the prosecution has not 
brought  any  material  on  the  record  which  may  suggest  that 
Muhammad  Zubair  had  any  reason  to  make  confession 
before him. Even otherwise, it is a weak type of evidence and 
the  same  cannot  be  made  basis  of  conviction  unless  it  is 
corroborated  by  cogent  evidence.  Reliance  is  placed  on 
“Wazir Muhammad and another v. The State” (2005 SCMR 
277), “Abdul Mateen v. Sahib Khan and others” (PLD 2006 
SC  538),  “Muhammad  Aslam  v.  Sabir  Hussain  and  others” 
(2009  SCMR  985),  “Imran  alias  Dully  and  another  v.  The 
State and others” (2015 SCMR 155) and “Azeem Khan and 
another v. Mujahid Khan and others” (2016 SCMR 274). 
37. 
 
Another  piece  of  evidence  brought  against 
Muhammad Zubair is identification test. It is observed that it 
is  the  prosecution’s  own  case  that  the  third  accused  was 
muffled  face.  As  such,  Muhammad  Adil  (PW-1)  and  Nazir 
Ahmad (PW-2) could not recognize him in the identification 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 26 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
test parade. It is also noteworthy that Muhammad Zubair was 
 
previously  known 
to 
the  said  PWs  which  fact 
they 
categorically  admitted  at  the  trial.  On  this  score  as  well  the 
identification test loses significance. 
38. 
 
The  prosecution  also  claims  that  motorcycle 
CG-125 was recovered from Muhammad Zubair alias Bhalli 
(which  was  recovered  vide  Recovery  Memo  Exh.  PM).  We 
have noted that the said motorcycle was not produced during 
the trial and Muhammad Jaffar 997/C (PW-13) who testified 
about  its  recovery  got  exhibited  only  the  Recovery  Memo 
Exh.PM  in  evidence.  More  importantly,  even  the  said 
document was not put to any of the accused when they were 
examined under  Section  342  Cr.P.C. This  piece of  evidence 
has  no  legal  value  and  is  discarded  in  view  of  the  law  laid 
down  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  the  cases  cited  as 
“Sheral  alias  Sher  Muhammad  v.  The  State”  (1999  SCMR 
697),  “Muhammad  Shah  v.  The  State”  (2010  SCMR  1009), 
and “Qaddan and others v. The State” (2017 SCMR 148). 
39. 
 
In  a  nub,  the  prosecution  has  not  adduced  any 
trustworthy evidence against Muhammad Zubair to prove his 
involvement in the offence.  
40. 
 
Noor  Ahmad  was  accused  of  abetment  and  the 
prosecution  examined  Javed  (PW-7)  and  Habib  (PW-8)  to 
prove the charge. We have already discarded their testimony 
while  deciding  Crl.  Appeal  No.  52/2014.  Therefore,  further 
discussion in this respect is not required.  
41. 
 
The  learned  trial  Court  has  extended  benefit  of 
doubt to Muhammad Zubair and Noor Ahmad after thorough 
appraisal  of  evidence.  The  learned  counsel  has  failed  to 
persuade this Court that the conclusions drawn by the learned 
 
Murder Ref.  No. 04/2014/BWP 
The State  v. Muhammad Anwar 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 52/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Anwar  v. The State 
 
- 27 - 
Criminal Appeal  No. 80/2014/BWP 
Muhammad Sarwar  v. Noor Ahmad etc. 
 
 
 
trial  Court  are  contrary  to  record  or  are  otherwise  arbitrary, 
 
fanciful  or  perverse.  In  “Mst.  Saira  Bibi  v.  Muhammad  Asif 
and others” (2009 SCMR 946), the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
held: 
“It  is  a  settled  law  that  before  the  order  of  acquittal  is 
reversed,  it  must  be  shown  that  the  judgment  of  the 
learned trial Court was not reasonable or wrong. Even if 
two  conclusions  were  equally  possible  the  order  of 
acquittal should not be reversed.”      
42. 
 
For what has been discussed above, Crl. Appeal 
No. 80/2014/BWP is hereby dismissed. 
 
(Malik Shahzad Ahmad Khan)   (Tariq Saleem Sheikh) 
  Judge 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
           Judge 
 
Judge  
Shafqat A. Toor* 
 
