 
 
 
              ORDER SHEET            
 
IN  THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,LAHORE 
                               JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
                                        Writ Petition No.222995-2018 
 
 
Ghulam Hussain 
 Vs.     
Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, Jaranwala District Faisalabad, etc. 
 
S. No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
Proceeding 
Proceeding 
Parties or Counsel, where necessary. 
 
 
02.07.2018   Mr. Abdul  Khaliq Safrani, Advocate for the petitioner. 
Mrs. Shazia Ashraf Khan, Assistant Advocate-General  
 
 
Punjab for the State on Court’s call. 
 
 
 
 
 
  Through this Constitutional Petition under Article 
199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973,  petitioner  Ghulam  Hussain  has  challenged  the 
legality  and  propriety  of  order  dated  24.04.2018,  passed 
by  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate  Ist  Class,  Jaranwala 
whereby  the  application  of  the  petitioner  for  obtaining 
samples  of  blood  of  accused/respondents  No.6  to  8 
(hereinafter  called  ‘the  respondents’)  for  the  purpose  of 
re-analysis through DNA test was dismissed. 
2. 
Briefly, the facts of the case necessary for disposal 
of  this  petition  are  that  the  petitioner  got  lodged  a  case 
FIR  No.501  dated  22.09.2017  in  respect  of  offences 
under  Sections  302  &  34  PPC  at  Police  Station 
Lundianwala District Faisalabad  regarding the murder of 
Mst. Sumera alias Sonia, wife of the petitioner’s nephew 
Ghulam  Sarwar,  against  unknown  accused  persons.  The 
respondents  were  implicated  in  the  said  case  through 
supplementary  statement  dated  24.04.2017,  as  the  post-
mortem  examination  report  had  revealed 
that 
the 
deceased lady was done to death after sexually assaulted 
by  the  accused  persons.  The  respondents  were  arrested 
and produced before the Punjab Forensic Science Agency 
for  Serology  analysis  and  DNA  test.  The  expert  report           
W.P. No.222995-2018 
2 
was  received  with  negative  results  to  the  extent  of  the 
respondents  and,  thus,  the  petitioner  being  dissatisfied 
with  the  report,  filed  an  application  before  the  learned 
Judicial  Magistrate,  Jaranwala  for  sampling  of  the 
respondents  for  the  purpose of  re-analysis  through  DNA 
test,  which  was  turned  down  by  the  learned  Magistrate 
vide  impugned  order  dated  24.04.2018.  Hence,  this 
Constitutional petition. 
3. 
 I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, 
learned  Assistant  Advocate-General,  Punjab  on  Court’s 
call and have perused the record with their assistance. 
4. 
Admittedly, as per crime report, the deceased lady 
had  been  done  to  death  by  some  unknown  accused 
persons 
and 
the 
respondents  were 
implicated 
subsequently  through  supplementary  statement  dated 
24.04.2017. The Investigating Officer had obtained most-
mortem  examination  report,  which  shows  that  the 
deceased  lady  had  been  sexually  assaulted  prior  to  her 
death  and,  thus,  the  respondents,  after  their  arrest,  were 
produced before the Punjab Forensic Science Agency for 
DNA test, in order to ascertain whether the said accused 
persons  were  indulged  in  the  act  of  sexual  intercourse 
with  the  deceased  lady  prior  to  her  death  or  not.  The 
required test was done by the said Agency and the report 
thereof,  was  received  with  negative  results  showing  that 
the  DNA  profile  obtained  from  the  sperm  fraction  from 
item  No.1,  6.4,  6.5,  6.6,  6.7,  6.9  was  a  mixture  of 
unknown  male 
individuals,  eliminating  respondents 
Sadam, Rizwan @ Jani and Imran @ Bhai as contributors 
to  DNA  obtained  from  the  viginal  as  well  as  shalwar  of 
the  deceased  lady.  The  said  report  certainly  does  not 
favour the prosecution and,  thus, the petitioner had filed 
Writ  Petition  No.195213/2018  to  repeat  the  process  of 
analysis through  DNA test, which was disposed  of  by 
this  Court  vide  order dated 11.04.2018, as the petitioner  
W.P. No.222995-2018 
 
3 
had  preferred to  withdraw  the same  in  order  to  avail  his 
remedy  under  Section  176  Cr.P.C  by  moving  afresh 
before  the  Court  of  first  instance  but  his  application 
before  the  learned  Magistrate  was  dismissed  while 
observing  that  proceedings  under  Section  176  Cr.P.C., 
was just to hold an inquiry to ascertain the cause of death 
if 
it  was  a  case  of  death  under 
the  suspicion 
circumstances and nothing else.  
5. 
 The  Investigating  Officer  got  conducted  DNA 
analysis  during  investigation  to  satisfy  his  conscious 
regarding  complicity  of  the  accused  persons  and  their 
connection with the crime. The report of Punjab Forensic 
Science Agency, Lahore is available on record, excluding 
the 
respondents 
from 
the  sperm 
fractions  being 
contributors to DNA obtained from  epithelial fraction of 
item  No.1,  6.4,  6.5,  6.6,  6.7  and  6.9  rather  mixture  of 
unknown  individuals.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 
remained  fail  to  satisfy  the  Court  that  under  what 
circumstances,  the  report  received  from  the  office  of 
Punjab  Forensic Science  Agency  is to be taken  dubious. 
Nothing is available on record to show that the report in 
question was maneuvered or any of the relevant officials 
in  the  lab  was  biased.  In  the  absence  of  any  sound 
material  creating  reasonable    doubt,  the  report  in  hand 
cannot  be  discarded  at  the  whims  and  wishes  of  the 
petitioner. The petitioner cannot be allowed to fill-up the 
lacuna  just  to  implicate  the  accused  persons  nominated 
by  him  at  the  subsequent  stage.  I  am  of  the  considered 
view that the order impugned suffers from no illegality of 
approach,  perversity  of  reasoning  or  any  irregularity  of 
procedure  to  warrant  interference  by  this  Court.  Let  the 
learned  trial  Court  to  decide  the  fate  of  the  case  on  the  
material/evidence available on record.  
W.P. No.222995-2018 
4 
 
 
6. 
 In  view  of  above,  the  instant  petition,  being 
devoid of any force, stands dismissed in limine. 
 
 
                        
 
 
(ASJAD JAVAID GHURAL)  
                JUDGE 
 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
 
 
Ramzan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       JUDGE 
