Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
MULTAN BENCH MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Crl. Misc.  No.5957-B/2018 
Muhammad Tariq 
VS. 
The State and another 
S.No. of order/  
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding. 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where 
necessary. 
 
 
 
03.12.2018  Mr. Rizwan Ahmad Khan, Advocate for the petitioner. 
 
Ch. Aftab Shabbir Arain, Advocate for the complainant. 
Mr.  Ashfaq  Ahmad  Malik,  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  with 
Sheraz Qamar, ASI.  
 
 
Muhammad Tariq, petitioner seeks his release on bail 
 
after  his  arrest in  case  FIR  No.100 of 2018 dated 19.04.2018 
registered  at  Police  Station  Sahuka,  District  Vehari,  under 
section 489-F PPC. 
2.  
Precisely  stated  the  case  of  the  prosecution,  as 
unfolded  from  the  FIR,  is  that  the  petitioner  had  drawn  a 
cheque  of  Rs.600,000/-  in  favour  of  the  complainant,  which 
on presentation before the concerned bank was dishonoured. 
3.  
4.  
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
It has been noticed that the alleged date of occurrence 
was  not  mentioned  in  FIR  however  it  was  recorded  that  the 
petitioner  allegedly  had  drawn  the  cheque  for  the  date  of 
30.01.2018 whereas the case was registered on 19.04.2018. It 
was not mentioned in the FIR as to when the said cheque was 
drawn. The instant FIR was registered after a delay which, on 
the perusal of the FIR, cannot be determined. No explanation 
has  been  mentioned  in  the  FIR  for  this  extreme  deferral  of 
getting  the  FIR  registered  .It  is  further  noteworthy  that  the 
cheque related to the account of the father of the petitioner and 
not  his  account.    Learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  and  
counsel  for  the  complainant  stated  that  the  petitioner  is 
involved  in  as  many  as  six  other  cases  of  similar  nature 
Crl. Misc. No.5957-B/2018 
 
2 
however,  conceded  that  he  has  not  been  convicted  in  any  of 
them. Even otherwise the august Supreme Court of Pakistan in 
case of  Qurban Ali v. The State and others (2017 SCMR 279) 
has held as under:- 
  “So  far  as  the  list  of  different  criminal  cases  placed 
on record by the learned counsel for the complainant 
through  C.M.A.  No.486-L  of  2016  registered  against 
accused side in general and petitioner Qurban Ali in 
particular  is  concerned,  suffice  it  to  observe,  at  this 
stage,  this  Court  is  only  seized  of  the  instant  bail 
application  and  the  effect/impact  of  the  aforesaid 
criminal record against petitioner and his co-accused 
is not relevant for disposing of the instant petition.” 
 
Learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  and    counsel  for  the 
complainant  further  stated  that  the  petitioner  caused  the 
financial  ruin  of  respondent  No.2,  complainant  of  the  FIR. 
I have  given  deep  consideration  to the  fact  that  the petitioner 
is saddled with the responsibility of depriving the complainant 
from  a  huge  amount  of  Rs.600,000/-.    I  have  perused  the 
record. The arrest of the petitioner in this case has been shown 
on  4th  of  September,  2018  and  he  was  remanded  to  judicial 
custody on the very next day. Nothing was recovered from the 
possession  of  the  petitioner  during  investigation  of  the  case. 
This  is  a  settled  principle  that  the  concession  of  bail  is  a 
procedural relief having nothing to do with the  final decision 
of  the  trial.  If  a  person,  otherwise  is  found  entitled  to  the 
concession  of  bail,  his  liberty  cannot  be  curtailed  on  the 
ground of the charge being of heavy amount. Even otherwise 
the  offence  punishable  under  section  489-F  PPC  carries  the 
maximum punishment of imprisonment for three years. There 
is  no distinction  regarding the  sentence  which can be passed, 
depending  upon  the  value  of  the  cheque.  Since  the  above 
provision  of  law  does  not  carry  any  such  distinction,  the 
maximum sentence which can be executed upon the petitioner 
remains to be three years if the case is proved. The case of the 
petitioner does not fall within the prohibitory clause of section 
Crl. Misc. No.5957-B/2018 
 
3 
497(1)  Cr.P.C.  The  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has 
settled the law that in such like cases the grant of bail is rule 
and its refusal is exception.  
5.  
It  may  further  be  noted  that  the  case  against  the 
present  petitioner  is  almost  entirely  reliant  on  documentary 
evidence  which,  admittedly  is  in  the  possession  of  the 
prosecution and clearly there is no possibility of the petitioner 
tampering with the same.  Keeping the petitioner incarcerated 
would  tantamount  to  punishing  him  despite  the  fact  that  a 
person  is  presumed  to  be  innocent  until  proven  guilty.  The 
Courts  have  invariably  leaned  favourably  in  the  granting  of 
bail  when  the  case  is  dependent  upon  documentary  evidence 
and  the  same  is  in  possession  of  the  prosecution  agency. 
Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  on  “Saeed  Ahmed  Vs.  The 
State” (1996 SCMR 1132), and “Muhammad Nawaz Vs. The 
State through Chairman, NAB, Islamabad and another” (PLD 
2008  SC  438).  It  has  been  observed  by  the  august  Supreme 
Court of Pakistan in the case of “Manzoor and 4 others versus 
The State” (PLD 1972 SC 81) as infra; 
“The ultimate conviction and incarceration of a 
guilty person can repair the wrong caused by a 
mistaken  relief  of  interim  bail  granted  to  him, 
but no satisfactory reparation can be offered to 
an 
unjustified 
incarceration at any stage of the case albeit his 
acquittal in the long run.”  
innocent  man 
his 
for 
 
In  the  light  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  present  case, 
refusal  of  bail,  at  this  stage,  will  tantamount  to  punishing  the 
petitioner when his guilt is yet to be proved.   
6. 
For  the  foregoing  reasons  the  petition  in  hand  is  allowed 
and  petitioner  is  ordered  to  be  released  on  bail  subject  to 
furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.100,000/- (Rupees One Lac 
Only)  with  one  surety  in  the  like  amount  to  the  satisfaction  of 
learned trial court. 
Crl. Misc. No.5957-B/2018 
 
4 
7. 
Needless  to  mention  that  any  observations  made  in  the 
above  order  are  tentative  in  nature  and  shall  not  influence  the 
trial court.  
(Sadiq Mahmud Khurram) 
Judge 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
Judge 
Saleem 
