 
Form No.HCJD/C-121 
 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
W.P.No.237718/2018 
Javed 
Vs 
The State, etc. 
 
S.  No.  of  
order/ 
proceedings 
of 
Date 
order/ 
proceeding 
Order  with  signature  of  Judge,  and  that  of  parties  or  counsel,  where 
necessary 
22.10.2018   Mr.  Rasheed  Afzaal  Cheema,  Advocate  for 
the 
petitioner. 
Mian  Muhammad  Qamar  uz  Zaman,  Advocate  for 
respondent No.7. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Afzal  Bhatti,  Assistant  Advocate 
General  with  Muhammad  Ilyas  SSP  and  Muhammad 
Ismail S.P. 
 
 
 
Briefly the facts of the case are that regarding an occurrence, 
FIR  No.116/2018  dated  30.03.2018  under  section  337-A(i),  337-
A(ii),  186,  148,  149  PPC  was  registered  at  police  station  City 
Nankana  Sahib  on  the  complaint  of  Abdul  Rehman  Shaheen 
(respondent  No.7)  against  the  present  petitioner  and  some  others. 
Since the petitioner had another story regarding the same occurrence, 
therefore,  he  filed  an  application  under  section  22-A/22-B  Cr.P.C. 
before  the  learned  Ex-officio  Justice  of  Peace,  the  same  was 
disposed  of  vide  order  dated  03.05.2018  with  a  direction  to  the 
Investigating Officer of the said FIR to proceed on the application of 
the petitioner if cross-version attracts in the case or not. Through the 
instant  writ  petition  the  petitioner  voiced  a  grievance  that  despite 
order  by  the  learned  Ex-officio  Justice  of  Peace,  his  cross-version 
was not being recorded. 
2. 
On  27.09.2018  District  Police  Officer and  S.P  (Investigation) 
were  directed  to  appear  before  this  court  in  person  along  with 
Investigating  Officer  on  28.09.2018.  On  28.09.2018  the  court  was 
apprised  that  cross-version  of  the  petitioner  had  been  recorded.  On 
perusal  of  the  police  file  this  court  observed  that  statement  of 
petitioner was not recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C and further his statement 
was also not incorporated in RAPT ROZNAMCHA and statements of 
 
 
his  witnesses  and  the  site  plan  in  the  light  of  statement  of  the 
witnesses  of  cross-examination  was  not  prepared,  which  is  against 
the requirement of law and if the Investigating Agency adopted this 
way of recording cross-version then the complainant of cross-version 
will miss out his basic rights and it will frustrate the requirement of 
law in the light of case “Mst. SUGHRAN BIBI versus THE STATE” 
(PLD  2018  Supreme  Court  595).  The  DPO  as  well  as  other  police 
officers  also  could  not  come  out  with  any  explanation;  as  such  the 
Additional Inspector General Police was directed to appear in person 
and  he  was  apprised  about  the  situation  and  relevant  provisions  of 
law,  especially  the  police  rules  as  guidance  for  recording  of  cross-
versions  and  its  investigation.  He  was  also  directed  to  prepare  SOP 
with  the  consultation  of  all  stakeholders  and  issue  the  same  for 
guidance of police officials investigating the cross-versions to avoid 
any complication to the public at large.  
3. 
Today,  the  court  has  been  informed  that  SOP  (Standard 
Operating  Procedures)  No.30200/Inv/HA/L  dated  19.10.2018  has 
been  issued  with  regard  to  recording  of  cross-versions,  a  copy 
whereof has been placed before the Court. An extract of the same is 
reproduced hereunder:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On  court  query  the  police  officers  present  in  court  inform  that  now 
the cross-version of the present petitioner has been recorded to bring 
the  same  in  line  with  the  requirement  of  law  and  the  police  rules. 
This being the position the grievance of the petitioner stands redress 
and this petition is disposed of accordingly. 
4. 
It  has  been  observed  that  in  the  above  referred  SOP  a 
comprehensive mechanism has been laid down but from the covering 
letter of the SOP it appears that although the same was addressed to 
the  heads/Incharge  of  the  concerned  branches  of  the  police 
department,  but  the  same  do  not  appear  to  have  been  routed  to  the 
bottom i.e. to the SHOs or the Investigating Officers. Similarly, the 
SOP  also  does  not  appear  to  have  been  circulated  for  public 
awareness or to the legal fraternity. The Inspector General of Police 
Punjab  is  directed  to  ensure  that  above  referred  SOP  shall  be 
communicated to the SHOs who shall onward see that the SOP must 
be complied with in letter and spirit by the Investigating Officer. At 
the  same  time,  the  Inspector  General  of  Police  Punjab  shall  ensure 
that  copy  of  this  SOP  must  be  transmitted  to  all  the  Tehsil  and 
District Bar Associations of Punjab for information. 
 
 (Muhammad Qasim Khan) 
Judge. 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
Javed* 
 
