Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Zafar Iqbal Khan 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
 
12.01.2017 
    Case No.  W.P. No.22623/2010 
 
Versus 
Punjab Labour Appellate 
Tribunal, etc.  
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties of 
counsel, where necessary 
 
M/s Syed Mansoor Ali Bukhari and Ch. Tahir 
Maqbool Gujjar, Advocates for petitioner. 
Mr.  Abdul  Rashid  Mian,  Advocate 
for 
respondents No.3 to 5.                                        
By way of this constitutional petition under Article 199 
of  the  Constitution of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 1973 
the  petitioner  has  challenged  the  legality  and  validity  of 
judgment  dated  10.08.2010  passed  by  respondent  No.1/ 
learned  Punjab  Labour  Appellate  Tribunal,  Lahore  whereby 
the 
judgment  dated  11.05.2009  passed  by  respondent 
No.2/learned  Punjab  Labour  Court  No.V,  Sargodha,  was 
upheld.    
 
 
  2. 
Tersely,  the  facts  relevant  for  the  disposal  of  this 
constitutional petition are that the petitioner was appointed as 
Cashier in the respondent-Bank. He performed his duties with 
the respondent Bank till the year 2007 when on 17.10.2007 he 
received  a  relieving  order  by  the  Manager  whereby  he  was 
transferred/posted  at  Naushera  Branch  at  Khushab  vide  order 
dated 12.10.2007. Being aggrieved by the said relieving order 
he  approached  the  Regional  Manager  Office  where  he  was 
advised to go on leave already applied by him before issuance 
of relieving order. When the earlier leave was going to expire, 
the  petitioner  submitted  another 
leave  application  on 
05.11.2007  for  four  months  w.e.f  06.11.2007  to  05.03.2008. 
On  19.02.2008  a  show  cause  notice  was  served  upon  the 
petitioner for his unauthorized absence. He replied to the said 
W.P. No.22623/2010. 
 
 
2 
show  cause  notice.  The  respondent-bank  after  inquiry  vide 
impugned  order  dated  29.04.2008  terminated  the  petitioner’s 
services.  The  petitioner  filed  a  grievance  petition  before 
respondent  No.2  which  was  dismissed  vide 
impugned 
judgment  dated  11.05.2009.  Being  dissatisfied  with  the  said 
judgment, the petitioner preferred an appeal before respondent 
No.1  which  was  disposed  of  vide  impugned  judgment  dated 
10.08.2010  whereby  the  petitioner’s  termination  order  was 
converted  into  that  of  compulsory  retirement.  Hence,  the 
present petition.  
 
 
  3.  
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contends  that  basic 
order of transfer dated 12.10.2007 was passed by incompetent 
authority inasmuch as such order should have been passed by 
Group Executive HR Organizational Development and not by 
Staff Officer and VP/RGM OPSS; that he has not been served 
with  second  show  cause  notice  which  is  illegality;  that  he 
submitted  leave  application  which  was  not  adhered  to  by  the 
respondent-bank which has caused great loss to the case of the 
petitioner;  and  that  the  impugned  judgments  of  the  courts 
below are the result of misreading and non-reading of oral as 
well as documentary evidence available on the record. 
4. 
On the other hand, learned counsel for respondents No.3 
to  5  supported  the  impugned  judgments  passed  by  learned 
Punjab  Labour  Court  No.V,  Sargodha  as  well  as  learned 
Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, Lahore. 
 
 
  5. 
Heard. Record perused.  
6. 
I have gone through the grievance petition in which the 
contention  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  that  his 
transfer  order  dated  12.10.2007  was  issued  by  incompetent 
authority,  has  not  been  raised.  The  petitioner  has  also  not 
agitated the same in  notice under Section 46 of the Industrial 
Relations  Ordinance,  2002.  He  has  not  stated  this  fact  in  his 
W.P. No.22623/2010. 
 
 
3 
examination in chief as well. He has also not agitated the same 
in the memo of appeal preferred before the appellate tribunal, 
therefore,  this  ground  cannot  be  agitated  for  the  first  time 
before this Court.  
7. 
The  petitioner  has  failed  to  plead  or  raise  specific 
ground  qua  his  contention  referred  to  above  from  the  very 
inception  of  the  case,  hence,  he  was  precluded  by  law  to 
agitate the same as it is also settled law that no litigant can be 
allowed  to  build  and  prove  his  case  beyond  the  scope  of  his 
pleadings. The point which was not taken before lower courts 
cannot  be  raised  before  this  Court.  New  point  involving 
investigation  of  facts  cannot  be  taken  up  at  this  stage.  It  is 
established  principle  of  law  that  party  cannot  be  permitted  to 
raise  contention  involving  inquiry  into  the  facts  for  the  first 
time before High Court. Had the petitioner raised afore noted 
plea  before  Labour  Court  that  would  have  been  answered  by 
the  respondent-bank  in  their  reply  explaining  their  position 
about  competency  of  the  officer  who  has  passed  the  order 
dated  12.10.2007.  Reference  may  be  made  to  the  cases 
reported  as  “Muhammad  Iqbal  v.  Mehboob  Alam”  (2015 
SCMR 21) and “Punjab Seed Corporation through Managing 
Director  and  another  v.  Labour  Court  No.9,  Multan  through 
Presiding Officer and 2 others” (2015 PLC 232).   
8. 
Even  otherwise,  simple  filing  of  application  for  leave 
does  not  absolve  the  petitioner  from  his  duty  to  pursue  the 
same.  It  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  here  that  mere 
submission  of  application  for  leave  by  the  petitioner  to  the 
respondent-bank against transfer order does not mean that the 
same  has  been  granted  in  his  favour.  The  petitioner  should 
have himself inquired about the status of application for grant 
of  leave.  He  even  did  not  bother  to  contact  respondent-bank 
himself or through his agent to know as to whether leave has 
been sanctioned or not. After transfer, the petitioner could not 
W.P. No.22623/2010. 
 
 
4 
stay  at  a  place  of  his  own  choice  unless  operation  of  the 
transfer  order  has  been  stayed  which  was  not  the  position  in 
the case in hand. If this practice is permitted then it will give 
license  to  every  employee  to  file  representation  against 
transfer  order  so  as  to  stay  at  a  place  from  which  he  did  not 
want to move, as the same would create administrative chaos. 
The petitioner has not produced on record any order from the 
competent authority whether his leave has been  sanctioned or 
not. The reasons provided by the petitioner that he has to look 
after his ailing mother and minor children is not a valid ground 
for  not  adhering  to  the  transfer  order  dated  12.10.2007 
whereby he was posted at Noushera.  
9. 
The  services  of  the  petitioner  were  terminated  by  the 
competent  authority  on  account  of  his  absence  from  duty.  In 
this  regard,  in  order  to  prove  his  case  petitioner  appeared  as 
PW-1  and  reiterated  the  contents  of  grievance  petition. 
However, in cross  examination he  categorically  admitted  that 
he  has  not  joined  the  duty  at  Naushera  where  he  was 
transferred/posted. This absence from duty of the petitioner is 
not tolerable while in service. The absence whether avoidable 
or unavoidable was the sole headache of the official but so far 
as  the  respondent-bank  is  concerned,  it  cannot  afford  the 
luxury of the absence from duty on the part of the employees.  
From  the  evidence  available  on  record,  it  is  clear  that 
petitioner never joined his duty where he was transferred. The 
learned  Appellate  Tribunal  converted  penalty  of  termination 
from  service  into  compulsory  retirement  by  taking  a  lenient 
view. 
10. 
In  the  afore-noted  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case 
this  Court  is  of  the  considered  view  that  petitioner  has  not 
been able to make out a good case and it can be held that when 
an  employee  would  disobey  orders  of  employer  in  respect  of 
W.P. No.22623/2010. 
 
 
5 
his transfer, no option would be left for the employer except to 
proceed against him and award penalty in accordance with law.  
11.  The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that 
second show cause notice has not been given to him which has 
caused great prejudice to his case is of no significance as laid 
down  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  law 
tilted  as  “Dawood  Cotton  Mills  Ltd.  V.  Guftar  Shah  and 
another”  and  Fazal  Shafiq  Textile  Mills  Ltd.  v.  IV  Sind 
Labour Court and another” (PLD 1981 SC 225). 
12.  The  findings  of  learned  Punjab  Labour  Court  No.V, 
Sargodha as well as learned Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, 
Lahore  are  concurrent,  therefore,  do  not  call  for  any 
interference by this Court. This Court cannot interfere into the 
concurrent  findings  of  facts  of  the  learned  Punjab  Labour 
Court  No.V,  Sargodha  as  well  as  learned  Punjab  Labour 
Appellate  Tribunal,  Lahore  recorded  after  due  assessment  of 
evidence as a Court of appeal. Reference may be made to the 
case law reported as “Ghulam Muhammad and another v. Mst. 
Noor  Bibi  and  5  others”  (1980  SCMR  933).  The  relevant 
portion of the judgment is reproduced herein below:- 
“we agree with the view taken by the High Court that it could not 
in  its  limited  constitutional  Jurisdiction  interfere  with  the 
concurrent  findings  against  the  petitioner-departments  on  what 
was essentially a question of fact.” 
 
  Further reference may be made to the cases reported as “Allah 
Ditta v. Ahmed Ali Shah and others” (2003 SCMR 1202)  and 
“Mst. Farah Naz v. Judge Family Court, Sahiwal and others” 
(PLD 2006 Supreme Court 457). 
13.  Learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to point out 
any  illegality  and  jurisdictional  defect  in  the  impugned 
judgments  of  the  learned  Punjab  Labour  Court  No.V, 
Sargodha as well as learned Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, 
Lahore. 
W.P. No.22623/2010. 
 
 
6 
14.  Sequel  to  the  above,  this  writ  petition  being  devoid  of 
any  force  is  dismissed  and  the  judgments  dated  11.05.2009 
and  10.08.2010  passed  by  the  learned  Punjab  Labour  Court 
No.V,  Sargodha  as  well  as  learned  Punjab  Labour  Appellate 
Tribunal, Lahore, respectively are upheld. No order as to cost.
 
 
 
(SHAHID MUBEEN) 
     JUDGE 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
Waseem 
