Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, 
RAWALPINDI BENCH RAWALPINDI  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
W.P. No. 3322/2018 
Mst. Saira Iram   
  VS.  Chief 
Secretary 
Lahore & Another 
Punjab 
S.No. of 
order/  
proceeding 
 
 
 
Date of order/ 
proceeding. 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary. 
 
30.11.2018 
Mr.  Moazzam  Sajjad  Kiani,  Advocate  for  the 
petitioner. 
                          ------- 
The  instant  writ  petition  has  been  filed  with  the 
following prayer:- 
―In  view  of  the  above  submissions  it  is  humbly  prayed 
that  the  respondents  may  kindly  be  ordered  /  directed 
for  decision  of  her  departmental  appeal  as  early  as 
possible‖. 
2. 
The  relevant  facts  of  the  case  for  the  decision  of 
the instant writ petition are that the petitioner was serving 
as  a  Charge  Nurse  at  Benazir  Bhutto  Hospital, 
Rawalpindi. She applied leave for one year on 22.3.2013 
to the Director General Nursing, without pay from 05-4-
2013  to  05-4-2014.  A  show  cause  notice  dated  19-02-
2014 was served upon her under The Punjab Employees 
Efficiency,  Discipline  and  Accountability  Act,  2006  for 
being absent from duty w.e.f. 05-4-2013. She submitted a 
reply  to  the  same  on  14.4.2014  through  which  she 
explained that she had applied leave for one year; that the 
Director  Finance,  R.M.C./Allied  Hospital  issued  leave 
entitlement  as  EOL  without  pay  and  that  the  Medical 
Superintendent,  Benazir  Bhutto  Hospital,  Rawalpindi, 
forwarded  her  leave  application  along  with  the  leave 
certificate to the competent authority for its approval but 
the reply from the competent authority was not received. 
Moreover,  she  also  claimed  that  the  reminders  were 
issued  by  the  Medical  Superintendent,  Benazir  Bhutto 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        2 
Hospital, Rawalpindi for sanctioning of the said leave. It 
is  also  noted  that  through  this  reply  she  had  stated  that 
she did not know the process of long leave. She requested 
that  she  be  granted  leave  and  sought  permission  to  join 
her  duty  at  Benazir  Bhutto  Hospital  Rawalpindi  w.e.f. 
05-4-2014. In view of the above, she was given personal 
hearing  on  12-6-2014.  The  competent  authority  noted 
that  she  could  not  give  any  plausible  reason  of  her 
absence, therefore, she was compulsorily retired from the 
government  service  w.e.f.  05-4-2013,  vide  order  dated 
19-7-2014.  The  record  appended  with  the  instant  writ 
petition shows that she filed a departmental appeal dated 
12-9-2014. It needs to be noted that under  Section 16 of 
the  Punjab  Employees  Efficiency,  Discipline  and 
Accountability Act, 2006 the departmental appeal has to 
be  filed  within  thirty  (30)  days  from  the  date  of 
communication of the order. The said appeal as annexed 
with  the  petition  does  not  say  a  word  about  the  date  on 
which the said order dated 19-7-2014 was communicated 
to the petitioner, therefore, it seems that the departmental 
appeal itself was time barred. In any case, thereafter, the 
petitioner  applied  to  the  Chief  Minister’s  Office,  Punjab 
and  a  direction  was  issued  by  the  said  office  on  31-10-
2014, for appropriate action, as per the rules and policy. 
3. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  stated  that 
the  appeal  of  the  petitioner  is  still  pending  and  that  she 
cannot  approach  the  Service  Tribunal  without  the 
decision  of  her  departmental 
appeal, 
therefore, 
respondent No. 1 be directed to decide the same. In order 
to  substantiate  his  arguments  he  relied  upon  the  cases 
reported as:-  
(i) 
S.  H.  M.  Rizvi  and  5  others  versus  Maqsood 
Ahmad and 6 others (PLJ 1982 S.C. 24) = S. H. 
M.  Rizvi  and  5  others  versus  Maqsood  Ahmad 
and 6 others (PLD 1981 S.C. 612). 
 
 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        3 
(ii)  Abdul  Bari  Khadim  versus  Government  of 
Balochistan  through  Chief  Secretary  and  3 
others (2016 P.L.C. (C.S.) 177); & 
(iii)  Sultan  Khan  and  others  versus  Public 
Functionaries (2009 P.L.C. (C.S.) 77). 
4. 
He  further  contended  that  the  show  cause  notice 
was  based  on  misconceived  information,  otherwise  it  is 
evident that she was on earned leave for one year which 
had been properly approved by the authority.  
5. 
No  other  issue  was  raised  /  argued  by  the  learned 
counsel for the petitioner. However, in view of the above, 
he prayed that a direction be issued  to respondent  No. 1 
for  decision  of  the  departmental  appeal  as  early  as 
possible,  so  that,  the  petitioner  gets  a  final  order  in  her 
hands  and  this  will  enable  her  to  approach  the  Service 
Tribunal  by  way  of  filing  an  appeal  under  Section  4  of 
the Punjab Service Tribunals Act, 1974.  
6. 
The 
learned  counsel  for 
the  petitioner  was 
confronted with the provisions of Section 4 of the Punjab 
Service  Tribunals  Act,  1974 
to 
explain  how 
constitutional jurisdiction could be exercised at this stage 
to rescue the petitioner from the time limit prescribed in 
the  said  Section  for  filing  of  an  appeal  before  the  said 
Tribunal.  In  response  to  the  above  noted  issue,  he 
referred to the above noted judgments wherein the courts 
had  either  given  directions  for  decision  on  departmental 
appeals or it was held that the relevant authorities should 
decide the cases pending before them.  
7. 
Heard. Record perused. 
8. 
In  order  to  appreciate  the  issue  at  hand,  it  is 
imperative  to  consider  the  relevant  provisions  of  the 
Punjab Service Tribunals Act, 1974:- 
 
 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        4 
―4.  Appeal 
to  Tribunals.—(1)  Any  civil  servant 
aggrieved  by  any  final  order,  whether  original  or 
appellate, made by a departmental authority in respect 
of  any  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  his  service  may, 
within  thirty  days  of  the  communication  of  such  order 
to him or within six months of the establishment of the 
appropriate  Tribunal,  whichever  is  latter  prefer  an 
appeal to the Tribunal – 
 
Provided that— 
 
(a) 
when  an  appeal,  review  or  representation  to  a 
departmental  authority  is  provided  under  the 
Punjab  Civil  Servants  Act,  1974,  or  any  rules 
against  any  such  order  no  appeal  shall  lie  to  a 
Tribunal  unless  the  aggrieved  civil  servant  has 
preferred an appeal or application for review or 
representation  to  such  departmental  authority 
and a period of ninety days has elapsed from the 
date  on  which  such  appeal,  application  or 
representation was so preferred;‖  
The  above noted statutory  provision  clearly  provides for 
the  timeline  that  needs  to  be  followed  by  an  aggrieved 
civil  servant  in  respect  of  any  adverse  order  passed  / 
made by a departmental authority, in respect of his terms 
and conditions of service.  
9. 
Turning  to  the  case  law  submitted  by  the  learned 
counsel for the petitioner, it is clear that all these cases do 
not  support  the  contentions  of  the  learned  counsel,  as 
noted below:-                   
(i) 
S.  H.  M.  RIZVI  AND  5  OTHERS  VERSUS 
MAQSOOD  AHMAD  AND  6  OTHERS  (PLD 
1981 S.C. 612) [THE SAME JUDGMENT HAS 
BEEN REPORTED AS PLJ 1982 S.C. 24]. 
It  may  be  noted  that  there  is  a  misprint  in  the  citation 
regarding  the  page.  The  correct  citation  is  PLJ  1982 
Supreme Court 36.  
In  this  case  the  issue  before  the  Apex  Court  was 
that whether the appeal before the Service Tribunal 
had  been  pre-maturely  filed  or  not.  The  Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  after  taking  into 
consideration  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 
case,  while  setting  aside  the  judgment  of  the 
 
 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        5 
Service  Tribunal,  dismissed  the  service  appeal, 
finding  it  incompetent.  That  case  related  to  a 
seniority  list  to  which  objections  had  been  filed. 
The covering letter that circulated the seniority list 
clearly stated as follows:- 
―The  seniority  list  is  circulated  amongst  the 
officers  concerned,  who  are  requested 
to 
acknowledge  its  receipt.  Objection,  any,  may 
please be filed by the 8th May, 1976 at the latest. 
No  objection  shall  be  entertained  if  received 
after prescribed date.‖      
The  respondent  therein,  filed  an  objection  to  the 
said list on 4-05-1976 and after waiting for ninety 
days  he  filed  an  appeal  before  the  said  Tribunal, 
treating the seniority list dated 21-4-1976 to be the 
final order within the  meaning of Section 4 of the 
Service Tribunal Act. The Tribunal concluded that 
the  said  list  had  become  final  within  the  meaning 
of  sub-section  (1)  of  Section  4  of  the  Service 
Tribunals  Act,  1974.  The  Honourable  Supreme 
Court of Pakistan held that:-  
―Right  of  appeal  has  been  conferred  by 
subsection  (1)  of  section  4  only  against  a  ―final 
order  whether  original  or  appellate‖.  A  final 
order  has  the  distinction  of  determining  the 
rights  of  the  parties.  Where  any  further  step  is 
necessary  to  perfect  an  order,  in  this  case  the 
disposal of the objections received or finalization 
of the provisional seniority list, the order cannot 
be taken to be final. An order may be final, if it 
determines  the  rights  of  the  parties,  concludes 
the  controversy  so  far  as  a  particular  authority 
or forum is concerned notwithstanding that such 
an order may be open to challenge in appeal etc. 
This  aspect  of  the  concept  of  the  finality  of  an 
order  has  been  taken  care  of  by  adding  the 
words  ―whether  original  or  appellate‖  in  the 
enacted law itself.‖ 
The  Honourable  Supreme  Court of  Pakistan further held 
that:-  
―The  proviso  (a)  to  subsection  (1)  of  section  4  of  the 
Service Tribunal Act relied upon by the learned counsel 
for  the  respondent  has  not  the  slightest  effect  of 
detracting from the finality of the order to be appealed 
against. What it accomplishes is that even a final order 
 
 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        6 
should not be brought before the Services Tribunal if a 
right  of  appeal,  review  or  representation 
to  a 
departmental  authority  is  provided  under  the  law, 
unless  that  right  has  been  availed  of  and  the  specified 
number  of  90  days  has  elapsed  without  a  substitutive 
order.  The  object  of  it  all  appears  to  be  to  encourage, 
ensure and emphasize  the redress  of service grievances 
within  the  departmental  hierarchy  before  ventilating 
them  in  the  Service  Tribunal.  As  there  was  no  final 
order  ever  passed  on  the  objection  of  the  respondent 
nor  was  the  seniority  list  finalized  his  appeal  was  not 
competent under section 4 of the Service Tribunal Act.‖  
In view of the above noted circumstances the Honourable 
Supreme Court of Pakistan observed that:-  
―It  is  either  a  right  of  appeal  or  a  right  to  make  a 
representation.  In  cases  where 
the  departmental 
authorities  procrastinate  or  contumaciously  refuse  to 
pass  a final  order, as  appears  to have happened on the 
objection  of  the  respondent  (for  the  objection  filed  in 
1976 remains to date undisposed of and the provisional 
list that issued in 1976 is yet to be finalized) the remedy 
for the aggrieved civil servant is to represent to the next 
higher authority and after waiting for a reasonable time 
to  seek  Constitutional  remedy  for  a  direction  to  the 
departmental  authority  to  perform  a  duty  enjoined 
upon it by law. The  Service Tribunal  being a statutory 
forum with restricted jurisdiction cannot in the absence 
of a final order of departmental authority adjudicate on 
all legitimate grievances of civil servants.‖  
10.  The  above  noted  case  does  not  support  the 
contentions  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  for 
the reason that the petitioner in the instant case does have 
the  original  order  with  her  and  under  the  provisions  of 
the Clause (a) of the proviso of sub-section (1) of Section 
4  of  the  Punjab  Service  Tribunals  Act,  1974  she  was 
required  to  approach  the  Service  Tribunal  within  one 
month  of  the  expiry  of  90  days,  after  having  filed  the 
departmental  appeal.  Unfortunately,  she  has  approached 
this Court in the year 2018 and now seeks a direction to 
the  respondent,  Chief  Secretary  Punjab  to  decide  the 
departmental appeal of the petitioner which she had filed 
on 12-9-2014. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in 
the above noted case had also observed that the aggrieved 
person  is  to  wait  for  a  reasonable  time  to  seek 
constitutional remedy for a direction to the departmental 
 
 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        7 
authority to perform the duty enjoined upon it by law. It 
needs to be noted that this was so said by the Apex Court 
for  the  reason  that  there  was  no  final  order  either 
“original” or “appellate” with the civil servants who were 
parties to that case.   
(ii)  ABDUL 
BARI 
KHADIM 
VERSUS 
GOVERNMENT BALOCHISTAN THROUGH 
CHIEF  SECRETARY  AND  3  OTHERS    (2016 
PLC(CS) 177) 
In this case a direction was sought for the decision 
of  the  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner  so  that  he 
could  approach  the  Balochistan  Service  Tribunal 
by filing a service appeal for recovery of his salary 
etc.  The  learned  Balochistan  High  Court  while 
allowing 
the  petition  directed 
the  competent 
authority  to  decide  the  appeal  of  the  petitioner, 
within one month and noted as follows:- 
to 
―6. 
The point of limitation though agitated by 
both  the  counsel  for  the  petitioner  and  the 
Assistant  Advocate-General,  but  as  the  only 
effective order prayed in the petition pertains to 
issuance  of  a  direction 
the  concerned 
authority  for  making  a  decision  on  appeal 
pending before it, thus there is no need to go into 
merit  of  the  case  and  record  findings  on 
maintainability  of  the  petition  with  reference  to 
the  provisions  containing  the  stipulated  period 
for  filing  of  an  appeal  before  the  Service 
Tribunal.  This  issue  left  for  decision  of  the 
Service Tribunal, the relevant forum.‖    
I,  very  humbly  and  with  all  due  respect  to  that  learned 
court,  tend  to  disagree  with the  same  for  the  reason  that 
there  would  be  no  question  of  limitation  left  for  the 
Tribunal  to  decide,  as  an  aggrieved  civil  servant  has  to 
approach  the  Service  Tribunal  within  the  stipulated 
period  of  30  days.  Even  if  his  appeal  is  not  decided  he 
has  to  approach  the  said  Tribunal  within  the  prescribed 
period.  If  such  a  direction  is  issued  while  exercising 
constitutional  jurisdiction  and  in  compliance  thereof  the 
competent 
authority 
decides 
the 
departmental 
 
 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        8 
appeal/representation / review, as the case may be, then a 
new  lease  of  life  is  given  to  the  civil  servant,  which 
would  result  into  defiance  of  the  statutory  law.  As  a 
consequence  of  the  direction  issued  by  that  Honourable 
Court, the Service Tribunal could only decide the case on 
merits  and  not  on  the  issue  of  limitation.  On  the  other 
hand,  another  consequence  of  such  a  direction  having 
been  given  may  result  into  multiplicity  of  litigation.  In 
case of non-compliance by the departmental authority, in 
the  face  of  such  a  direction,  the  petitioner  may  file  a 
contempt  petition.  Confronted  with  such  a  situation,  the 
Departmental  authority  will  either  have  to  comply  with 
the  direction  or  face  the  consequences  under  the  law  of 
contempt. On  the other  hand, it  may  challenge  the same 
before the Apex Court. This clearly is not the intention of 
the governing law.      
(iii)  SULTAN  KHAN  AND  OTHERS  VERSUS 
PUBLIC  FUNCTIONARIES  (2009  PLC  (CS) 
77) 
In  this  case  the  departmental  appeal  of  the 
petitioners  dated  12-4-2007 
regarding 
their 
entitlement to “generation allowance” was pending 
before  the  respondent.  Their  claim  before  the 
constitutional  court  was  that  the  decision  of  the 
said  appeals  was  being  delayed  without  any 
reason.  This  writ  petition  was  filed  in  2008  and 
decided  on  21-5-2008.  The  Honourable  Court,  in 
limine,  issued  a  direction  to  the  respondent  for 
deciding  the  departmental  appeals  within  one 
month.  
I again very humbly and with utmost respect do not agree 
with the above noted judgment for the reason that the law 
clearly  caters  for  the  situation  at  hand, i.e.,  that  in  cases 
where  the  departmental  appeals  are  not  decided  within 
the stipulated time period, the aggrieved civil servant can 
 
 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        9 
approach the Service Tribunal after the expiry of 90 days 
and the maximum period within which the said Tribunal 
can be approached is the next thirty days. This case again 
does not help the petitioner, as the stance taken before the 
competent authority by her was that she was not aware of 
the  procedure  for  long  leave.  It  is  also  noted  from  the 
record  placed  with  the  instant  petition  that  she  willfully 
absented  herself  without  obtaining  prior  leave.  It  is 
further  noted  that  the  petition  in  hand,  as  is  self-evident 
from  the  record,  that  after  October,  2014  she  did  not 
bother  to  contact  anyone  of  the  relevant  authorities, 
hence  too, the  writ  petition  merits  dismissal.  Keeping  in 
view  the  above  noted  conduct  of  the  petitioner  and  the 
fact that she did not approach the Service Tribunal within 
the period provided for under the provisions of Section 4 
of  the  Punjab  Service  Tribunals  Act, 1974, the  direction 
prayed for cannot be granted. In reaching this conclusion, 
I am fortified by the case reported as Muhammad Naeem 
Vs.  Director  Public  Instruction  (SE),  Punjab  and 
another (2018 PLC (C.S.) Note 52). 
11. 
It is also noted that the matter relates to the terms 
and conditions of service for which the Service Tribunal 
is  the  appropriate  forum.  In  such  circumstances  the  bar 
contained  in  the  Article  212  of  the  Constitution  of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 is also fully attracted. 
It is further noted that certain other precedents have also 
been mentioned in various paragraphs of the writ petition 
but these were not referred to by the learned counsel for 
the petitioner and rightly so as they related to the merits 
of  the  case.  It  also  needs  to  be  noted  that  the  petitioner 
has  not  sued  the  Province  of  Punjab  in  accordance  with 
the provisions of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of  Pakistan,  1973  (Article  174)  read  with  the  Code  of 
Civil  Procedure,  1908,  (Section  79)  hence  too  this 
 
 
W.P. No.3322/2018                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
        10 
petition  merits  dismissal.  Reference  is  made  to  cases 
reported 
as  ―Government  of  Balochistan  VS. 
Nawabzada Mir Tariq Hussain Khan Magsi & Others 
2010  SCMR  115  &  Province  of  Punjab  VS. 
Muhammad  Hussain  PLD  1993  SC  147.  In  the  above 
background,  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  set  the  ball  rolling  for 
the  petitioner  particularly  in  view  of  the  governing  law, 
resultantly, this petition is dismissed in limine.                                            
(SHAKIL-UR-REHMAN KHAN) 
JUDGE 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
Shabbir 
 
 
 
