 
 
 
 
          Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
    
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
 
 
 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
      WP No.14172/2012 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
Petitioners By: 
 
 
Mian Ayaz Anwar etc. 
Versus 
State Bank of Pakistan etc. 
 
     J U D G M E N T  
7.12.2018 
Mr. Shahid Ikram Siddiqui, Mr. Muhammad Imran 
Malik,  Mr.  Akif  Majeed  and  Syed  Muhammad 
Mohsin Raza, Advocates 
Mr. Salman Akrarm Raja, Mr. Tariq Bashir and Mr. 
Bilal Bashir. 
Syed  Shahab  Qutab  and  Mian  Taiq  Hassan, 
Advocates 
Mr.  Salman  Aslam  Butt,  Munawar-us-Salam,  Mr. 
Muhammad Shoaib Rashid, Mr. Walid Khalid, Mr. 
Usman  Akram  Sahi,  Mr.  Furqan  Naveed  and  Mr. 
Arslan Riaz, Advocates 
Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, Advocate. 
Ms.  Ayesha  Hamid  and  Mr.  Atta  Mustafa  Rizvi, 
Advocates 
Mian  Sultan  Tanvir  Ahmad,  Mr.  Usman  Ail 
Cheema and Hafiz Mubashr Ullah, Advocates 
Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhandari and Mian Muhammad 
Kashif, Advocates 
Ms. Saba Saeed Sheikh, Advocate 
Ch. Muhammad Amin Javed, Advocate  
Mian Asghar Ali, Advocate 
Mr. Nadeem Ahmad Sheikh, Advocate 
Mr. Muhammad Ahmad Pansota, Advocate 
Mr. Rab Nawaz Baloch, Advocate 
Mr. Jameel Ahsan Gill 
Mr. Asim Ali Chohan, Advocate 
WP No.14172/2012 
2 
Mr. Muhammad Umar Riaz, Advocate 
Ms.  Hina  Bandealy  and  Mr.  Khizar  Javed, 
Advocates 
Mr.  Haq  Nawaz  Chattha  and  Malik  Haider  Ali 
Langah, Advocates 
Mr. M. Salman Masood, Advocate 
Syed Zeeshan Haider Zaidi, Advocate 
Rao Muhammad Nasir Khan, Advocate 
Mr. Salman Safdar, Advocate 
Chaudhry Shahbaz Akhtar, Advocate 
Mr. Masood Sadiq, Advocate 
Mian Muhammad Faheem Bashir, Advocate 
Syed Amir Ali Shah, Advocate 
Mr.  Ashar  Elahi,  Mr.  Adnan  Kazmi  and  Mr. 
Ghulam Hussain Chaudhary, Advocates. 
Mr. Sardar Azeem Afrasiab, Advocate 
Mr. Nadeem Irshad, Advocate 
Ch. Amjad Iqbal Sandhu, Advocate 
Mian Zulfiqar Ali, Advocate 
Mr. Shahid Mehmood Khan, Advocate 
Respondents By: 
Mr. Nasar Ahmad, DAG. 
Mrs.  Samia  Khalid,  Addl.  AG  and  Ms.  Shazia 
Ashraf Khan, AAG 
Mr.  Arif  Mehmood  Rana,  Mr.  Haroon  Rasheed 
Cheema,  Mian  Nadeem  Ahmad  Qazi  and  Syed 
Faisal Raza Bukhari, Advocates for NAB 
Kh.  Muhammad  Farooq  and  Mr.  Abid  Hussain 
Advocates for State Bank of Pakistan 
Syed Murtaza Ali Zaidi, Advocate for MEPCO 
Mr.  Muhammad  Bilal  Akhtar 
Muhammad Ali, Advocates for NTDC. 
and  Sheikh 
Mr.  Imtiaz  Rashid  Siddiqui,  Mr.  Shehryar  Kasuri, 
Mr.  Muhammad  Asif  Butt,  Rana  Imtiaz  Siddiqui 
and  Mr.  Jamshid  Alam,  Advocates  for  Bank  of 
Punjab 
Mr.  Shezada  Mazhar  and  Mr.  Ghulam  Mustafa 
Malik,  Advocates  for  Saudi  Pak  Industrial  and 
Bank of Punjab/ 
Askari Bank/ Saudi 
Pak Industrial 
Company By: 
WP No.14172/2012 
3 
Agricultural Investment Company Limited 
Mr.  Adnan  Shuja  Butt,  Advocate  for  Bank  of 
Punjab 
Mr.  Rashdeen  Nawaz  Kasuri,  Mr.  Muhammad 
Akram Pasha, Mr. Nadeem Yousaf Rana and Malik 
Asad Ullah Waghra, Advocates for Bank of Punjab 
and Askari Bank Limited 
Mr.  Hfeez  Saeed  Akhtar,  Advocate  for  Saudi  Pak 
Industrial Company and Bank of Punjab 
Mr.  Nadeem  Yousaf  Rana,  Advocate  for  Bank  of 
Punjab and Askari Bank Limited 
Mian  Belal  Ahmad,  Mr.  Adil  Fayyaz,  Mr.  Rashid 
Mehmood  Gill  and  Mr.  Waqas  Mehmood  Gill, 
Advocates for Bank of Punjab 
Mr. A.W. Butt, Advocate for Bank of Punjab 
Mr. Nadeem Saeed, Advocate or Bank of Punjab 
Sardar  Qasim  Farooq  Ali,  Advocate  for  Bank  of 
Punjab 
Mr. Muhammad  Khalid  Sajjad  Khan,  Advocate for 
Saudi  Pak  Industrial  and  Agricultural  Investment 
Company Limited. 
Mr. Ahmad Pervaiz and Mr. Umar Toor, Advocates  
Mr.  Muhammad  Raza  Qureshi,  Rana  Haseeb 
Ahmad  Khan,  Mr.  Abdul  Ghaffar  Malik  and  Mr. 
Majid Ali Wajid, Advocates 
Mr. Iftikhar Hussain Shah, Advocate 
Mr. Husnain Ali Ramzan, Advocate 
Mr. Husnain Ali Ramzan, Advocate  
Ch. Hashim Hayat Wathra, Advocate 
Mr. Saqib Haroon Chishti, Advocate 
 
JS Bank By: 
MCB Bank By: 
NBP Bank By: 
NIB Bank By: 
Summit Bank By: 
Habib Metropolitan 
Bank Limited By: 
Punjab Provincial 
Cooperative Bank 
Limited By: 
 
 
Ayesha  A.  Malik  J:  This  common  judgment  decides  upon  the 
issues raised in the Writ Petitions detailed in Schedule “A”, appended with 
the judgment,  as all petitions raise common questions of law and facts. 
2. 
The  Petitioners  are  all  customers  of  different  financial  institutions 
who  have  availed  some  form  of  finance  from  the  Respondent  Banks. 
Respondent  No.1  is  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  which  is  arrayed  in  all  the 
WP No.14172/2012 
4 
Petitions. The other Banks are the Bank of Punjab, Askari Bank Limited, JS 
Bank,  MCB  Bank  Limited,  National  Bank  of  Pakistan,  Punjab  Provincial 
Cooperative  Bank  Limited,  Saudi  Pak  Industrial  Company,  NIB  Bank, 
Summit  Bank  and  Habib  Metropolitan  Bank  Limited  (“the  Banks”).  The 
Banks allege that the Petitioners owe money to the Banks for which, in some 
cases suit for recovery of finance have been filed before the competent court. 
During  the  pendency  of  the  aforementioned  suits  the  Banks  also  filed 
complaint  before  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  which  then  filed  reference 
under  Section  31D  of  the  National  Accountability  Ordinance, 1999  (“NAB 
Ordinance”)  before  the  National  Accountability  Bureau  (“NAB”)  calling 
for  an  inquiry  into  the  matter  of  willful  default  by  the  Petitioners.  In  some 
cases  direct  notices  were  issued  to  the  Petitioners  alleging  willful  default 
calling for immediate payment under the Financial Institutions (Recovery of 
Finances) Ordinance, 2001 (“FIO”).  
3. 
Consequently,  the  Petitioners  have  challenged;  (a)  notices  issued 
under Section 5(r) of the NAB Ordinance which called upon the Petitioners 
to  show  cause  within  seven  days  as  to  why  they  should  not  be  proceeded 
against  as  willful  defaulters  under  the  NAB  Ordinance;  (b)  notices  under 
Section  2(g)  of  the  FIO  calling  upon  the  Petitioners  to  pay  their  liability 
within  thirty  days  failing  which  the  Bank  shall  approach  the  investigating 
agency nominated by the Federal Government in terms of Section 20(7) and 
20(8) of the FIO to proceed against the act of willful default as defined under 
Section 2(g) of the FIO; and (c) notices under Section 19 read with Section 
31D  of  the  NAB  Ordinance  which  calls  upon  the  Petitioners  to  provide 
information for the investigation with reference to the amounts owed to the 
Banks.  The  notices  call  upon  the  Petitioners  to  provide  documentation  and 
details for the benefit of the combined investigation team, which is inquiring 
into  the  matter  of  willful  default  and  in  some  cases  called  upon  the 
Petitioners  to  show  cause  as  to  why  proceedings  should  not  be  initiated 
against  them  under  the  NAB  Ordinance  for  willful  default.  The  Petitions 
also challenged the vires of Section 5(r), 9, 19, 23, 27 and 31D of the NAB 
Ordinance  seeking  declaration  that  these  provisions  are  ultra  vires  of  the 
WP No.14172/2012 
5 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution") and are 
in  direct  conflict  with  the  provisions  of  the  subsequently  promulgated 
special law, the FIO. Some Petitioners have challenged the vires of Section 
2(g)  and  20(8)  of  the  FIO  for  being  ultra  vires  the  Constitution  giving 
unguided  and  excessive  power  to  the  Government  appointed  agency  to 
investigate into the matter of willful default. 
4. 
All the Petitioners before the Court are therefore aggrieved by various 
actions  taken  by  NAB  at  the  behest  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  and  the 
Banks who for the purposes of recovering amounts stated to be due from the 
Petitioners have alleged willful default in order to enable NAB or the Federal 
Investigating  Agency  (“FIA”)  to  recover  and  settle  the  debt  of  the  Banks. 
The  Petitioners‟  case  is  that  the  act  of  initiating  inquiry  or  investigation  or 
calling  upon  them  to  show  cause  on  allegations  of  willful  default  is  illegal 
and  contrary  to  the  mandate  of  the  FIO.  It  is  their  case  that  the  question 
whether there is default by a customer of a financial obligation to a financial 
institution  in  such  cases,  jurisdiction  vests  with  the  Banking  Court 
established under the FIO. It is for the Banking Court to determine whether 
there is default in the repayment of financial obligations and if the Banking 
Court  makes  a  determination  on  the  issue  of  default  then  the  question 
whether  the  default  was  willful  be  decided.  In  support  of  their  arguments, 
learned  counsel  have  relied  upon  “Syed  Mushahid  Shah  and  others  v. 
Federal Investment Agency and others” (2017 SCMR 1218) where the issue 
of  parallel  jurisdiction  has  been  decided  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  with  specific  reference  to  the  FIO  and  the  Banking  Courts 
established thereunder. It is also their case that NAB and the FIA‟s inquiry 
and  interference  is  an  infringement  of  their  fundamental  right  to  fair  trial 
under Article 10A of the Constitution. With respect to the provisions of the 
FIA  under  Section  20(8),  the  case  of  the  Petitioners  is  that  the  FIA  has  no 
jurisdiction  in  such  matters  and  the  impugned  provision  grants  immense 
discretionary powers to the FIA or any nominated Government agency so as 
to prejudice the basic rights of the customer. Their argument is the same as 
that for NAB, that parallel action by the FIA or any Government Agency, for 
WP No.14172/2012 
6 
pursuing criminal charges before the conclusion of the civil proceedings will 
seriously prejudice the rights of the Petitioners. It was argued that this power 
amounts  to  unfettered  discretion  at  the  hands  of  the  government  agency 
allowing them to harass and coerce the customer into paying amounts which 
are not due to the Banks. 
5. 
On behalf of the State Bank of Pakistan, the Bank of Punjab being the 
Respondents  in  most  of  the  cases,  along  with  other  Banks,  report  and 
parawise  comments  have  been  filed.  Learned  counsel  stated  that  the 
Governor State Bank of Pakistan can issue show cause notice under Section 
5(r) of the NAB Ordinance alleging therein the offence of willful default and 
subsequently,  can  make  recommendations  to  the  Chairman  NAB  for 
proceedings  against  a  willful  defaulter  in  order  to  ensure  recovery  of 
defaulted amounts. As per the NAB Ordinance, the Governor State Bank of 
Pakistan  makes  a  tentative  assessment  of  the  liability  and  issues  notices 
under  Section  31D  of  the  NAB  Ordinance.  Due  process  is  followed  and  a 
decision  with  respect  to  the  willful  default  is  made  under  the  NAB 
Ordinance.  Hence  there  is  no  violation  of  Article  10A  of  the  Constitution. 
Furthermore,  it  is  their  case  that  the  NAB  has  concurrent  jurisdiction  with 
the  Banking  Court  which  jurisdiction  has  been  rightly  exercised  by  the 
Respondents.  Even  otherwise 
they  argued 
that  civil  and  criminal 
proceedings can be conducted at the  same  time. Hence  there  is  no  merit in 
these petitions which are liable to be dismissed.  
6. 
Notice  in  terms  of  Section  XXVII-A  of  the  Civil  Procedure  Code, 
1908 has been issued to the Federation of Pakistan. On behalf of Federation, 
learned DAG stated that the Ministry of Law and Justice is not involved in 
these issues and no relief is claimed against the Federation. The issues raised 
in these petitions relate directly to the recovery of outstanding loans, which 
is a matter inter se the customer and the financial institutions and the State 
Bank  of  Pakistan.  As  to  the  vires  of  the  law  challenged,  the  learned  DAG 
argued that the laws are in consonance with the Constitution and the august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has  settled  the  issues  related  to  the  challenge 
WP No.14172/2012 
7 
against the vires of the NAB Ordinance in Khan Asfandyar Wali and others 
v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Cabinet  Division,  Islamabad  and  others 
(PLD 2001 SC 607). 
7. 
On  behalf  of  Respondent  No.3  NAB,  report  and  parawise  comments 
have also been filed. So far as the vires of the offence of willful default are 
concerned, these have been upheld by the august Supreme Court of Pakistan 
in  PLD  2001  SC  607(supra).  It  was  argued  that  in  terms  of  the  judgment 
certain  recommendations  were  made  with  reference  to  amending  the  NAB 
Ordinance  which  recommendations  were  duly  implemented  and  the  NAB 
(Amendment)  Ordinance,  2001  and  2002  were  promulgated  on  10.8.2001 
and 13.11.2002 respectively; that the purpose of the NAB Ordinance and the 
FIO is totally separate and distinct and each will work within the ambit of its 
own  objective.  It  is  their  case  that  no  harassment  is  made  out  to  the 
Petitioners and that NAB had acted strictly in accordance with law. Further 
these cases relate to misappropriation and criminal breach of trust along with 
corruption  and  loss  of  amounts  due  to  financial  institutions,  which  falls 
within  the  ambit  of  the  jurisdiction  vested  with  NAB.  Moreover  the  State 
Bank of Pakistan upon a request by the Bank of Punjab and the Respondents 
Banks probed into the matter of willful default by the Petitioners who were 
not  paying  the  amounts  due  to  the  Banks.  A  joint  investigation  team  was 
formed  to  calculate  the  outstanding  liability  of  the  Petitioners  and  after  a 
determination  was  made  by  the  investigation  team,  notices  were  issued  to 
the Petitioners giving them a fair chance to respond and explain why action 
should  not  be  taken  against  them  under  the  NAB  Ordinance  for  willful 
default.  
8. 
On the basis of what has been argued, the issues before the Court are 
the  vires  of  Section  5(r),  19  and  31D  of  the  NAB  Ordinance  and  whether 
NAB  can  conduct  an  inquiry  or  investigation  into  willful  default  by  a 
customer  of  a  financial  institution  especially  if  a  suit  for  recovery  of 
defaulted  amount  is  pending  before  the  competent  Banking  Court.  The 
question of jurisdiction is also involved that is whether the NAB Ordinance 
WP No.14172/2012 
8 
and  the  FIO  have  parallel  jurisdiction  to  determine  the  issue  of  willful 
default or whether FIO‟s jurisdiction takes precedence over NAB Ordinance. 
With  respect  to  the  FIO,  the  vires  of  Section  2(g)  ad  20(8)  are  under 
challenge  and  whether  Section  20(7)  and  (8)  gives  unfettered  discretion  to 
the  government  agency  nominated  to  investigate  the  offence  of  willful 
default.  
Relevant Law 
9. 
The basic law under challenge before this court is the NAB Ordinance 
specifically  the  powers  contained  in  Section  5(r),  19  and  31D.  For  ease  of 
reference, these provisions are reproduced hereunder:- 
5(r)  Willful default   
 
a  person  [or  a  holder  of  public  office]  is  said  to  commit  an 
offence  of  willful  default  under  this  Ordinance  if  he  does  not  pay  [or 
continues  not  to  pay]  or  return  or  repay  the  amount  [due  from  him]  to 
any  bank,  financial 
institution,  cooperative  society,  Government 
department statutory body or an authority established or controlled by a 
Government on the date that it became due [as per agreement containing 
the  obligation  to  pay,  return  or  repay  or]  according  to  the  laws,  rules, 
regulations,  instructions,  issued  or  notified  by  [the  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan,  or  the  bank,]  financial  institution,  cooperative  society, 
Government  Department,  statutory  body  or  an  authority  established  or 
controlled  by  a  Government,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  a  [thirty  days‟ 
notice has been given to] [such person or holder of public office] 
 
 
Provided  that  it  is  not  willful  default  under  this  Ordinance  if 
[such person or holder of public office] was unable to pay return or repay 
the amount as aforesaid on account of any willful breach of agreement or 
obligation  or  failure  to  perform  statutory  duty  on  the  part  of  any  bank, 
financial 
institution,  cooperative  society,  government  department, 
statutory body or an authority established or controlled by Government: 
 
 
Provided further that in the case of default concerning a bank or 
a  financial  institution  a  seven  days  notice  has  also  been  given  to  [such 
person  or  holder  of  public  office]  by  the  Governor,  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan: 
 
Provided  further  that  [the]  aforesaid  thirty  days  or  seven  days 
notice shall not apply to cases pending trial at  the time of promulgation 
of the National Accountability Bureau (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001. 
 
19 
Power to call for information   
The Chairman NAB or an officer of the NAB duly authorized by 
him  may, during the course of an inquiry or investigation of an offence 
under this Ordinance:- 
(a)  
call for information from any person for the purpose of satisfying 
himself  whether  there  has  been  any  contravention  of  the 
WP No.14172/2012 
9 
(b)  
(c)  
(d) 
(e)  
provisions  of  this  Ordinance  or  any  rule  or  order  made 
thereunder. 
require any person to produce or deliver any document or thing 
useful or relevant to the inquiry or investigation; 
examine any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances 
of the case; 
require  any  bank  or  financial 
institution,  notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
to  provide  any  information  relating  to  any  person  whosoever, 
including  copies  of  entries  made  in  a  bank‟s  or  a  financial 
institution‟s books such as ledgers, day books, cash books and all 
other  books  including  record  of  information  and  transactions 
saved  in  electronic    or  digital  form,  and  the  keepers  of  such 
books  or  records  shall  be  obliged  to  certify  the  copies  in 
accordance with law and  
where  there  is  reasonable  suspicion  that  any  person  is  involved 
in or is privy to an offence under this Ordinance, the Chairman 
NAB may, with the prior approval in writing of the High Court 
concerned, direct that surveillance of that person may be carried 
out  through  such  means  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  facts  and 
circumstances  of  the  case  and  the  Chairman  NAB  may  in  this 
regard  seeks  the  aid  and  assistance  of  any  Government  agency 
and the information so collected may be used as evidence in the 
trial under this Ordinance. 
that 
Provided 
the  copies  obtained  or 
information 
received or evidence collected under classes (d) and (e) shall be 
kept  confidential  and  shall  not  be  used  for  any  purpose  other 
than for legal proceedings under this Ordinance. 
 
 
31D 
Inquiry, investigation or proceedings in respect of imprudent 
bank loans, etc. 
 
 
Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  Ordinance  or  any 
other law for the time being in force, no inquiry, investigation or 
proceedings  in  respect  of  imprudent  loans,  defaulted  loans  or 
rescheduled loans shall be initiated or conducted by the National 
Accountability Bureau against any person, company or financial 
institution  without  reference  from  the  Governor,  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan: 
Provided  that  cases  pending  before  any  Accountability 
Court  before  coming  into  force  of  the  National  Accountability 
Bureau (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2000, shall continue to 
be  prosecuted  and  conducted  without  reference  from  the 
Governor, State Bank of Pakistan.  
10.  The  NAB  Ordinance  is  a  special  law,  promulgated  in  1999  to 
eradicate  corruption  and  corrupt  practices  and  to  hold  people  accused  of 
such  practices  accountable.  The  objective  of  the  law  is  to  protect  public 
WP No.14172/2012 
10 
money  and  ensure  its  recovery.  The  nature  of  investigation  and  inquiry 
under  the  NAB  Ordinance  is  therefore  a  kind  of  special  dealing  with 
offences which  are deemed necessary in order to protect public  money and 
ensure that the public exchequer is not deprived of amounts due to it. It also 
ensures that cases of corruption and corrupt practices are duly investigated in 
order  to  hold  accountable  persons  involved  in  the  abuse  of  authority  and 
office. At various different times, the provisions of the NAB Ordinance have 
been  challenged  for  being  ultra  vires  the  Constitution  and  the  fundamental 
rights enshrined thereunder. However, the august Supreme Court of Pakistan 
in  PLD  2001  SC  607  (supra)  has  upheld  the  provisions  of  the  NAB 
Ordinance stating therein that they are not ultra vires the fundamental rights 
or the Constitution.  
11.  The FIO is also a special law promulgated in 2001 to provide effective 
remedy  for  the  recovery  of  finances  extended  by  Banks  and  for  the 
fulfillment of obligation defined in Section 2(e) of the FIO in favour of the 
financial institution. The  FIO  prescribe the  procedure  to be  adopted  for  the 
purposes  of  invoking  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Banking  Court  for  recovery  of 
amounts  due  to  the  financial  institution  or  breach  of  any  obligation  as 
defined  under  the  FIO.  The  law  prescribes  for  a  special  procedure  to  be 
followed  when  filing  a  suit  under  the  FIO  and  also  prescribes  for  certain 
offences  which  are  triable  before  the  Banking  Court.  Hence  the  Banking 
Court  is  a  specialized  court  where  the  issue  of  „default‟  can  be  contested 
which  established  for  the  purposes  which  pass  judgment  and  decree  for 
recovery of outstanding amounts in cases of default.   
Opinion of the Court 
12.  So  far  as  the  question  of  vires  of  the  various  provisions  of  the  NAB 
Ordinance  are  concerned, in particular  Section  5(r)  and  Section  31D  of the 
NAB Ordinance, the matter in issue has already been decided by the august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  PLD  2001  SC  607(supra).  The 
petition before the august Supreme Court of Pakistan sought to challenge the 
vires of the NAB Ordinance, as amended from time to time, on the ground 
WP No.14172/2012 
11 
that the NAB Ordinance is ultra vires of the Constitution and is in violation 
of  the  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  under  the  Constitution.  The  Court 
considered several questions, of which two of the questions have again been 
raised  in  the  Petitions  before  this  Court  that  is  whether  there  is  parallel 
judicial  system  created  under  the  NAB  Ordinance  for  recovery  of  amounts 
due  in  disregard  to  the  provision  of  the  Constitution  and  whether  Section 
5(r) of the NAB Ordinance which defines “willful default” is ultra vires the 
constitutional  provisions.  The  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  examined 
the law in great detail on the question of parallel jurisdiction, holding therein 
that there is  no bar  under the  Constitution  to  investigate  and criminalize or 
prosecute  the  conduct  of  those  who  are  guilty  of  not  discharging  their 
contractual  obligation  in  repayment  of  loans.  The  Court  while  relying  on 
Syed  Zafar  Ali  Shah  and  others  v.  General  Pervez  Musharraf,  Chief 
Executive of Pakistan and others (PLD 2000 SC 869) held that there is no 
bar to promulgate legislation to make such conduct an offence, which should 
be duly investigated and prosecuted through fail trial. The Court also found 
that the provisions of the NAB Ordinance, in particular with reference to the 
creation  of  the  offence  of  willful  default  and  the  punishment  given 
thereunder  did  not  offend  Article  12  of  the  Constitution.  With  specific 
reference to Section 5(r) of the NAB Ordinance guidelines were provided so 
as  to  ensure  that  due  process  was  followed  and  those  accused  of  willful 
default get a fair trial. Consequently Section 31D of the NAB Ordinance was 
inserted  whereby  calling  for  a  report  from  the  Governor  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan  was  made  necessary  before  any  inquiry  or  investigation  under  the 
NAB  Ordinance.  The  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  concluded  that  by 
adopting  the  given  guidelines  an  investigation  may  reach  a  logical 
conclusion  and  it  will  ensure  that  in  cases  of  willful  default  due  process  is 
followed  for  the  purposes  of  the  investigation.  Therefore  we  find  that  the 
issue  of  the  vires  of  the  NAB  Ordinance  is  settled  on  the  basis  of  the 
judgment cited at PLD 2001 SC 607(supra). 
13.  On  the  issue  of  concurrent  jurisdiction  of  the  FIO  and  the  NAB 
Ordinance, in a case before the august Supreme Court of Pakistan, the trying 
WP No.14172/2012 
12 
of offences under a special law as opposed to the general law was considered 
in 2017 SCMR 1218 (supra). The question before the Court was whether the 
Banking Courts constituted under the FIO have exclusive jurisdiction to try 
offences mentioned therein, to the exclusion of the special courts constituted 
under  the  Offence  in  Respect  of  Banks  (Special  Courts)  Ordinance,  1984 
(“ORBO”),  the  courts  of  ordinary  criminal  jurisdiction  under  the  Code  of 
Criminal Procedure, 1989 (“Cr.P.C”) read with Pakistan Penal Code, 1960 
(“PPC”)  and  the  inquiry  and  investigation  by  the  FIA  under  the  Federal 
Investigation  Agency  Act,  1974  (“FIA  Act”).  In  these  cases  financial 
institutions filed complaints before the Special Courts constituted under the 
ORBO  and  the  FIA  Act  as  well  as  registered  FIRs  under  the  PPC  with 
respect to cheques that had been dishonoured. The customers approached the 
High  Court  challenging  the  exercise  of  jurisdiction  under  ORBO,  PPC  and 
FIA  Act  on  the  ground  that  the  Banking  Courts  established  under  the  FIO 
have  exclusive  jurisdiction  in  such  cases.  The  august  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  considered  the  case  at  length  and  held  that  as  a  consequence  of 
Section  4  of  the  FIO,  the  Banking  Courts  have  exclusive  jurisdiction  to 
determine whether an offence has been committed by a customer in terms of 
Section  20  of  the  FIO.  The  Court  also  held  that  the  FIO  shall  have  an 
overriding  effect  on  all  those  cases  which  are  covered  by  it,  concomitantly 
the offences not covered by the FIO would be triable under the ORBO. The 
reasons explained by the Court in para 16 of the judgment are as follows:-   
Were  both  laws  to  apply  concurrently  and  permit  of  parallel  platforms 
for  the  adjudication  of  offences  under  both  laws  then  banks/financial 
institutions would always choose to initiate proceedings under the more 
onerous  law,  in  this case  the  ORBO.  Such  an  interpretation  would  give 
banks/financial  institutions  unbridled  power  to  choose  the forum  before 
which  trial  of  offences  should  take  place,  and  they  would  obviously 
choose the Special Courts under the ORBO being more burdensome and 
prejudicial to the accused (as demonstrated above). A natural corollary is 
that  in  such  circumstances  the  Ordinance,  2001  would,  in  effect,  be 
rendered  redundant.  This  is  not  permissible  under  any  principle  of 
interpretation  of  law  when  the  Courts  are  trying  to  reconcile  two 
potentially conflicting laws; our duty is to bridge the gap between what is 
and what was intended to be. We are not willing to attribute redundancy 
to  the  legislature.  We  do  not  wish  to  give  financial  institutions  the 
unrestricted power to choose, when there has been an alleged dishonor of 
a cheque, between section 20(4) of the Ordinance, 2001 and Section 489-
F  of  the  P.P.C,  as  they  would  of  a  certainty  opt  to  initiate  proceedings 
WP No.14172/2012 
13 
under  the  latter  which  offence  carries  a  greater  punishment  than  the 
former.  
 
Hence  in  the  opinion  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  financial 
institution cannot choose whether to initiate proceedings under ORBO, PPC 
or FIA Act or whether to proceed under the FIO as the ability to make such a 
choice  means  giving  unfettered  power  to  the  financial  institution  enabling 
them to exert unfair power over the customer. The Court also opined that to 
allow ORBO, PPC or the FIA Act to operate concurrently with FIO would 
offend the provision of Article 25 of the Constitution which guarantees that 
all  citizens  are  equal  before  the  law  and  are  entitled  to  equal  protection  of 
law.  The  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  also  relied  on  Article  4  of  the 
Constitution  holding  that  customers  cannot  be  left  to  speculate  on  which 
offence they will be charged with, under which law and before which forum.  
That the rule of law requires law to be intelligible, clear and predictable for 
it to be accessible to citizens. Hence the court held that FIO would have an 
overriding effect over ORBO and PPC and the FIA Act.  
14.  On  this  premise  we  now  set  out  to  examine  the  question  of  „willful 
default‟ and whether the offence of willful default is to be decided under the 
FIO or can it be decided, in parallel proceedings under the NAB Ordinance. 
Section 5(r) was inserted in the NAB Ordinance on 3.2.2000 by Ordinance 
IV of 2000 and the 3 provisos were inserted in the NAB Ordinance vide the 
National Accountability Bureau (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 promulgated 
on 10.8.2001. This definition in Section 5(r) of the FIO has been interpreted 
in  The  State  through  Chairman  NAB  and  others  v.  Muhammad  Asif  Saigol 
and others (PLD 2016 SC 620) by the august Supreme Court of Pakistan to 
mean a deliberate and calculated refusal to pay. The august Supreme Court 
of  Pakistan  held  that  to  constitute  the  offence  of  “willful  default”  the 
prosecution, in addition to establishing default, has to prove that the default 
was  willful,  that  is  an  intentional  and  conscious  act.  Consequently  mere 
inability  to  pay  will not  constitute  the offence of  “willful  default”  meaning 
thereby  that  the  element  of  willfulness  must  be  present  where  there  is  a 
WP No.14172/2012 
14 
default.  „Willful  default‟  is  also  defined  in  Section  2(g)  of  the  FIO  as 
follows: 
 
2(g)  willful default  
 
 
(i) 
(ii) 
deliberate  or  international  failure  to  repay  any  finance, 
loan, advance or any financial assistance received by any 
person from financial institution after such payment has 
become due under the terms of any law or an agreement, 
rules or regulations issued by the State Bank of Pakistan; 
 
Utilization  of  finance, 
loan  advance  or  financial 
assistance  or  a  substantial  part thereof,  obtained  by  any 
person  from  a  financial  institution  for  a  purpose    other 
than  that  for  which  such  finance,  loan,  advance  or 
financial  assistance  had  been  obtained  and  payment  in 
part or full not made to the financial institution; or 
(iii) 
Removal, transfer, misappropriation or sale of any assets 
collateralized  to  secure  a  finance,  loan  advance  or 
financial assistance obtained from a financial institution 
without permission of such institution.” 
 
As  per  Section  2(g)  of  the  FIO,  “willful  default”  is  with  reference  to  the 
three separate situations. It is an intentional or deliberate failure to repay any 
finance, loan, advance or financial assistance received by a person which is 
due  under  the  terms  of  an  agreement  or  under  a  law.  It  also  includes  the 
wrongful use of finance that is not as per the purpose for which it was given 
and the misappropriation or sale of collateral or security given to a financial 
institution.  Hence  it  prescribes  three  different  cause  of  actions  for  willful 
default. Willful default is also an offence under Section 20 of the FIO in the 
following terms: 
20 
Provisions relating to certain offences 
20(7)  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  provided in any 
other  law  for  the  time  being  in  force,  action  in  respect  of  an 
offence of wilful default shall be taken by an investigating agency, 
to  be  nominated  in  this  behalf  by  the  Federal  Government,  on  a 
complaint  in  writing  filed  by  an  authorized  officer  of  a  financial 
institution after it has served a thirty days notice upon the borrower 
demanding payment of the loan, advance or financial assistance.  
 
(8) 
An  offence  of  willful  default  shall  be  cognizable,  non-
bailable and non-compoundable and punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to seven years or fine not exceeding the amount 
of default or with both. 
 
Any person convicted of the offence of willful default by a 
(9) 
Banking Court shall not be eligible to receive any loan, advance or 
WP No.14172/2012 
15 
finance from any financial institution for a period of ten years and 
shall  not  be  permitted  to  contest  any  election  as  a  member  of  the 
Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament),  any  Provincial  Assembly  or  a  local 
body  for  a  period  of  five  years,  after  serving  out  a  sentence  after 
conviction.  
 
 
In terms of the Section, the offence of willful default is with reference to the 
three situations stipulated in the definition under Section 2(g). Hence for the 
purposes  of  Section  20,  three  separate  offences  are  defined  in  Section  2(g) 
which  are  triable  under  Section  20(7)(8)  and  (9)  of  the  FIO.  In  terms  of 
Section  20,  an  offence  is  to  be  investigated  by  an  investigating  agency 
nominated  by  the  Federal  Government.  After  the  investigation  agency 
completes  its  investigation,  it  shall  tender  its  findings  before  the  Banking 
Court and thereafter the offence of willful default is triable by the Banking 
Court.  Therefore  the  Banking  Court  may  take  cognizance  of  a  deliberate 
failure to re-pay any finance, loan, advance or  financial assistance received 
by a person which is due under the terms of an agreement or under a law or 
the wrongful use of finance being an offence where finance is not used for 
the  purpose it  was given.  And  finally  the offence of removing,  transferring 
or  misappropriating  or  selling  any  of  the  security  provided  to  the  financial 
institution to secure the loan. These offences can be looked at separately and 
are  to be  tried  as individual offences  for the purposes of  Section 20(7),  (8) 
and (9) of the FIO. Essentially this means that a customer can be tried for the 
offence stipulated in Section 2(g)(i) or 2(g)(ii) or 2(g)(iii) of the FIO. In the 
majority cases before us the issue is that notwithstanding the powers of the 
Banking  Court  to  investigate  and  try  the  offence  of  willful  default  under 
Section  20  of  the  FIO,  NAB  also  has  the  power  to  investigate  and  try  the 
offence  of  “willful  default”.  Hence  the  question  is  which  law  will  take 
priority over the other and whether Section 20(7) can be invoked prior to a 
determination on the civil liability of default.  
15.  The FIO was promulgated on 30.8.2001 and Section 20(7), (8) and (9) 
were 
inserted  vide  Financial 
Institutions 
(Recovery  of  Finances) 
(Amendment)  Act  (XXXVII  of  2016)  in  2016.  Section  2(g)  of  the  FIO 
defines the offence of willful default and was also inserted in 2016 vide the 
WP No.14172/2012 
16 
Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances)  (Amendment)  Act  (XXXVIII 
of  2016).  Prior  to  2016  willful  default  was  an  offence  investigated  only 
under the NAB Ordinance. However after 2016 it is a specific offence triable 
by  the  Banking  Court.  From  what  has  been  argued  before  us,  the  NAB 
Ordinance  and  the  FIO  are  both  special  laws  dealing  with  the  offence  of 
“willful default”. The only difference is that the NAB Ordinance deals with 
the  offence  to  pay  that  which  is  stated  to  be  due  by  a  financial  institution 
whereas  the  FIO  gives  the  Banking  Court  jurisdiction  to  determine  if  a 
customer  has  committed  any  default  of  an  obligation  with  regard  to  any 
finance and has added the offence of willful default as stipulated in Section 
2(g) of the FIO. The august Supreme Court of Pakistan in 2017 SCMR 1218 
(supra)  examined  the  question  of  concurrent  jurisdiction  with  reference  to 
the FIO, PPC and ORBO in great detail. Para 9 of the stated Judgment reads 
as follows: 
Section 7(4) of the Ordinance, 2001 confers exclusive jurisdiction on 
the  Banking  Courts  with  respect  to  certain  matters  albeit  sub-section  (5) 
creates an exception to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Banking Courts. This 
confers  a  right  on  the  financial  institution  to  seek  any  remedy  before  any 
court or otherwise which may be available to it under the law by which the 
financial institution may have been established [Section 7(5)(a)]. According 
to Section 4 of the Ordinance, 2001 reproduced above, its provisions “shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 
other  law  for  the  time  being  in  force.”  This  is  essentially  a  non  obstante 
clause  which  is  defined  as  “A  phrase  used  in  documents  to  preclude  any 
interpretation  contrary  to  the  stated  object  or  purpose.  „Notwithstanding‟ 
means despite, in spite of or regardless of something. In this respect Justice 
G. P. Singh has aptly explained:-  
 
“A  clause  beginning  with  „notwithstanding  anything  contained 
in this Act or in some particular provision in the Act or in some 
particular  Act  or  in  any  law  for  the  time  being  in  force‟,  is 
sometimes appended to a section in the beginning, with a view to 
give  the  enacting  part  of  the  section  in  case  of  conflict  an 
overriding effect over the provision or Act mentioned in the non 
obstante  clause.  It  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  in  spite  of  the 
provision  or  Act  mentioned  in  the  non  obstante  clause,  the 
enactment  following  it  will  have  its  full  operation  or  that  the 
provisions  embraced  in  the  non  obstante  clause  will  not  be  an 
impediment for the operation of the enactment.”  
 
In the judgment reported as Packages Limited through its General Manager and 
others  Vs.  Muhammad  Maqbool  and  others  (PLD  1991  SC  258)  this  Court 
observed:-  
 
“In our opinion a 'non-abstante' clause operates as an ouster of 
the  earlier  provisions  only  where  there  is  a  conflict  and 
inconsistency between the earlier provisions and those contained 
WP No.14172/2012 
17 
in the later provision and, therefore, must be read in the context 
in which it is operating. Accordingly, a non-obstante clause will 
operate  as  ouster  only  if  an  inconsistency  between  the  two  is 
found to exist.”  
 
In  the  judgment  reported  as  Muhammad  Mohsin  Ghuman  and  others  v. 
Government  of  Punjab  through  Home  Secretary,  Lahore  and  others  (2013 
SCMR  85),  this  Court  cited  with  approval  a  passage  from  Interpretation  of 
Statutes by N. S. Bindra which reads as under:-  
 
It has to be read in the context of what the legislature conveys in 
the enacting part of the provision. It should first be ascertained 
what  the  enacting  part  of  the  section  provides  on  a  fair 
construction  of  words  used  according  to  their  natural  and 
ordinary  meaning  and  the  non  obstante  clause  is  to  be 
understood as operating to set aside as no longer valid anything 
contained in relevant existing law which is inconsistent with the 
new  enactment.  The  enacting  part  of  a  statute  must, where  it  is 
clear,  be  taken  to  control  the  non  obstante  clause  where  both 
cannot be read harmoniously, for even apart from such clause a 
later law abrogates earlier laws clearly inconsistent with it.  
The  proper  way  to  construe  a  non  obstante  clause  is  first  to 
ascertain the meaning of the enacting part on a fair construction 
of  its  words.  The  meaning  of  the  enacting  part  which  is  so 
ascertained is then to be taken as overriding anything inconsistent 
to  that  meaning  in  the  provisions  mentioned  in  the  non  obstante 
clause.  A  non  obstante  clause  is  usually  used  in  a  provision  to 
indicate that that provision should prevail despite anything to the 
contrary in the provision mentioned in such non obstante clause. 
In  case  there  is  any  inconsistency  between  the  non  obstante 
clause and another provision one of the objects of such a clause is 
to indicate that it is the non obstante clause which would prevail 
over  the  other  clauses.  It  does  not,  however,  necessarily  mean 
that there  must  be  repugnancy  between  the  two provisions in  all 
such cases. The principle underlying non obstante clause may be 
invoked only in the case of 'irreconcilable conflict'.”  
 
From  the  above  it  is  clear  that  the  non  obstante  clause  of  Section  4  of  the 
Ordinance,  2001  has  been  used  by  the  legislature  to  give  the  provisions  of  the 
said Ordinance an overriding effect over any other law for the time being in force 
which may be contrary thereto. The use of the word „notwithstanding‟ in Section 
4  ibid  indicates  the  legislative  intent  to  avoid  the  operation  of  conflicting 
provisions, by providing that in the event of such conflict, the provisions of the 
Ordinance, 2001 would take precedence over any such inconsistent law.   
 
In terms of these findings, the FIO is a special law which gets priority over 
the  ORBO,  the  Cr.PC  and  the  PPC  to  try  the  same  offence,  hence  the 
Banking  Court  has  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  try  such  cases.  On  the  same 
analogy the FIO will have exclusive jurisdiction to try the offence of “willful 
default” where the matter is between a customer and a financial institution. 
In  terms  of  Section  7(4)  of  the  FIO,  the  Banking  Court  has  exclusive 
jurisdiction  with  all  matters  falling  within  its  domain  under  the  FIO.  Not 
only does the FIO prevail on account of being promulgated later in time but 
WP No.14172/2012 
18 
also  because  the  FIO  is  a  special  law  which  gives  exclusive  jurisdiction  to 
the Banking Court to establish whether or not there has been a “default” by a 
customer in the fulfillment of any “obligation” with regard to any finance as 
defined under Section 2 of the FIO. The definition of “obligation” as given 
under  the  FIO  includes  a  vast  number  of  situations  which  tantamount  to  a 
breach and includes the issue of determining whether any amounts are due to 
the  financial institution.  Since  the  Banking  Court  has exclusive  jurisdiction 
to determine the question of “default” it also has exclusive jurisdiction to try 
the offence of “willful default” under Section 20 of the FIO. In the event that 
there are two different forums adjudicating  or investigating on the question 
of  “willful  default”  at  the  same  time,  means  that  there  is  a  likelihood  of 
conflicting  judgments  or  findings  not  to  mention  that  parallel  proceedings 
can  prejudice  the  rights  of  a  customer  charged  for  willful  default  against 
whom  the  issue  of  default  is  yet  to  be  established.  Hence  in  the  context  of 
the  definition  given  in  Section  2(g)(i)  of  the  FIO,  “willful  default”  is  an 
intentional failure to pay that which is due to the financial institution. In all 
such cases, the element of “default” precedes the criminality  of the offence 
of  willfulness,  meaning  thereby  that  the  question  of  default  must  be 
established first as per the prescribed procedure under the FIO, before it can 
be alleged that the default was deliberate or intentional.  
16. 
In  this  regard  NAB  is  a  special  law  which  is  to  look  into  corruption 
and  corrupt  practices  and  hold  the  persons  involved  in  such  practices  as 
responsible.  Section  5(r)  of  the  NAB  Ordinance  was  inserted  by  way  of 
Ordinance  No.IV  of  2000  dated  3.2.2000.  The  Section  provides  for  the 
offence of “willful default” which offence is limited to the extent of payment 
of  amounts  stated  to  be  due  by  a  financial  institution,  giving  the 
Accountability  Court  jurisdiction  to  decide  cases  of  willful  default  and 
giving  investigative  powers  to  the  NAB  against  any  customer  complained 
against  by  the  financial  institution  through  the  Governor  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan  as  per  Section  19  or  Section  31D  which  was  also  inserted  on 
5.7.2000 vide Ordinance No.XXIV. At the time the FIO did not include the 
definition of willful default nor was willful default an offence under Section 
WP No.14172/2012 
19 
20  of  the  FIO,  hence  NAB  had  jurisdiction  in  such  cases.  However  as  we 
have  already  held  that  the  FIO  will  take  priority  over  the  NAB  Ordinance 
with respect to the offence of “willful default”. Consequently Section 5(r) or 
Section  31D  of  the  NAB  Ordinance  and  any  other  related  proceedings 
cannot  be  invoked  by  NAB  simultaneously  with  the  FIO  or  prior  to  the 
determination of default of an obligation to pay under the FIO. We find that 
this  gives  unfettered  power  to  the  financial  institution  to  use  the  NAB 
Ordinance as a means to exert unfair pressure on customers to pay amounts 
which  may  be  disputed  or  which  they  are  not  in  default  of,  for  which 
adjudication  is  necessary.  Furthermore  it  allows  financial  institution  to 
bypass  the  mechanism  prescribed  under  the  FIO  and  compel  customers  to 
pay amounts alleged to be due to financial institutions without any chance of 
exercising  their  rights  under  the  FIO.  Even  otherwise  as  we  have  already 
observed that the offence of willfulness will come after the civil liability of 
default, in an obligation to pay, is determined as there has to be an obligation 
to  pay  before  it  can  be  alleged  that  the  obligation  to  pay  was  deliberately 
avoided. Section 20(7) of the FIO can only be invoked once the civil liability 
of default has been established. 
17.  So  far  as  the  offences  in  Section  2(g)(ii)  and  (iii)  of  the  FIO  are 
concerned, they  provide  for independent offences  which can be  tried under 
Section  20  of  the  FIO  independent  of  any  determination  of  a  default  in  an 
obligation  to  pay.  Neither  offences  are  dependent  on  the  civil  liability  of 
„default‟ under Section 9 of the FIO as they are offences due to the very act 
of  the  customer.  So  if  a  customer  utilizes  the  finance  obtained  from  a 
financial institution for purposes other than for which it was given for or if a 
customer  removes,  transfers  or  misappropriates  collateral  or  security  of  the 
financial 
institution, 
then 
the  act  of  such 
removal, 
transfer  or 
misappropriation constitutes an offence for which criminal proceedings can 
be  initiated  under  Section  20  of  the  FIO.  A  lot  has  been  argued  with 
reference to the power given to a government agency for investigating into 
the offence of “willful default” under Section 20(7). However, we find that 
the power is simply to investigate, that too on a complaint filed in writing by 
WP No.14172/2012 
20 
the  Bank  and  after  securing  a  thirty  days‟  notice.  Hence  it  is  neither 
unconstitutional  nor excessive. The  Banking  Court  being  the  special  forum 
to try offences under the FIO is the proper forum to try the offence of willful 
default and in this regard in terms of the provisions of Section 20(7) once the 
civil  liability  of  default  is  established  the  offence  of  willfulness  can  be 
investigated  by  the  FIA  or  any  other  nominated  Federal  Government 
Agency. Offences under Section 2(g)(ii) and (iii) however are not dependent 
on the determination of the civil liability and can be investigated in terms of 
Section  20(7)  by  the  nominated  government  agency.  In  all  such  cases  the 
Banking Court will try the offence of willful default as per Section 20 of the 
FIO.  
18.  WP  Nos.28883/14,  31141/15  and  13400/16  challenge  the  NAB 
Ordinance  as  according  to  them  the  same  has  been  repealed. However, the 
said three petitions stand dismissed on account of the fact that this issue has 
already  been  decided  by  a  learned  Full  Bench  of  this  Court  vide  judgment 
dated 31.8.2018 passed in WP No.196881/2018. 
19.  Under the circumstances and in view of the aforesaid, the petitions are 
decided in the following terms: 
 
 
(i)  All  Petitions  as  detailed  in  Schedule  “A”  which  challenge 
notices  issued  under  Section  5(r),  19  and  31D  of  the  NAB 
Ordinance  or  related  thereto  and  notices  issued  by  the  FIA 
under  Section  2(g)  read  with  Section  20  of  the  FIO  or  related 
thereto  are  allowed  and  the  stated  notices  are  declared  to  be 
illegal, hence set aside. 
(ii)  The  petitions  which  challenge  notices  issued  under  Section 
2(g)(iii)  of  the  FIO  being  WP  Nos.241265/18,  231658/18  and 
237281/18  are  dismissed  on  account  of  the  fact  that  they 
constitute an independent offence;   
WP No.14172/2012 
21 
(iii)  WP Nos.28883/14, 31141/15 and 13400/16 which challenge the 
vires  of  the  NAB  Ordinance  after  promulgation  of  the 
Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010 are dismissed 
on  account  of  the  fact  that  this  issue  has  already  been  decided 
by  a  learned  Full  Bench  of  this  Court  vide  judgment  dated 
31.8.2018  passed  in  WP  No.196881/2018  titled  Lawyers 
Foundation for Justice v. Federation of Pakistan etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ayesha A. Malik) 
Judge 
(Ali Akbar Qureshi) 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
         (Sadaqat Ali Khan) 
                  Judge 
Announced in an open Court on 24.12.2018. 
 
 
 
 
      Judge 
      Judge 
       Judge 
 
 
Approved for Reporting 
       Judge 
 
 
