     Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Civil Revision No.9/2014  
(Abid Husssain Shah etc.   Versus    Aurangzeb etc.)  
 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of Hearing 
15.06.2017 
Petitioners by: 
Mr. Hafeez-ur-Rehman Mirza, Advocate.  
Respondents by:  
Mr. Arshad Malik Awan, Advocate.  
 
 
 
 
Atir Mahmood, J.   Brief  facts  of 
the  case  are 
that 
the 
petitioners filed a suit for declaration with the averments that father of 
the  petitioners  namely  Muhammad  Ashraf  Ali  Shah  owned  land 
measuring 41 kanals 19 marlas out of Khata No.515/476 (total land 78 
kanals 10 marlas) and land measuring 4-kanals 6 marlas out of Khata 
No.516/477  (total  land  16  kanals)  i.e.  46  kanals  5  marlas  in  the 
revenue  estate  of  Mauza  Farid  Mahmood  Kathia,  Tehsil  Shorkot, 
District  Jhang  who  had  two  wives;  that  the  petitioners  are  sons  and 
daughters of his first wife whereas respondents No.1 to 5  (hereinafter 
called  “the  respondents”)  are  from  his  second  wife;  that  it  is  the 
assertion of the respondents that predecessor of the parties transferred 
the  said  property  in  their  favour  vide  mutation  No.1870  on 
17.04.2000;  that  the  predecessor  of  the  parties  after  remaining 
confined to bed for a long time ultimately expired in March, 2001 on 
account  of  failure  of  his  kidney;  that  the  deceased  had  attack  of 
paralysis  and  he  was  unable  to  speak  or  move  due  to  which  he  was 
confined  to  bed  till  his  death;  that  the  respondents  taking  undue 
benefit  of  illness  of  father  of  the  parties  got  transferred  the  property 
through said mutation by way of gift in connivance with the revenue 
staff; that the deceased never went to Patwari or Revenue Officer nor 
he appeared before any such officer to make statement with regard to 
said gift; that the transaction of gift is forged and fictitious, therefore, 
the same be declared so.  
Civil Revision No.9/2014 
2 
2. 
The  respondents  contested  the  suit  by  way  of  filing  written 
statement. Out of divergent pleadings of the parties, following issues 
were framed:  
ISSUES 
1.  Whether  the  plaintiffs  and  defendant  No.6  are  the  legal 
heirs of the deceased Muhammad Ashraf Ali Shah and as 
such  they  are  owners  in  possession  of  the  disputed 
property? OPP.  
2.  Whether the mutation No.1870 decided on 17.04.2000 in 
favour  of  defendants  No.1  to  5  is  against  law,  based  on 
fraud,  collusion  and  inoperative  upon  the  rights  of  the 
plaintiffs? OPP. 
3.  Whether  the  plaintiffs  are  entitled  to  get  the  declaratory 
decree for the suit land as prayed for? OPP. 
4.  Whether the plaint is not maintainable in its present form 
and is liable to be dismissed? OPD. 
5.  Whether the plaintiffs are not in possession over the suit 
land and the suit is not maintainable? OPD.  
6.  Whether the suit by the plaintiffs is liable to be dismissed 
in  lieu  of  concealment  of  facts  as  averred  through  serial 
No.6 of the written statement? OPD. 
7.  Whether the suit by the plaintiffs is liable to be dismissed 
as the same is hit by the rule of estoppel?OPP.  
After  framing  of  issues,  evidence  of  the  parties  was  recorded.  Then, 
learned  trial  court  dismissed  the  suit  of  the  petitioners-plaintiffs  vide 
judgment  and  decree  dated  26.04.2012.  The  appeal  preferred 
thereagainst  was  also  dismissed  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 
01.10.2013  passed  by  learned  lower  appellate  court.  Hence  this  civil 
revision  has  been  filed  assailing  both  the  judgments  and  decrees  of 
learned courts below.  
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  inter  alia  contends  that 
attestation  of  gift  mutation  was  a  subsequent  step  prior  to  which  the 
gift had been made by the donor but the written statement as well as 
the evidence of the respondents is totally silent as to how, when and in 
whose  presence  the  property  was  gifted  to  them;  that  no  proof  of 
Civil Revision No.9/2014 
3 
family settlement as asserted by the respondents has been brought on 
record;  that  when  the  ingredients  of  gift  were  missing,  the  gift 
mutation  in  favour  of  the  respondents  could  not  sustain;  that  the 
learned  courts  below  have  utterly  overlooked  this  aspect  and  have 
passed the judgments and decrees against the law, therefore, this civil 
revision be allowed, the impugned judgments and decrees be set aside 
and the suit of the petitioners be decreed as prayed for.   
4. 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submits 
that  there  are  concurrent  findings  of  law  and  fact  against  the 
petitioners  which  are  immune  from  interference  by  this  Court  in  its 
revisional  jurisdiction;  that  the  predecessor  of  the  parties  had  gifted 
the  property  to  the  plaintiffs  and  the  defendants;  that  when  the 
plaintiffs had themselves received the property through gift, they were 
estopped to  challenge  the gift  made  in  favour of  the  defendants;  that 
there was family settlement between the parties in light of which some 
property  was  gifted  out  to  the  plaintiffs  and  some  to  the  defendants. 
He  asserts  that  this  civil  revision  is  without  any  merit  and  the  same 
merits dismissal.  
5. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
6. 
The  moot  point  in  this  case  is  as  to  whether  the  property  was 
gifted out to the respondents-defendants validly and lawfully or not.  
7. 
The  petitioners  have  specifically  challenged  gift  mutation 
No.1870 dated 17.04.2000 allegedly got attested by predecessor of the 
parties  Muhammad  Ashraf  Ali  Shah.  In  response  thereto,  the 
defendants  have  asserted  that  the  gift  mutation  was  got  attested  by 
their  predecessor  while  appearing  himself  before  the  revenue  officer 
and that the health of the predecessor at that time was very good. They 
also take plea that the predecessor of the parties has also gifted out the 
property  to  the  plaintiffs  as  well  and  gift  mutation  No.1001  was 
attested on 26.02.2001 in favour of plaintiff No.2, 10/13 days prior to 
death  of  their  predecessor  which  is  sufficient  to  establish  health  of 
their predecessor.   
Civil Revision No.9/2014 
4 
8. 
So  far  as  gifting  of  the  property  to  the  plaintiffs  through  gift 
mutations  is  concerned,  the  gifts  or  gift  mutations  in  favour  of  the 
plaintiffs have not been challenged by the defendants, therefore, I am 
not  going  to  look  into  their  validity.  In  this  suit,  validity  of  gift 
mutation No.1870 dated 17.04.2000 allegedly made by predecessor of 
the  parties  in  favour  of  the  defendants  is  under  challenge  and  I  will 
confine myself to the same only.  
9. 
Petitioner No.1-plaintiff appeared before the court as PW.1 and 
reiterated  the  contents  of  the  plaint  while  alleging  that  the  suit 
property  was  never  gifted  to  the  defendants  by  predecessor  of  the 
parties and the disputed mutation is result of fraud and forgery.  
10.  Being beneficiaries of the disputed mutation, the onus to prove 
the valid gift was on the defendants. The defendants have taken plea 
that the suit property was gifted by their predecessor to them through 
oral  gift  and  gift  mutation  was  got  attested  by  their  predecessor  by 
appearing himself before  the revenue  officer. Attestation of  mutation 
of gift is a subsequent step. Prior to attestation of gift mutation, there 
is  transaction  of  gift  which  is  required  to  be  established.  There  are 
three  ingredients  of  gift,  i.e.  offer,  acceptance  and  delivery  of 
possession  which  are  required  to  be  proved  by  the  beneficiary  if  the 
gift made in his favour is challenged. I have gone through the whole 
written  statement  as  well  as  the  evidence  of  the  defendants.  The 
written statement and evidence of the defendants are silent as to how, 
when  and  in  presence  of  whom  the  suit  property  was  gifted  by  the 
predecessor  of  the  parties  in  favour  of  the  defendants.  There  is  even 
no  mention  as  to  when  and  in  whose  presence,  the  offer  was  made, 
when  it  was  accepted  by  the  defendants  and  when  the  possession  of 
the property was handed over to the defendants by their predecessor. 
In the circumstances, all the three ingredients of gift which allegedly 
led to attestation of disputed gift mutation in favour of the defendants 
are missing and the defendants have badly failed to prove the factum 
of gift in their favour.  
Civil Revision No.9/2014 
5 
11. 
If it is presumed that the oral gift was made at some date other 
than  that  of  the  disputed  mutation,  the  mutation  of  the  gift  was 
required  to  be  proved  through  credible  and  unimpeachable  evidence, 
as  required  by  law.  In  this  regard,  the  defendants  produced  DW.2 
Allah Bakhsh Patwari who deposed that Sharaf Shah came to him for 
attestation  of  mutation  No.1870.  In  cross-examination,  he  stated  that 
the  mutation  was  entered  at  about  1.00  p.m.  and  attestation  of  the 
same was made at 3.00 p.m. He further deposed that the mutation was 
entered in the Consolidation Office whereas it was attested in Fareed 
Mahmood  Kathia.  DW.3,  the  alleged  witness  of  the  mutation  in  his 
cross-examination, stated that the mutation was entered at 3.30 p.m. in 
Colony Qasimabad School and it was not entered in the Consolidation 
Office. DW.4, the defendant himself, stated the time of attestation of 
mutation  as  1.30  p.m.  According  to  DW.3,  Manzoor  Hussain,  the 
mutation  was  entered  in  Colony  Qasimabad  in  a  school  whereas 
DW.4,  the  defendant,  stated  that  the  mutation  was  entered  in  the 
building  of  old  Tehsil.  This  is  a  material  contradiction  in  the 
statements of the witnesses. 
12.  According  to  Exh.P1, the  mutation  was  entered on 24.03.2000 
and it was attested on 17.04.2000 but none of the defendant witnesses 
deposed  about the date  of  entry  of  the  mutation. However, DW.4,  in 
his  cross-examination,  stated  that  the  attestation  was  made  after  20 
days  of  its  entry,  which  when  calculated  comes  to  24  days.  Further, 
the  other  witness  of  the  mutation  namely  Ghulam  Baqar  was  not 
produced in the witness box which also casts serious doubts about the 
lawful  attestation  of  the  mutation.  The  entry  of  the  mutation  and  its 
subsequent  attestation  was  the  outcome  of  an  alleged  oral  gift.  None 
of the witnesses of the gift produced by the defendants uttered even a 
single word that at the time of mutation, the property was orally gifted 
to  the  defendants.  As  admitted  by  DW.4,  the  defendant,  the  other 
beneficiary  of  the  oral  gift  Shah  Jahan  was  not  present.  None  of  the 
remaining  defendants,  the  daughters  of  the  deceased  of  Muhammad 
Ashraf  Shah,  were  present  on  the  spot.  This  leads  me  to  a  definite 
conclusion  that  the  ingredients  were  not  completed  on  the  date  of 
Civil Revision No.9/2014 
6 
entry  or  attestation  of  the  mutation  and  if  the  same  was  not  done  on 
that  date,  then  transaction  of  oral  gift  was  at  some  earlier  date  but 
neither  there  is  any  assertion  in  the  written  statement  nor  evidence 
was produced in this regard.  
13.  The  defendants  have  taken  plea  that  there  was  family  settlement 
between the parties. I am afraid that neither this factum was asserted 
in  the  written  statement  nor  any  evidence  to  prove  the  factum  of 
family  settlement  was  led.  Mere  assertion  or  supposition  is  not 
sufficient  to  reach  a  conclusion.  If  there  was  any  family  settlement 
between the parties, the defendants should have pleaded in the written 
statement and proved the same through evidence.  Non-mentioning of 
factum of family settlement and non-leading of any evidence to prove 
thereof  leads  me  to  an  inference  that  there  was  no  family  settlement 
between the parties as averred by the defendants.   
14.  There is contention of learned counsel for the respondents that 
the  concurrent  judgments  and  decrees  cannot  be  interfered  with  by 
this  Court  in  its  revisional  jurisdiction.  There  is  no  cavil  to  the 
proposition  of  law  that  concurrent  findings  should  not  be  interfered 
with  in  revisional  jurisdiction  by  this  Court  but  where  there  is  some 
material 
illegality,  misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  or 
jurisdictional  defect,  this  Court  has  ample  powers  to  interfere 
therewith and rectify the illegality committed by learned courts below. 
The  contention  of  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  is  accordingly 
repelled.  
15.  For  the  aforementioned  reasons,  this  civil  revision  is  allowed, 
the impugned judgments and decrees are set aside and the suit of the 
petitioners-plaintiffs is decreed as prayed for.       
Akram* 
 (ATIR MAHMOOD) 
Judge 
