 
 
 
 
 
           
 
Appellant  by: 
State by: 
 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT RAWALPINDI BENCH 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.99-J of 2016 
(Naveed Akhtar v. The State)  
 
JUDGMENT 
       Date of hearing:  09.07.2018 
Raja  Muhammad  Nasarullah  Waseem, 
Advocate. 
Sheikh  Istijabat  Ali,  District  Public  Prosecutor 
with Tariq SI.  
----------------------------------- 
 
Ch.  Abdul  Aziz, J.    Naveed  Akhtar  (appellant)  involved  in 
case FIR No.206/2015 dated 08.06.2015 registered under section 9 
(c)  of  the  Control  of  Narcotic  Substances  Act,  1997  (hereinafter 
referred  to  as  CNSA,  1997)  at  Police  Station  Saddar,  District 
Jhelum,  was  tried  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge/Judge 
Special  Court  CNSA,  Jhelum.  The  learned  trial  court  in  terms  of 
judgment  dated  12.05.2016  proceeded  to  convict  and  sentence  the 
appellant in the following terms:- 
Under  section  9  (c)  of  CNSA,  1997  to  undergo  six  years  RI 
with  the  direction  to  pay  fine  of  Rs.50,000/-  and  in  default 
whereof to further undergo six months SI. 
 Benefit of section 382-B, Cr.P.C. was also  extended in  favour 
of the appellant. 
 
Challenging  his  conviction  and  sentence,  the  appellant  has 
filed the instant appeal.  
2. 
Precisely stated the facts of the prosecution case as unveiled 
in  FIR  (Exh.PA)  are  to  the  effect  that  on  08.05.2015  Muhammad 
Ashraf SI along with other police officials was present at Muzaffar 
Town,  Jhelam  on  official  vehicle  in  connection  with  patrolling 
duty;  that  in  the  meantime  he  received  a  secret  information  that  a 
person  was  selling  heroin  near  graveyard  and  could  be  arrested  if 
2               Criminal Appeal No.99-J of 2016 
                                                                               Naveed Akhtar v.  The State 
 
raid  was  conducted;  that  on  the  receipt  of  such  information, 
Muhammad Ashraf SI along with other police officials reached the 
spot at about 9:30 a.m. and arrested a person who was subsequently 
identified  as  Naveed  Akhtar  alias  Niak  (appellant)  and  from  a 
plastic  bag  in  his  hand,  1020  grams  of  heroin  was  recovered;  that 
out of the said heroin, 5 grams were separated for chemical analysis 
and  both  these  parcels  were  secured  vide  memo  (Exh.PB);  that 
search of the appellant also led to the recovery of Rs.2,000/- as sale 
proceeds  of  narcotics  (Watak  amount).  Thereafter  Muhammad 
Ashraf  drafted  complaint  (Exh.PD)  which  was  sent  to  the  Police 
Station through Zameer Ahmad 373/C for the registration of formal 
FIR.  
3. 
The written complaint (Exh.PD) was transcribed into formal 
FIR (Exh.PA) which was chalked out by Sana Hussain ASI (PW.1). 
The  task  of  investigating  the  case  was  performed  by  Muhammad 
Ashraf  SI/complainant  (PW.5).  He  prepared  rough  site plan of  the 
place  of  recovery  (Exh.PE),  recorded  the  statements  of  witnesses 
under section 161, Cr.P.C. and submitted report under section 173, 
Cr.P.C. Formal charge against the appellant under Section 9 (c) of 
CNSA,  1997  was  framed  on  16.06.2015  to  which  he  pleaded  not 
guilty and opted to face trial. The prosecution  in order to prove its 
case  produced,  in  all,  five  witnesses.  Sana  Hussain  ASI  (PW.1) 
chalked  out  the  formal  FIR.  Muhammad  Riaz  100/C  (PW.2) 
received one sample parcel of heroin from  Azhar Abbas Moharrar 
on  15.05.2015  and  delivered  it  in  the  office  of  PFSA  on  the  same 
day. Azhar Abbas 135/HC (PW.3) while performing functions of 
Station Clerk/Moharrar received two parcels on 08.05.2015 i.e. one 
of  case  property  and  other  of  sample  heroin  and  kept  the  same  in 
Malkhana for safe custody. He on 15.05.2015 delivered one sample 
parcel of heroin to Muhammad Riaz 100/C for onward transmission 
to  the  office  of  PFSA.  Muhammad  Iqbal  468/C  (PW.4)  and 
Muhammad  Ashraf  SI/IO  (PW.5)  are  the  witnesses of  recovery. 
3               Criminal Appeal No.99-J of 2016 
                                                                               Naveed Akhtar v.  The State 
 
Learned Assistant District Public Prosecutor closed the prosecution 
case after tendering in evidence report of PFSA (Exh.PF). 
4. 
The  learned  trial  court  also  examined  Naveed  Akhtar 
(appellant)  under  section  342  Cr.P.C.  He  in  response  to  questions 
No.10 & 11, replied as under:- 
 
 
 
“Q.10. Why this case against you? 
Ans. 
I  am  totally  innocent.  The  police  picked  me  from  my 
home  and  have  falsely  been  involved  in  this  case.  Police  has 
registered  present  case  just  to  show  their  efficiency  their  high 
ups.  Nothing  was  received  from  my  possession.  All  the 
recoveries  were  planted  by  the  police  just  to  strengthen  their 
case against me. 
Q.11. Why P.Ws deposed against you? 
Ans.    All  the  PWs  are  police  officials.  They  were  made  false 
PWs by the I.O. of this case. They deposed falsely because they 
know if they retract from their falsely recorded statements U/S 
161 Cr.P.C. then they are going to bear departmental action.” 
 
The appellant neither opted to make statement under section 
340(2) of Cr.P.C. nor produced any evidence in his defence. On the 
conclusion  of  trial,  the  appellant  was  convicted  and  sentenced  as 
afore-stated, hence, the instant appeal.  
5. 
It is contended on behalf of appellant that he is innocent and 
has  been  falsely  implicated  in  the  case;  that  though  the  alleged 
recovery of heroin was effected from a public place, however, none 
from the vicinity was produced as witness during trial; that the case 
was investigated by none other than the complainant himself which 
is  violative  of  all  norms  of  justice;  that  since  the  task  of 
investigation  was  performed  by  the  complainant  himself,  hence,  it 
caused  prejudice  to  the  appellant  as  he  omitted  to  bring  on  record 
circumstances  which  were  adverse  to  the  case  of  prosecution;  that 
from  naked  eye  it  becomes  evident  that  complaint  Ex.PD  suffers 
from menace of tampering; that the recovery witnesses contradicted 
each  other  on  all  material  aspects  which  rendered  their  testimony 
unworthy  of  any  credence;  that  though  reasonable  doubt  emerges 
from  the  recital  of  prosecution  evidence,  however,  its  benefit  was 
not extended to appellant. With these submissions, it was urged that 
conviction awarded to the appellant is liable to be set-aside. 
4               Criminal Appeal No.99-J of 2016 
                                                                               Naveed Akhtar v.  The State 
 
6. 
Learned  District  Public  Prosecutor  while  controverting  the 
arguments advanced by other side submitted that a sizeable quantity 
of  heroin  was  recovered  from  the  appellant  for  which  he  failed  to 
offer  any  justification  either  at  investigation  stage  or  during  trial; 
that though the recovery was effected from a public place, however, 
since the provision of 103, Cr.P.C. has been held not applicable to 
cases  registered  under  CNSA,  1997  hence,  there  was  no  need  to 
associate  two  witnesses  from  the  vicinity  in  the  proceedings;  that 
during  trial  the  guilt  of  appellant  was  well  established  from  the 
statements  of  two  recovery  witnesses,  namely,  Muhammad  Iqbal 
468/C  and  Muhammad  Ashraf  Gondal  SI;  that  even  the  safe 
custody  of  recovered  heroin  and  its  transmission  to  PFSA  for 
analysis was reasonably proved by the prosecution; that this is not 
the  case  of  appellant  that  any  of  the  recovery  witness  was  having 
some  animosity  against  him;  that  prosecution  successfully  proved 
its  case  beyond  any  iota  of  doubt,  hence,  the  judgment  of 
conviction needs no interference from this Court. 
7. 
8. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.   
It evinces from record that on 08.05.2015 Muhammad Ashraf 
Gondal  SI  (PW.5)  alongwith  three  police  officials  was  present  at 
Muzaffar Town on his official vehicle in connection with patrolling 
duty. He received spy information that a person  was selling heroin 
in a nearby graveyard and if raided, could be arrested. On receipt of 
such  information,  Muhammad  Ashraf  SI  (PW.5)  immediately 
proceeded to the spot and at about 9:30 a.m. arrested a person who 
was later on identified as Naveed Akhtar alias Niak (appellant) and 
from  a  plastic  bag  in  his  hand,  1020  grams  of  heroin  (P.1)  was 
recovered,  out  of  which,  5  grams  were  separated  as  sample  for 
chemical  analysis.  Before  embarking  any  further  on  the  merits  of 
the  case,  we  deem  it  appropriate  to  observe  here  that  in  order  to 
bring  home  the  guilt  of  accused  facing  trial  in  cases  registered 
under  CNSA,  1997,  the  prosecution  is  generally  obliged  to  prove 
following constituents:- 
5               Criminal Appeal No.99-J of 2016 
                                                                               Naveed Akhtar v.  The State 
 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Recovery of narcotics from the accused; 
Safe custody of recovered substance; 
Safe  transmission  of  recovered  substance  to  Government 
Analyst/Chemical Examiner; 
The  proof  that  the  recovered  substance  is  narcotics/contraband 
substance within the purview of CNSA, 1997 and 
The  quantity  of  the  recovered  substance  so  as  to  ascertain  that 
the  act  of  an  accused  attracts  the  mischief  of  which  clause  of 
section 9 of CNSA, 1997.   
9. 
In  the  above  backdrop,  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  record  is 
made, from which, it divulges that in order to prove the recovery of 
contraband  substance  from  Naveed  Akhtar  (appellant), 
two 
witnesses,  namely,  Muhammad  Iqbal  468/C  and  Muhammad 
Ashraf  Gondal  SI  (PW.4  &  PW.5)  appeared  in  the  dock.  A  wade 
through  the  statements  of  afore-mentioned  two  witnesses  reveals 
that none of them was having any animosity against the appellant as 
no  such  material  was  put  forth  during  cross-examination.  This 
feature  of  the  case  out-rightly  excludes  the  possibility  of  false 
implication.  It  is  further  noticed  that  both  the  witnesses  narrated 
straightforward  and  confidence  inspiring  details  of  the  search  and 
seizure proceedings. The witnesses of recovery remained consistent 
regarding  the  time  of  their  departure  from  Police  Station, the  time 
and place of intercepting the appellant, the manner in which heroin 
was seized, preparation of parcels of recovered substance as well as 
its  quantity.  We  have  further  meticulously  examined  the  record 
from which it emerges that even the details of post recovery events 
provided  by  Muhammad  Iqbal  468/C  (PW.4)  and  Muhammad 
Ashraf Gondal SI (PW.5) were in consonance with each other.  So 
far  as,  placing  of  recovered  substance  in  safe  custody  and  its 
forwarding  to  PFSA  for  analysis  is  concerned,  it  is  noticed  that 
prosecution  successfully  discharged  such  obligation.  According  to 
record, recovered heroin was handed over to Mohrrar/Station Clerk, 
namely,  Azhar  Abbas  135/HC  (PW.3)  by  Muhammad  Ashraf 
Gondal  SI  (PW.5)  on  the  very  day  of  recovery.  The  task  of 
forwarding  the  samle  parcel  to  PFSA  for  analysis  was  assigned  to 
6               Criminal Appeal No.99-J of 2016 
                                                                               Naveed Akhtar v.  The State 
 
Muhammad  Riaz  100/C  (PW.2)  on  15.05.2015  which  was  duly 
performed by him. 
10.  We  have  also  given  considered  thought  to  the  fact  that  the 
case  was  investigated  by  the  complainant,  namely,  Muhammad 
Ashraf Gondal SI (PW.5). Though this aspect was canvassed by the 
learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  as  a  ground  sufficient  for  setting 
aside  the  guilty  verdict,  however,  we  are  not  in  agreement  with 
him.  In  our  considered  view,  there  is  no  legal  impediment  for 
carrying  out  the  investigation  of  a  case  registered  under  CNSA, 
1997  by  the  complainant-police  officer.  In  the  absence  of  any 
expressed statutory prohibition, such objection essentially relates to 
question of fact. In order to render such investigation as biased, the 
appellant  was  required  to  come  forward  with  the  stance  that 
Muhammad  Ashraf  Gondal  SI  was  inimically  placed  against  him 
and had some sinister motive in planting narcotic substance against 
him.  However,  it  gleans  from  record  that  neither  during  cross-
examination nor in his examination under section 342, Cr.P.C. the 
appellant  pleaded  his  implication  in  the  case  on  account  of  some 
nefarious  designs  attributable  to  the  complainant  of  case,  namely, 
Muhammad  Ashraf  Gondal  SI.  In  these  circumstances,  afore-
mentioned  objection  is  not  worthy  of  any  credence.  We  deem  it 
appropriate to mention here that such objection came up for hearing 
before  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  reported  as 
State through Advocate-General, Sindh v. Bashir and others (PLD 
1997  Supreme  Court  408)  and  was  dealt  with  in  the  following 
manner:- 
“Adverting to the above first submission of Mr. M.M. Aqil that 
since  Shamim  Ahmed  was  the  complainant  in  the  case  as  well 
as  the  Investigating  Officer,  the  trial  vitiated,  it  may  be 
observed that in support of his above submission he has referred 
the  case  of  Aksar  Khan  v.  The  State  (1995  MLD  1237),  in 
which  a  learned  Single  Judge  of  the  Peshawar  High  Court, 
while  dealing  with  an  appeal  of  a  convict  under  section  13  of 
the Explosive Substances Act, 1908, inter alia held that a Police 
Inspector  could  not 
functions  as 
complainant and also as an Inspector as it had rendered the trial 
a sheer mockery. We are unable to subscribe to the above broad 
legally  assume  dual 
7               Criminal Appeal No.99-J of 2016 
                                                                               Naveed Akhtar v.  The State 
 
legal  proposition.  There  is  no  legal  prohibition  for  a  Police 
Officer to be a complainant if he is a witness to the commission 
of an offence and also to be an Investigating Officer so long as 
it does not, in any way, prejudice the accused person.” 
11.  As  regards,  objection  of  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant 
regarding  non-association  of  two  witnesses  from  the  vicinity  of 
recovery  in  reference  to  section 103, Cr.P.C.,  suffice  it  to  say  that 
such  argument  has  no  leg  to  stand.  While  arriving  at  such 
conclusion,  we  have  in  our  minds  the  provision  of  section  25  of 
CNSA, 1997 whereby the provision of section 103, Cr.P.C. is made 
inapplicable  in  recovery  of  narcotic  cases.  Thus,  in  the  given 
circumstances,  non-association  of  two  respectables  from  the 
vicinity,  in  no  manner  can  be  termed  as  fatal  for  the  case  of 
prosecution.  While  embarking  upon  similar  legal  proposition,  the 
Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Zafar  v.  The 
State (2008 SCMR 1254), held as under:- 
“It would mean that applicability of section 103, Cr.P.C. in  the 
narcotic  cases  has  been  excluded  and  non-inclusion  of  any 
private  witness  is  not  a  serious  defence  to  vitiate  the 
conviction.” 
 
Similar views were expressed by the Hon’ble Apex Court in 
the  cases  Zulfiqar  Ahmad  v.  The  State  (2006  SCMR  800)  and 
Muhammad Khan v. The State (2008 SCMR 1616). 
12.  From 
the  afore-mentioned  facts  and  circumstances, 
it 
reasonably  alludes  that  prosecution  has  successfully  proved  the 
recovery  of  heroin  from  appellant.  However,  we  have  noticed  an 
anomaly  which insinuates  from  the  report  of  PFSA  (Exh.PF). It is 
noticed  with  concern  that  according  to  prosecution  case,  1020 
grams  of  heroin  was recovered  from  the  appellant, out  of  which 5 
grams were forwarded to PFSA for analysis. The forwarded sample 
of  heroin,  when  weighed  in  PFSA,  it  transpired  to  be  2.37  grams. 
Needless  to  mention  here  that  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency  is 
generally known to have the facility of modern equipments, hence, 
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  weight  of  sample  heroin  as  2.37 
grams rather than 5 grams. From above anomaly, we are persuaded 
8               Criminal Appeal No.99-J of 2016 
                                                                               Naveed Akhtar v.  The State 
 
to  hold  that  Muhammad  Ashraf  Gondal  SI  (PW.5)  used  a  faulty 
scale to measure the weight of recovered heroin. Even otherwise, as 
per  settled  principles  laid  down  for  appraisal  of  evidence,  the 
prosecution is obliged to prove every bit of its case beyond scintilla 
of doubt. In this backdrop, prosecution was required to address the 
difference of  above-referred  weight  arising  out of  PFSA  report.  In 
our  view,  1020  grams  of  heroin  is  to  be  reduced  in  same  ratio  as 
weighed by PFSA. As a necessary corollary we are swayed to hold 
that  483.48  grams  of  heroin  was  recovered  from  the  appellant.  It 
needs  no  elaboration  that  483.48  grams  of  heroin  attracts  the 
provision of section 9 (b) of CNSA, 1997.  In these circumstances, 
the conviction and sentence of the appellant under section 9 (c) of 
CNSA,  1997  is  set-aside  and  accordingly  he  is  convicted  under 
section  9  (b)  of  CNSA,  1997.  In  accordance  with  the  sentencing 
policy formulated by this Court in the case of Ghulam Murtaza and 
another  v.  The  State  (PLD  2009  Lahore  362),  the  appellant  is 
directed  to  undergo  rigorous  imprisonment  for  01-year  and  07-
months with the direction to pay fine of Rs.13,000/- and in default 
whereof to further undergo simple imprisonment for 4-months and 
15-days. 
13. 
In  the  above  terms  Criminal  Appeal  No.99  of  2016  is 
dismissed.  
 
 
                    Judge  
 
               (Ibad-ur-Rehman Lodhi)                       (Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
                         Judge 
 
(Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
                    Judge 
 
Najum* 
 
