 
Form No.HCJD/C-121 
                      ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE. 
 
 
    JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Page 1 of 22 
Writ Petition No.9027/2017. 
Muhammad Jawad Hamid 
Vs 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc. 
 
S. No. of  
order/ 
Date of 
order/ 
proceedings 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where 
necessary 
 
06.07.2018.  Rai  Bashir  Ahmad,  Muhammad  Azhar  Siddique,  Mirza 
Naveed Baig, S. Parveen Mughal, Naeem ud Din Chaudhry, 
Abdullah  Malik,  Sardar  Ghazanfar  Husain,  Mr.  Adeel 
Hassan  and  Syed  Umair  Abbas,  Ch.  Naeem  ud  Din 
Chaudhry, Advocates for the petitioner. 
 
 
Syed  Ehtisham  Qadir,  Prosecutor  General  Punjab  assisted 
by Rai Akhtar Hussain, Deputy Prosecutor General and Mr. 
Muhammad  Amjad  Rafiq,  Additional  Prosecutor  General 
on court’s call. 
Mr.  Sittar  Sahil  and  Mr.  Muhammad  Hammad  Khan  Rai, 
Assistant Advocate General. 
The  instant  writ petition has  arisen out of  the  following  admitted 
facts:- 
A  private  complaint  was  filed  by  Muhammad  Jawad  Hamid 
(petitioner)  under  section  190(1)(a)  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 
Procedure (Act  V of 1898  (hereinafter to be called as ‘Code’) 
and section 19(3) of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, (hereinafter 
to  be  called  as  “ATA”)  for  offences  under  sections  302/324, 
295-B/452, 395/427, 365/506, 120-B, 148/149, 337-F(vi), 337-
C,  337-F(iii),  337-A(v),  337-L(ii),  337-F(i),  337-A(i)  Pakistan 
Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860) read with Section 7 of the ATA 
and  section  155-C  of  Police  Order,  2002  before  Special  Court 
under  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997,  at  Lahore  (hereinafter  to  be 
called as “ATC”) , wherein, 139 persons were cited as accused; 
the  case  of  Shahid  Aziz  Butt  (respondent  No.139)  was 
 
Page 2 of 22 
separated;  in  the  separate  trial  he  was  finally  convicted  and 
sentenced  and  the  court  has  been  informed  that  he  is  now  out 
after  serving  out  his  entire  sentence.  After  recording  cursory 
evidence,  vide  order  dated  07.02.2017  respondents  No.13  to 
138 have already been summoned and are facing trial before the 
ATC.  Vide  the  same  order  dated  07.02.2017  the  learned  trial 
court opined that there is no evidence to prove prima facie case 
against  respondents  No.1  to  respondents  No.12,  as  such,  they 
were not summoned and their names were directed to be deleted 
from  the  list  of  respondents.  (See  para-41  of  the  impugned 
order.).  The  order  dated  07.02.2017  to  the  extent  of  non-
summoning of respondents No.1 to 12 is under challenge by the 
petitioner/complainant 
through 
the 
instant  Writ  Petition 
No.9027/2017  “Muhammad  Jawad  Hamid  versus  Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others”.  
2. 
Since the question about maintainability of writ petition against an 
order  of  summoning/non-summoning  in  the  proceedings  carried  out 
under  ATA  was  the  basic  legal  question  to  be  resolved,  therefore,  we 
took the same as primary issue and after hearing the learned counsel for 
the parties at length, vide our short order dated 11.05.2018, held that:-  
 “For the reasons to be recorded latter in a detailed judgment, after 
hearing  the  learned  counsel  for  respective  parties,  we  hold  that 
against  an  interim  order  passed  by  a  Court  under  Anti-Terrorism 
Act,  1997,  during  proceedings  of  a  case,  including  an  order  of 
summoning/non-summoning 
is  not 
maintainable,  as  under  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997,  applicability  of 
sections  435,  436  and  439  Cr.P.C.  has  not  been  restricted,  except 
under section 21(d) to the extent of bail, hence, criminal revision is 
competent.” 
 
the  accused,  writ  petition 
 
This  shall  form  the  detailed  reasoning  of  the  above  reproduced  short 
order. 
3. 
Rai  Bashir  Ahmad  and  Mirza  Naveed  Baig,  Advocates 
representing 
the  petitioner  while  referring 
to 
the  principles  of 
interpretation  of  statutes,  argued  that  when  any  provision  by  itself  is 
clear  in  its  literal  meaning  then  it  may  not  involve  question  of 
 
Page 3 of 22 
interpretation,  however,  where  there  remains  any  ambiguity,  only  then 
interpretation  would  be  required.  According  to  the  learned  counsel  as 
ATA is a special law having overriding effect on the Code, hence, in the 
light  of  sections  21-D,  31  and  32  of  ATA,  criminal  revision  under 
general  law  i.e.  Code  is  not  maintainable  and  furthermore  since  under 
section  25  of  the  Act  only  a  remedy  of  appeal  has  been  provided, 
therefore, no other meaning can be imported to say that criminal revision 
would  lie  as  if  this  was  the  intent  of  the  legislators  they  could  have 
provided remedy of criminal revision in the statute itself. Added that the 
law was promulgated for speedy trial of heinous offences, which create 
panic in the society and this aspect is clear from the preamble of ATA. 
Submit that law is to be interpreted keeping in mind the purpose of the 
relevant  law  reflected  by  its  preamble.  The  learned  counsel  therefore, 
concluded  that  if  the  legislator  had  the  intent  to  provide  multiple 
remedies to the persons aggrieved of orders of the ATC under ATA, then 
its  scope  could  have  been  extended  to  make  the  provisions  of  Section 
435, 436, 439 of the Code, applicable. The learned counsel by referring 
different  sections  of  ATA  submits  that  since  revisional  jurisdiction  has 
not  been  provided  against  interlocutory  orders,  and  the  legislators  have 
intentionally  kept  the  provisions  of  Section  435,  436,  439  of  the  Code 
away  from  the  proceedings  under  the  above  Act,  therefore,  by 
interpreting the statute a remedy of revision cannot be  extended against 
interlocutory orders. 
4.  Mr. Muhammad Azhar Siddique, Advocate adopted the arguments 
of his learned colleagues with a view that any illegality can be rectified 
by  the  High  Court  in  exercise  of  jurisdiction  under  section  561-A 
Cr.P.C. 
5. 
Learned  Prosecutor  General  referred  2012  P.Cr.L.J.  696,  2000 
YLR  2668  and  2000  P.Cr.L.J.  to  contend  that  in  these  cited  cases 
criminal revision has been held to be not maintainable,  however, in the 
light of guidance provided in the latest case law i.e. PLD 2018 SC 351, 
2016  P.Crl.L.J  1463,  PLD  2012  IHC  35,  PLD  2006  Lhr  290,  criminal 
revision would lie against the orders passed by ATC. Further argued that 
 
Page 4 of 22 
bar  contained  under  section  21(d)  is  only  to  the  extent  of  the  bail  and 
could  not  take  away  revisional  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court.  By 
referring  Section  21(d),  25,  31  and  32  of  ATA,  he  further  argued  that 
ATA  itself  does  not  provide  any  bar  on  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court 
under  sections  435  and  439  of  the  Code,  hence,  the  High  Court  can 
exercise revisional jurisdiction in appropriate case.  By referring section 
19(14)  and  32  ATA  and  Section  6  of  the  Code,  he  argued  that  for  all 
intents  and  purposes  the  High  Court  being  the  appellate  court  has 
supervisory  authority  over  the  ATC  as  inferior/subordinate  court, 
therefore, the scope of Section 435, 439 of the Code, cannot be curtailed. 
In  this  respect  learned  Prosecutor  General  referred  the  case  PLD  2016 
SC 55 and PLD 2018 SC 351)  
6.  Mr.  Muhammad  Amjad  Rafiq  learned  Additional  Prosecutor 
General  argued  that  in  the  light  of  Mehram  Ali’s  case  PLD  1998  SC 
1445, this Court can exercise revisional jurisdiction in appropriate cases 
against  the  proceedings  of  ATC.  Further  added  that  Section  31  ATA 
deals  with  finality  of  the  judgment  and  order  which  is  appealable  and 
when  the  ATA  was  promulgated  appeal  lied  before  the  Appellate 
Tribunal but later on amendment was introduced and High Court became 
the  appellate  court  of  ATC  and  the  ATC  is  deemed  to  be  court  of 
Sessions  under  ATA  and  the  provisions  of  Code  are  applicable    until 
they are not inconsistent with the Code, which make it clear that against 
the  interlocutory  order  or  an  interlocutory  order  of  final  nature,  against 
which no appeal is provided, only  revision  is  competent.  Added that in 
Suppression of Terrorist Activities (Special Courts) Act, 1975, Terrorist 
Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act, 1992 and National Accountability 
Bureau Ordinance, 1999 (No.XVIII of 1999), specific prohibitions have 
been  imposed  against  the  filing  of  revision  but  no  such  condition  has 
been imposed in the ATA, as such revision is maintainable and visitorial 
jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  over  its  subordinate  courts  cannot  be 
curtailed.  
 
 
Page 5 of 22 
7.  Mr. Sittar Sahil, Assistant Advocate General, while agreeing with 
the arguments addressed by the learned Prosecutor General as well as the 
learned  Additional  Prosecutor  General,  and  while  referring  to  various 
provisions  of  law  argued  that  writ  petition  is  not  maintainable  and 
remedy of criminal revision can be invoked by the petitioner against the 
impugned order. 
8.  We have heard the arguments of learned counsel for the parties at 
full length and analyzed the legal preposition in the light of Articles 175, 
203  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  and 
Sections  2(c),  13(4)  19(14),  21-D,  25,  30(2),  31  and  32  of  the  ATA, 
Sections 6, 435, 439 and 561-A, of the Code. 
9. 
On  the  face  of  it  the  question  whether  a  Writ  Petition  under 
Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, a 
Revision Petition under section 435, 439 of the Code or a petition under 
section  561-A  of  the  Code,  would  be  maintainable  to  check  the 
correctness,  legality  or  propriety  of  any  findings  recorded  by  the  ATC 
with respect to any order which is not  appealable under ATA, appeared 
to  be  a  perplexed  question  and  admittedly  there  existed  views  of  the 
courts  for  and  against  the  said  legal  proposition,  as  some  judgments  of 
the courts held that a revision petition is not maintainable under the ATA 
on account of a collective reading and effect of sections 25, 31 and 32 of 
the  said  Act  and  in  some  judgments  the  court  have  held  that  revision 
petition is maintainable.  
10.  We have examined this issue in the light of relevant provisions of 
ATA and the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. Article 
175  of  the  Constitution  deals  with  establishment  of  certain  courts  by 
implication  of  law  other  than  Supreme  Court,  High  Courts  and  the 
Federal  Shariat  Court.  In  Mehram  Ali’s  Case  the  combined  effect  of 
Article 175, 202 and 203 of the Constitution was examined and in para 
No.11 thereof, it was held:- 
(i) That Articles 175, 202 and 203 of the Constitution provide a 
framework  of  Judiciary  i.e.  the  Supreme  Court,  a  High  Court 
for each Province and such other Courts as may be established 
by law. 
 
Page 6 of 22 
(ii)  That  the  words  "such  other  Courts  as  may  be  established 
by  law"  employed  in  clause  (1)  of  Article  175  of  the 
Constitution  are  relatable  to  the  subordinate  Courts  referred 
to in Article 203 thereof. 
(iii)  That  our  Constitution  recognises  only  such  specific 
Tribunal to share judicial powers with the above Courts, which 
have  been  specifically  provided  by  the  Constitution  itself 
Federal  Shariat  Court  (Chapter  3-A  of  the  Constitution), 
Tribunals under Article 212, Election Tribunals (Article 225). It 
must follow as a corollary that any Court or Tribunal which is 
not founded on any of the Articles of the Constitution cannot 
lawfully  share  judicial  power  with  the  Courts  referred  to  in 
Articles 175 and 203 of the Constitution. 
(iv)  That  in  view  of  Article  203  of  the  Constitution  read  with 
Article  175  thereof  the  supervision  and  control  over  the 
subordinate  judiciary  vest  in  High  Courts,  which  is  exclusive 
in nature, comprehensive in extent and effective in operation. 
(v)  That  the  hallmark  of  our  Constitution  is  that  it  envisages 
separation  of  the  Judiciary  from  the  Executive  (which  is 
founded  on  the  Islamic  Judicial  System)  in  order  to  ensure 
independence  of  Judiciary  and,  therefore,  any  Court  or 
Tribunal  which 
judicial  review  and 
administrative  control  of  the  High  Court  and/or  the  Supreme 
Court  does  not  fit  in  within  the  judicial  framework  of  the 
Constitution. 
is  not  subject 
to 
judiciary  providing 
(vi) That the right of "access to justice to all" is a fundamental 
right,  which  right  cannot  be  exercised  in  the  absence  of  an 
independent 
just 
hierarchy.  The 
adjudicatory 
Courts/Tribunals  which  are  manned  and  run  by  executive 
authorities  without  being  under  the  control  and  supervision  of 
the  High  Court  in  terms  of  Article  203  of  the  Constitution  can 
hardly meet the mandatory requirement of the Constitution. 
impartial, 
judicial 
framework 
fair  and 
i.e. 
(vii)  That  the  independence  of  judiciary  is  inextricably  linked 
and  connected  with  the  process  of  appointment  of  Judges  and 
the security of their tenure and other terms and condition.” 
[Emphasis have been supplied by us] 
Section 6 of the Code  accommodates classes of various criminal courts 
which  are  liable  to  revisional  check  of  High  Court;  for  facility  of 
reference, relevant provisions are reproduced hereunder:- 
Code of Criminal Procedure (Act V of 1898) 
6. Classes of Criminal Courts and Magistrates: (1) Besides 
the High Courts and the Courts constituted  under any law 
other than this Code for the time being in force, there shall 
be two classes of Criminal Courts in Pakistan, namely:- 
(i) Courts of Session; 
(ii) Courts of Magistrate. 
 
 
[(2)  There  shall  be  the  following  classes  of  Magistrate, 
namely:- 
(i) Magistrate of the First Class;: 
(ii) Magistrate of the Second Class; and 
(iii) Magistrate of the Third Class, 
Page 7 of 22 
435. Power to call for records of inferior Courts:  
(1)  The  High  Court  or  any  Sessions  Judge  may  call  for  an 
examine  the  record  of  any  proceeding  before  any  inferior 
Criminal  Court  situate  within  the  local  limits  of  its  or  his 
jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying, itself or himself as 
to  the  correctness,  legality  or  propriety  of  any  finding, 
sentence  or  order  recorded  or  passed,  and  as  to  the 
regularity  of  any  proceedings  of  such  inferior  Court  and 
may, when calling for such record, direct that the execution 
of  any  sentence  be  suspended  and,  if  the  accused  is  in 
confinement, that he be released on bail or on his own bond 
pending the examination of the record. 
Explanation:  All  Magistrates  shall  be  deemed  to  be  inferior 
to the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this sub-section. 
439. High Court’s powers Of revision:  
(1)  In  the  case  of  any  proceeding  the  record  of  which  has 
been  called  for  by  itself  or  which  otherwise  comes  to  its 
knowledge,  the  High  Court,  may,  in  its  discretion,,  exercise 
any of the powers Conferred on a Court of Appeal by Sections 
423, 426, 427 and 428 or on a Court by Section 338, and may 
enhance  the  sentence  and,  when  the  Judges  Composing  the 
Court  of  Revision  are  equally  divided  in.  opinion,  the  case 
shall be disposed of in manner provided by Section 429. 
(2)  No  order  under  this  section,  shall  be  made  to  the 
prejudice of the accused unless he has had an opportunity of 
being  heard  either  personally  or  by  pleader  in  his  own 
defence. 
(3) Where the sentence dealt with under this section has been 
passed  by  a  Magistrate  the  Court  shall  not  inflict  a  greater 
punishment  for  the  offence  which,  in  the  opinion  of  such 
Court,  the  accused  has  committed,  than  might  have  been 
inflicted for such offence by a Magistrate of the First Class. 
(4)  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be,  deemed  to  authorize  a 
High Court— 
(a) To convert a finding of acquittal into one of conviction; or 
(b)  to  entertain  any  proceedings  in  revision,  with  respect  to 
an order made .by the Sessions Judge under Section 
(5)  Where  under  this  Code  an  appeal  lies  and  no  appeal  is 
brought,  no  proceedings  by  way  of  revision  shall  be 
entertained  at  the  instance  of  the  party  who  could  have 
appealed. 
 
Page 8 of 22 
(6)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  section,  any 
convicted  person  to  whom  an  opportunity  has  been  given 
under  sub-section  (2)  of  showing  cause  why  his  sentence 
should not be enhanced shall, in showing cause, be entitled at 
so to show cause against his conviction” 
Examination of Section 6 of the Code uncovers that there might be other 
courts  established  by  any  law  other  than  the  courts  created  under  the 
Code. All criminal courts whether created by the Code or some other law 
are the Courts inferior/subordinate to High Court in the light of Mehram 
Ali Case (supra).  Therefore, the revisional control under Section 435 to 
439  of  the  Code  being  supervisory  and  curative  in  nature,  will  be 
available to the High Court unless expressly ousted by such special law. 
11.  Now  the  question  would  remain  as  to  what  would  be  the  scope 
and extent of Section 21-D, 31 and 32 of ATA? Before dilating upon this 
legal proposition, we would like to refer the relevant provisions:-  
21D.  Bail.—  (1)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  sections 
439,  491,  496,  497,  498,  498A  and  561  of  the  Code,  no  Court, 
other than an Anti-terrorism Court, a High Court or the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan, shall have the power or jurisdiction to grant 
bail to or otherwise release an accused person in a case triable 
by an Anti-terrorism Court. 
 
25.  Appeal.--(1)  An  appeal  against  the  final  judgment  of  an 
[Anti-Terrorism Court] shall lie to [a High Court]. 
(2)  Copies  of  the  Judgment  of  [Anti-Terrorism  Court]  shall  be 
supplied to the accused and the Public Prosecutor free of cost on 
the  day  the  judgment  is  pronounced  and  the  record  of  the  trial 
shall be transmitted to the [a High Court] within three days of the 
decision. 
(3)  An  appeal  under  sub-section  (1)  may  be  preferred  by  a 
person sentenced by an [Anti-Terrorism Court] to [a High Court] 
within seven days of the passing of the sentence. 
(4)  The  Attorney  General,  (Deputy  Attorney  General,  Standing 
Counsel) or an Advocate General [or an Advocate of High Court 
or  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  appointed  as  Public  Prosecutor, 
Additional  Public  Prosecutor  or  a  Special  Public  Prosecutor] 
may,  on  being  directed  by 
the  Federal  or  a  Provincial 
Government,  file  an  appeal  against  an  order  of  acquittal  or  a 
sentence  passed  by  (An  Anti-Terrorism  Court)  within  fifteen 
days of such order. 
[(4A)  Any person who is a victim or legal heir of a victim and is 
aggrieved by the order of acquittal passed by an Anti-Terrorism 
Court,  may  within  thirty  days,  file  an  appeal  in  a  High  Court 
against such order. 
 
Page 9 of 22 
(4B)  If  an  order  of  acquittal  is  passed  by  an  Anti-Terrorism 
Court in any case instituted upon complaint and the High Court, 
on  an  application  made  to  it  by  the  complainant  in  this  behalf, 
grant  special  leave  to  appeal  from  the  order  of  acquittal,  the 
complainant may within thirty days present such an appeal to the 
High Court.] 
(5)  An appeal under this section shall be heard and decided by "a 
High Court" within seven working days. 
[(6)  Omitted  by  Ordi.  IV  of  1999  and  XIII  of  1999  w.e.f. 
27.4.1999]. 
(7)  Omitted  by  Ordi.  IV  of  1999  and  XIII  of  1999  w.e.f. 
27.4.1999]. 
(8)  Pending  the  appeal  "a  High  Court"  shall  not  release  the 
accused on bail. 
[(9)  For the purposes of hearing appeals under this section each 
High Court shall establish a Special Bench of Benches consisting 
of not less than two Judges. 
(10)  While  hearing  an  appeal,  the  Bench  shall  not  grant  more 
than two consecutive adjournments.] 
31. Finality  of  judgment.-  A  judgment  or  order  passed,  or 
sentence awarded, by (An Anti-Terrorism Court), subject to 
the result of an appeal under this Act shall be final and shall not 
be called in question in any Court.” 
 
32.  Overriding  effect  of  Act. —  (1)  The  provisions  of  this  Act 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
or any other law but, save as expressly provided in  this Act, the 
provisions of the Code shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent 
with  the  provisions  of  this  act,  apply  to  the  proceedings  before 
[an  Anti-terrorism  Court]  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  Court  of 
Session. 
(2)  In  particular  and  without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the 
provisions contained in sub-section (1), the provisions of section 
350 of the Code shall, as far as may be, apply to the proceedings 
before  1[an  Anti-terrorism  Court]  and  for  his  purpose  any 
reference  in  those  provisions  to  a  Magistrate  shall  be  construed 
as a reference to [an Anti-terrorism Court]. 
By  examining  Section  31  along  with  section  25  ATA  (relating  to 
appeal), it becomes crystal clear that section 31 specifies just such orders 
which  achieve  conclusiveness  after  the  decision  of  the  High  Court  in 
appeal. The words “subject to” used in Section 31 ATA get significance 
as these words have not been defined; therefore, we need to think about 
their  strict  and  lexicon  meaning.    This  expression  was  examined  in  the 
case  “DADA  SOAP  FATORY  LIMITED  versus  COMMISSIONER  OF 
INCOME  TAX,  CENTRAL  ZONE,  KARACHI  (PTCL  1987  CL  569),  as 
 
Page 10 of 22 
“The  word  ‘subject  to’  are  not  descriptive  words  but  they  impose 
conditions  and  obligation.  These  are  words  of  qualification  and 
conditions.”  Further,  in  the  case  “ISLAMIC  REPUBLIC  OF  PAKITAN 
versus  ABDUL  WALI  KHAN”  (PLD  1976  SC  57),  the  expression 
‘subject  to’  has  also  been  defined  as  ‘conditional  upon  or  dependent 
upon’  or  ‘exposed  to  (some  contingent  action)’,  being  under  the 
contingency.” The case “A.P. Moller versus Taxation Officer of Income 
Tax”  (2011  PTD  1460),  is  also  referred.  The  circumstances  in  this 
manner develop that the word “subject to” used in section 31 ATA in the 
light of qualified condition of Section 25 ATA only included the orders 
of acquittal and not any interlocutory order, regardless of the fact that if 
it may be of a final nature. Following are some of the examples of such 
orders which are not covered under section 31 ATA being not appealable 
but are final in nature :- 
i) 
ii) 
Discharge of an accused; 
Remand of an accused; 
iii)  Dismissal of a private complaint under section 203 Cr.P.C. 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
Summoning  or  non-summoning  of  blamed  in  a  private 
complaint; 
Summoning or non-summoning of a private witness; 
Summoning or non-summoning of a document or any other 
thing; 
vii)  Rejection of application under section 265-K Cr.P.C. 
12. 
In  the  case  of  “Mian  Khalid  Rauf  Vs.    Chaudhry  Muhammad 
Saleem and another” (PLD 2015 SC 348) Leave to Appeal was granted 
by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  to  consider  the  question,  inter  alia, 
whether the High Court was legally barred from entertaining a criminal 
revision  petition  against  the  Judgment  of  a  Special  Court  and  whether 
the bar of maintainability of appeal contained in section 10(2) of the Act 
1958  would  be  extended  to  a  Special  Court  created  under  Section  3  of 
the  Act  1958  by  an  appropriate  Provincial  Government?  While 
answering the said question it was observed that the Special Court/Judge 
is  a  Court  inferior  to  the  High  Court  and  hence  the  High  Court's 
revisional  powers  under  section  435,  Cr.P.C.  to  check  the  correctness, 
legality  or  propriety  of  any  finding  or  order  recorded  or  passed  by  an 
inferior  Court  would  not  stand  excluded  particularly  as  the  Act  itself 
 
Page 11 of 22 
does not exclude the same. Further, in the case “Abdul Hafeez Vs. The 
State” (PLD 1981 SC 352) it was argued that in the Drugs Act there was 
a provision as contained in subsection (7) of section 31 which provided 
for  an  appeal  against  a  sentence  passed  by  a  Drug  Court,  to  the  High 
Court, but  there  was no  express provision  providing  for or  bestowing a 
revisional jurisdiction on the High Court, with the result, that in this case 
the  High  Court,  had  no  jurisdiction  or  authority  to  enhance  the 
petitioner's  sentence  in  his  own  appeal,  and  as  such,  the  order  of  the 
High  Court  in  this  respect  was  nullity  and  liable  to  be  set  aside. 
Repelling the aforesaid contention, Hon’ble Supreme Court observed:- 
5.  The  contention  has  no  merit.  Section  435  of  the  Criminal 
Procedure  Code  says  that  the  High  Court  (to  put  in  broad  words) 
will  have  a  revisional  jurisdiction  against  orders  of  "inferior 
criminal Courts". The word "inferior" here means judicially inferior 
Nobin Kristo Mookerjee v. Russick Lall Laha (1 L R 10 Cal. 269). It 
is  to  point  out  that  a  Court  whose  orders  are  subject  to  appeal  to 
another independent and separate Court, is in that particular sense, 
inferior to the appellate Court. It will be worthwhile to mention here 
that in the Criminal Procedure Code of  1872, in the corresponding 
section  295,  the  words  used were "any  Court  subordinate  to  such 
Court  or  Magistrate". It  appears  to  unreasonable  to  suppose  that 
this new expression has been substituted without any definite object, 
and the obvious conclusion which can legitimately be drawn is, that 
it  refers  to  a  Court  over  which  the  High  Court  proceeding  under 
section  435,  has  appellate  jurisdiction.  From  the  above  principle  it 
is further evident that there may be inferiority without subordination 
but  there  cannot  be  subordination  without  inferiority.  The  epithet 
"inferior" seems to have been used simply in order to avoid the use 
of  "subordinate"  on  account  of  the  special  limitation  of  the  latter 
word  which  would  prevent  the  superior  Court  from  looking  into 
certain cases arising beyond the line of "subordination" to it; which 
yet  might  properly  be  examined  for  the  purpose  of  as  order  under 
sections  436  and  437  or  reference  under  section  438,  and  then  by 
High  Court  under  section  439. It  is  to  keep  the  hands  of  the  High 
Court  quite  free  in  dealing  with  a  case  in  its  ultimate  stage  of 
revision  etc.  that  expression  "inferior"  has  been  substituted  for  the 
word "subordinate". In that context, therefore, when in the manner 
aforesaid,  a  Drug  Court  has  been  made  subject  to  appellate 
jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  and  in  that  sense  inferior  to  the 
High Court, the latter could exercise revisional jurisdiction against 
its order and proceedings as laid down in sections  435/439, Cr. P. 
C.  In  other  words  once  having  made  the  Drug  Court,  in  that 
manner  judicially  inferior  to  the  High  Court,  there  was  no 
necessity  of  duplicating  the  matte  over  again  by  expressly 
providing for a revisional jurisdiction of the High Court; because, 
the  same  already  inhered  in  the  status  and  position  i  which  the 
Drug  Court  stood  to  the  High  Court.  It  is  well  settled  that  an 
appeal  is  a  complaint  to  a  superior  body  of  any  injustice  done  or 
 
Page 12 of 22 
error  committed  by  an  inferior  one  with  a  view  to  its  reversion  or 
correction etc. From that point of view also the Drug Court being 
subject  to  the  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  is  an 
"inferior  criminal  Court"  whose  orders  and  proceedings  will  be 
revisable by it under section 435. (Emphasis added) 
After in-depth analysis, the Court concluded:- 
The  result  is  that  looked  from  whatever  angle,  the  conclusion  is 
inevitable that no provision of the Drugs Act ousts the revisional 
jurisdiction  of  the  High  Court  (and  rather  points  to    the 
contrary  as  discussed  above)  and  the  use  of  the  word  "final" 
does  not  detract  anything  from  the  same  in  the  context  above 
explained. The cumulative effect of all the above provisions and the 
discussion  is  that  the  High  Court  in  cases  under  the  Drugs  Act  is 
simultaneously  a  Court  of  appeal  and  revision  and  can,  not  only, 
exercise appellate powers but also, those under section 439 of the Cr. 
P. C. and can enhance sentence passed by, the inferior Court viz. the' 
Drug Court. (Emphasis added) 
In the case of  “Habib Bank Ltd.   Vs.  The State and 6 others” (1993 
SCMR 1853) Section 10 of Suppression of Terrorist Activities (Special 
Courts)  Act,  1975  came  under  consideration.  The  said  provision  is 
reproduced hereunder for ready reference. 
10. Act to override other laws.- The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect  notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the  Code  or  in  any 
other law for the time being in force.  
The Hon’ble Supreme Court resolved that the powers of the High Court 
under  sections  435  and  439  remained  intact  despite  prohibitory  and 
negative provisions contained in section 10 of the Ordinance. 
13.  Honourable Karachi High Court in the case of  “Huzoor Bux Vs. 
The  State”  (PLD  2008  Karachi  487)  while  referring  to  Criminal 
Appeals  Nos.  257  of  2000  and  others  (Syed  Hussain  Abbass  v.  The 
State) decided by the august Supreme Court observed:- 
“Criminal  Appeals  Nos.  257  of  2000  and  others  (Syed  Hussain 
Abbass v. The State) had observed that High Courts being appellate 
forum  against  the  orders  of  the  Anti-Terrorism  Court  in  a  suitable 
and  appropriate  cases  can  exercise  powers,  as  required  under 
sections 435 and 439, Cr.P.C” 
A  Division  Bench  of  this  Court,  in the  case of  Atta  Ullah  Vs. Ghulam 
Rasool and others (PLD 2006 Lahore 290) it was held:-  
 22.  The  conclusions  drawn  are  that  a  petition  for  leave  to  appeal 
can  be  filed  by  an  aggrieved  person  against  an  order  or  acquittal 
 
Page 13 of 22 
passed by 'A.T.A. Court before a High Court within the timeframe as 
prescribed and the aggrieved person includes the victim, a legal heir 
or  a  private  complainant.  Likewise,  the  High  Court  has  the 
visitorial powers over the Anti-Terrorist Courts and, therefore, can 
entertain petitions in the nature of those as covered by section 439 
of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code.  The  law  is  now  so  declared  and 
this constitutional petition is accordingly disposed of.   [Emphasis 
have been supplied by us] 
The  same  view  has been  followed  in  the  cases  reported  as Muhammad 
Obaid Iqbal and others  Vs.  Khadim Hussain and others 2006 PCr. LJ 
78 [Lahore];  Muhammad Yunus Bhatti Vs.  Muhammad Arif and others 
2007  Y  L  R  1171  [Lahore].  Whereas,  contrary  view  has  been  taken  in 
the  cases  reported  as  Muhammad  Arif  Vs.  Nazeer  Ahmed  and  others 
2012 P Cr. L J 696 [Lahore]. 
14.  We  have  considered  the  argument  of  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioners  that  the  law  was  promulgated  for  speedy  trials  and  observe 
that although in the preamble of ATA, the purpose of the Act has been 
depicted  as speedy  trial of the  case but the  trial is to be  conducted  and 
completed  by  adopting  all  the  legal  parameters  and  no  court  can  be 
permitted  to  circumvent  the  procedure  or  pass  an  illegal  interim  order 
which  may  prejudice  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  parties,  now 
protected  by  Article  10-A  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan, 1973 and when no limitation has been forced in the statue then 
same  cannot  be  embedded  by  deciphering  the  state  in  the  light  of 
preamble. 
15.  There are a number of judgements at High Courts level wherein 
contrary  and  contradictory  interpretations  of  a  single  legal  question 
have been offered by the different Benches of coordinate jurisdiction.  
This  lack  of  coordination  and  non-adherence  to  the  principles  of 
horizontal stare decisis, judicial propriety and judicial comity create a 
lot  of  uncertainty  and  confusion.  The  Courts  subordinate  to  High 
Court, which are bound to follow the principles of law enunciated by 
this  Court  as  per  Article  201  of  the  Constitution,  face  awkward 
situation and general public perception and trust in the judicial system 
stands compromised. In another context but on the same point august 
 
Page 14 of 22 
Supreme  Court  in  case  of  Ameer  Zeb  Vs.  The  State  (PLD  2012  SC 
380) observed:- 
5.  Because  of  the  conflict  of  decisions  of  this  Court  on  the  above 
point,  the  High  Courts  and  subordinate  Courts  are  making  pick 
and  choose  to  apply  any  of  the  decisions  in  the  case  which 
apparently  is  causing  miscarriage  of  justice.  Now  it  is  left  at  the 
discretion  of  the  High  Courts  and  subordinate  Courts  to  give 
benefit or otherwise to any particular accused which apparently is 
frustrating  the  intention  of  lawmakers  and  diminishing  the  rigour 
of law for which it is made… 
With reference to binding authority of the ruling of Division Bench of 
High  Court,  august  Supreme  Court  in  cases  “Multiline  Associates  v. 
Ardeshir Cowasijee” (PLD 1995 SC 423) observed as under:-  
In  such  circumstances,  legal  position  which  emerges  is  that  the 
second  Division  Bench  of  the  High  Court  should  not  have  given 
finding  contrary  to  the  findings  of  the  1st  Division  Bench  of  the 
same  Court  on  the  same  point  and  should  have  adopted  the 
correct  method  by  making  a  request  for  constitution  of  a  larger 
Bench, if a contrary view had to be taken. [...] We, therefore, hold 
that the earlier judgment of equal Bench in the High Court on the 
same  point  is  binding  upon  the  second  Bench  and  if  a  contrary 
view had to be taken, then request for constitution of larger Bench 
should have been made. [emphasis added] 
Earlier same view was taken by the august Supreme Court in the case 
of The Province of East Pakistan Vs.  Dr. Azizul Islam (PLD 1963 SC 
296), it was observed:- 
With  respect  we  must  point  out  that  the  decision  was  a  direct 
authority  also  on  this  question,  as  in  spite  of  the  rubber-stamp 
signature the validity of the order of requisition was upheld and if 
the  learned  Judges  of  the  High  Court  deciding  the  present  case 
were  inclined  to  take  a  different  view,  they  should  have,  in 
accordance with the rules of their own Court, referred the matter 
to  a  larger  Bench.  Alternatively,  they  could  have  expressed  their 
doubts regarding the view taken in the precedent case1 in a Court 
of co-equal jurisdiction, while yet following that view, and left the 
matter to be raised in appeal before this Court.  
[Emphasis supplied by us.] 
In more elaborated terms a Full Bench of Karachi High Court in case 
“Murad  Ali  V.  Collector  of  Central  Excise  and  Land  Customs” 
(PLD 1963 (W. P.) Karachi 280(F.B) also observed:- 
 
In order to maintain judicial propriety; 
Page 15 of 22 
(i)   the  decision  of  a  Division  Bench  on  a  question  of  law 
should  be  followed  by  the  other  Bench.  If  they  differ,  the 
proper  course  to  adopt  would  be  to  refer  the  question  for 
the decision of a Full Bench; 
(ii)   the  decision  of  one  Division  Bench  on  a  question  of  fact  is 
not binding on the other Division Bench; 
(iii) if  the  decision  of  one  Division  Bench  has  not  come  to  the 
notice of the other Bench and a different view is taken in the 
subsequent  Division  Bench  case  and  when  such 
two 
conflicting decisions are placed before the Bench, the proper 
procedure  to  follow  in  such  a  case  would  be,  for  the  Bench 
hearing the case, to refer the matter to a Full Bench in view 
of  the  conflicting  authorities  without  deciding  the  question 
itself.  
The  same  view  has  been  followed  in  the  case  of  “Syed  Muhammad 
Murtaza  Zaidi  Vs.  Motor  Registration  Authority  and  others  2010” 
PTD  1797  (DB  Lahore).  In  the  case  of  Asif  Mahmood  Vs.  Deputy 
Commissioner,  Sheikhupura  and  another  (2005  M  L  D  589 
[Lahore]) a Division Bench of this Court observed:  
Even  otherwise  we  cannot  bypass  the  judgment  of  the  D.B. 
over  the  judgment  of  the  Single  Bench  of  this  Court.  Even 
otherwise it is settled principle of law that earlier judgment of 
the equal Bench in the High Court on the question of law is 
binding upon the Second Bench as per law laid down by the 
Honourable  Supreme  Court  in  Multi  Line  Associates'  case 
(1995 SCMR 362). [Emphasis added] 
On the same point august Supreme Court in Ameer Zeb Case (Supra) 
applied the principles laid down in Ardeshir Cowasijee Case (supra) 
to benches of equal strength of august Supreme Court and held:- 
4. It appears that a contrary view was taken by two other Benches 
of equal number of Judges in the cases of Muhammad Hashim and 
Amanat  Ali  (supra).  In  such  a  situation.  apparently  the  rule  laid 
down by the case of Multiline Associates v. Ardeshir Cowasjee PLD 
1995 SC 423 was required to have been followed which is that if a 
Bench  of  equal  Judges  does  not  agree  with  the  earlier  Bench  of 
equal Judges, then the matter should be referred to a larger Bench. 
It appears that earlier decisions of this Court in the cases of Nadir 
Khan and Ali Muhammad (supra) were not brought to the notice of 
the  Benches  in  the  cases  of  Muhammad  Hashim  and  Amanat  Ali 
(supra),  therefore,  the  principle  laid  down  in  the  said  cases  was 
never  discussed.  In  such  a  situation  this  Court  in  the  case  of 
Province of the Punjab v. S. Muhammad Zafar Bukhari PLD 1997 
SC 351 observed as under:--- 
            
Page 16 of 22 
 
 
"Halsbury's  Laws  of  England.  Fourth  Edition,  volume  26  in 
paras 577-578, has commented on the "judgment per incuriam" 
as under: 
            
"A  decision  is  given  per  incuriam  when  the  Court  has  acted  in 
ignorance  of  previous  decision  of  its  own  or  of  a  Court  of 
coordinate jurisdiction which covered the case before it in which 
case it  must decide which case to follow or when it has acted in 
ignorance  of  House  of  a  Lords'  decision,  in  which  case  it  must 
follow that decision or when the decision is given in ignorance of 
the terms of statute or rule has statutory force." 
[Emphasis added by us] 
Indian  Supreme  Court,  while  highlighting  the  importance  of  judicial 
discipline in the case of “Dr. Vijay Laxmi Sadho Vs. Jagdish” (2001 (2) 
SCC 247) observed:- 
It is well-settled that if a Bench of coordinate jurisdiction disagrees 
with another Bench of coordinate jurisdiction whether on the basis 
of  "different  arguments"  or  otherwise,  on  a  question  of  law,  it  is 
appropriate  that  the  matter  be  referred  to  a  larger  Bench  for 
resolution of the issue rather than to leave two conflicting judgments 
to operate, creating confusion. It is not proper to sacrifice certainty 
of  law.  Judicial  decorum,  no  less  than  legal  propriety  forms  the 
basis  of  judicial  procedure  and  it  must  be  respected  at  all  costs." 
[Emphasis added] 
A  Division  Bench  of  Allahabad  High  Court  explained  the  principle  of 
judicial  comity  in  the  case  of  “Arun  Kumar  Singh  v.  State  of  U.P.” 
2013(1) ADJ 457 in the following terms:- 
9.  Moreover,  there  is  a  principle  known  as  ''comity  of  Judges'. 
Particularly  when  the  issue  relates  to  High  Court  itself,  such 
principle has to be applied for taking uniform stand, if not, make an 
observation to place the matter before the appropriate Court which 
had  passed  original  order,  that  too  when  it  is  of  a  Division  Bench, 
whose order has a binding effect, but not to show any judicial over-
activism at the behest of handful of persons. In this regard, we have 
come  across  the  judgements  reported  in  (State  of  U.P.  v.  C.L. 
Agrawal),  1997  (5)  SCC  1  (Furest  Day  Lawson  Ltd.  v.  Jindal 
Exports  Ltd.),2001  (6)  SCC  356  (State  of  Madhya  Pradesh  v. 
Narmada  Bachao  Andolan),  2011  (7)  SCC  639  (Rattiram  v.  State 
of M.P.), 2012 (4) SCC 516 and (U.P. Power Corpn. Ltd. v. Rajesh 
Kumar).,  2012  (7)  SCC  1  In  Furest  Day  Lawson  Ltd.  (supra)  the 
Supreme  Court  has  held  that  a  prior  decision  of  the  Court  on 
identical facts and law binds the Court on the same points of law in 
a  latter  case.  This  is  not  an  exceptional  case  by  inadvertence  or 
oversight  of any  judgement  or  statutory  provisions running  counter 
to  the  reason  and  result  reached.  Unless  it  is  a  glaring  case  of 
obtrusive  omission, it is not desirable to depend on the  principle of 
judgement "per incuriam". In U.P. Power Corpn. Ltd. (supra) it has 
 
Page 17 of 22 
been held by the Supreme Court that judicial discipline commands in 
such a situation when there is disagreement, to refer the matter to a 
larger  Bench. 
that 
considerations of judicial propriety and decorum require that if a  
is  hardly  necessary 
to  emphasise 
It 
learned  Single  Judge  hearing  a  matter  is  inclined  to  take  the  view 
that  the  earlier  decisions  of  the  High  Court,  whether  of  a  Division 
Bench or of a Single Judge, need to be reconsidered, he should not 
embark upon that enquiry sitting as a Single Judge, but should refer 
the  matter  to  a  Division  Bench  or,  in  a  proper  case,  place  the 
relevant papers before the Chief Justice to enable him to constitute a 
larger  Bench  to  examine  the  question.  That  is  the  proper  and 
traditional  way  to  deal  with  such  matters  and  it  is  founded  on 
healthy  principles  of  judicial  decorum  and  propriety.  It  is  to  be 
regretted  that  the  learned  Single  Judge  departed  from  this 
traditional  way  in  the  present  case  and  chose  to  examine  the 
question  himself.  It  was  further  held  that  one  must  remember  that 
pursuit of the law, howsoever, glamorous it is, has its own limitation 
on  the  Bench.  In  a  multi-Judge  court,  the  Judges  are  bound  by 
precedents and procedure. They could use their discretion only when 
there is no declared principle to be found, no rule and no authority. 
The  judicial  decorum  and  legal  propriety  demand  that  where  a 
learned  Single  Judge  or  a  Division  Bench  does  not  agree  with  the 
decision of a Bench of coordinate jurisdiction, the matter should be 
referred to a larger Bench. It is a subversion of judicial process not 
to  follow  this  procedure.  The  Supreme  Court  has  also  held  that 
judicial enthusiasm should not obliterate the profound responsibility 
that is expected from the Judges.  
[Emphasis suppled] 
A  Full  Bench  of  Gujrat  High  Court  (India)  in  the  case  of  “State  of 
Gujarat  v.  Gordhandas  Keshavji  Gandhi  and  others”  AIR  1962 
Gujarat 128, observed:-  
One  Judge  of  a  High  Court  has,  however,  no  right  to  overrule 
the  decision  of  another  Judge  of  the  same  High  Court  nor  has 
one  Division  Bench  of  a  High  Court  the  legal  right  to  overrule 
another  decision  of  a  Division  Bench  of  the  same  High  Court. 
(Emphasis added) 
With regard to powers of Full Bench of High Court, Bombay High Court 
in  the  case  of  Emperor  v.  Ningappa  Ramappa  Kurbar  (A.I.R.  1941 
Bombay 408), observed as follows:  
"There  seems  to  be  very  little  authority  on  the  powers  and 
constitution  of  a  Full  Bench.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  Full 
Bench  can  overrule  a  Division  Bench  and  that  a  Full  Bench  must 
consist  of  three  or  more  Judges;  but  it  would  seem  anomalous  to 
hold  that  a  later  Full  Bench  can  overrule  an  earlier  Full  Bench, 
merely  because  the  later  bench  consists  of  more  Judges  than  the 
earlier.  If  that  were  the  rule,  by  a  majority  of  four  to  three,  could 
Page 18 of 22 
overrule a  unanimous  decision of a bench of  six Judges, though all 
the  Judges  were  of  co-ordinate  jurisdiction.  In  Enatullah  v. 
Kowsher  Ali,  ILR  54  Calcutta  266  :  (A.I.R.  1926  Calcutta  1153) 
(SB) Sanderson, C.J., stating the practice in Calcutta, seems to have 
been  of  opinion  that  a  decision  of  a  Full  Bench  could  only  be 
reversed by the Privy Council or by a bench specially constituted by, 
the Chief Justice." 
 
 
Therefore, any contrary decision given by the subsequent bench of equal 
strength  of  High  Court  in  ignorance  of  the  terms  of  statute,  binding 
precedent  of  Supreme  Court  or  previous  decision  of  bench  of  equal 
strength/Benches  of  coordinate  jurisdiction  of  the  same  Court  will  be  a 
judgement  per  incuriam  and  without  any  precedential  value. Moreover, 
whenever a contrary view has been taken after considering the previous 
decision of the Bench of the same Court, then such a decision would be 
in  violation  of  law  of  precedent  as  set  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 
Ameer Zeb Case (supra) and Ardeshir Cowasijee Case (supra). Hence, 
subsequent judgements given by the subsequent benches of equal or less 
strength  in  the ignorance of  Atta  Ullah  Case  (supra)  are  held  to  be per 
incuriam.  
16. 
It  may  be  noted  that  this  Full  Bench  vide  short  order  dated 
11.05.2018  held  and  declared  that  “-  -  -  -  -against  an  interim  order 
passed by a court under Anti-Terrorism Act 1997, during proceedings of 
a  case,  including  an  order  of  summoning/non-summoning  the  accused 
writ  petition  is  not  maintainable,  as  under  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997, 
applicability of Section 435, 436 and 439 Cr.PC has not been restricted 
except under Section 21-D to the extent of bail, hence, criminal revision 
is  competent”.  In  the  meanwhile,  a  new  development  has  also  arisen, 
which needs consideration. Another full Bench of this Court (at Multan) 
in Criminal Revision No. 417 of 2006 vide order dated 31.05.2018 held 
that Criminal Revision against the order passed by Anti-Terrorism Court 
for  dismissal  of  private  complaint  is  incompetent  and  Constitution 
petition  would  be  maintainable.  The  view  taken  by  the  learned  second 
full bench (at Multan) is contrary to the declaration made by this Bench 
vide short order dated 11.05.2018. 
 
Page 19 of 22 
Now  the  anomaly  has  arisen  that,  whether  this  Full  Bench  is 
bound by the decision of second Full Bench on the same question of law 
or the second bench was bound to follow the declaration of law made by 
this Bench through short order referred supra. It is well settled law that a 
short  order  announced  by  the  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  has  the 
operational effect of judgement pronounced by the court (reference may 
be  made 
to  D.-G.  A.N.F.  RAWALPINDI  and  others  Versus 
MUNAWAR  HUSSAIN  MANJ  and  others  (2014  SCMR  1334); 
REVIEWS  ON  BEHALF  OF  JUSTICE  (RETD.)  ABDUL  GHANI 
SHEIKH  and  others  PLD  2013  SC  1024;  JUSTICE  HASNAT 
AHMED  KHAN 
and 
others  Versus  FEDERATION  OF 
PAKISTAN/STATE P L D 2011 Supreme Court 680; WISRAM DAS 
Versus  SGS PAKISTAN (PVT.) LTD. and another 2010 SCMR 1234; 
WAFI  ASSOCIATES  (PVT.)  LIMITED  Versus  FAROOQ  HAMID 
and  others  (2010  SCMR  1125).  From  perusal  of  case  law  on 
precedential value of a short order, we are of the view that there may be 
two types of short orders i.e. (i) which decide the question of law in clear 
and  operative  terms,  and  (ii)  which  only  adjudicates  the  matter  and  no 
question  of  law  is  clarified  in  terms  of  Article  189  and  201  of  the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. In the light of these 
principles,  we  have  again  carefully  examined  our  short  order  dated 
11.05.2018  and  hold  that  the  same  is  covered  under  the  first  category, 
therefore,  has  the  precedential  value.  However,  second  type  of  orders 
have no precedential value, as those do not qualify the test as laid down 
in  the  case  of  MUHAMMAD  TARIQ  BADR  and  another  Vs. 
NATIONAL BANK OF PAKISTAN and others (2013 SCMR 314)   
[--]  Moreover,  for  the  purpose  that  a  judgment  of  the  apex 
Court  should  have  due  effect  and  due  deference,  three 
conditions  as  per  Khan  Gul  Khan  and  others  v.  Daraz  Khan 
(2010  SCMR  539)  should  be  met  (a)  judgment  decides  a 
question of law; (b) it is passed upon the basis of law; and 
(c) it enunciate the principle of law… 
[Emphasis added] 
In  the  case  of  KHAN  GUL  KHAN  and  others  Vs.  DARAZ  KHAN 
2 0 1 0   S C M R   5 3 9   i t   w a s   h e l d : -  
 
  
Page 20 of 22 
 
In  Muhammad  Tariq's  case  supra,  contentions  raised  by  the  
learned  counsel  as  noted  in  para.6.  Precedents  were  also  noted 
in paras.6 and 7 but the learned Judges had given conclusions in 
para.9.  The  same  is  result  of  per-incuriam  as  the  conclusion  is 
not  in  consonance  with  the  provisions  of  section  20  of  the  Pre-
emption Act. The following are three basic ingredients of every 
decision:--- 
 
        (a) Findings of fact both direct and inferential. 
(b)  Statement  of  principles  of  law  applicable  to  the  legal  terms 
disclosed by the facts. 
(c)  The  judgment  passed  on  the  combined  effect  of  the  above 
ingredients. 
A  decision  of  apex  Court  is  binding  only  when  it  fulfils  the 
following three conditions: --- 
 (i) It decides a question of law. 
 (ii) It is passed upon the basis of law. 
 (iii) It enunciates a principle of law. 
Mere  mentioning 
judgment  without 
adverting  to  the  ratio  laid  down,  in  the  cited  judgments  raises 
questions than resolving the same. 
the  precedents 
the 
in 
       
      [Emphasis supplied by us] 
 
The decision of the second full bench of this Court (at Multan) has been 
based  upon  The  State  through  Mehmood  Ahmad  Butt,  Deputy 
Director, Regional Directorate, Anti-Narcotics Force, Lahore Vs. Mst. 
Fazeelat  Bibi,  (PLD  2013  SC  361)  wherein  the  question  before  the 
court  was,  “---whether  the  learned  High  Court  in  dismissing  State's 
appeal  has  correctly  interpreted  the import  of  section 48  of  the  Control 
of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997". Responding the aforesaid question, it 
was held:- 
[---] The right of appeal conferred by section 48(1) of the Control 
of  Narcotic  Substances  Act,  1997  is  all  pervasive  catering  for 
every  kind  of  appeal  from  every  kind  of  order  passed  by  such  a 
Special Court and the provisions of section 48(1) of the Control of 
Narcotic  Substances  Act,  1997  do  not  make  any  distinction 
between  an  appeal  against  a  conviction,  an  appeal  against  an 
acquittal  or  an  appeal  seeking  enhancement  of  a  sentence  passed 
against a convict. The restrictive scope of section 48 of the Control 
of  Narcotic  Substances  Act,  1997  visualized  by  the  learned 
Division Bench of the Lahore High Court, Lahore confining it only 
to  an  appeal  against  conviction  has  been  found  by  us  to  be 
offensive  to  the  clear  and  unambiguous  provisions  of  the  said 
section and, thus, the same cannot be sustained or upheld by us. 
Therefore, in the light of  Khan Gul Khan Case (supra), Fazeelat Case 
cannot  be  cited  as  a  binding  authority  on  the  question  of  revisional 
 
Page 21 of 22 
powers  of  this  court  against  an  interim  order/order  for  summoning  or 
non-summoning  of  the  accused  passed  by  the  “subordinate”  Anti-
terrorism Court. Moreover, the second Full Bench of this Court was not 
informed  about  unreported  judgement  of  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in 
case of Syed Hussain Abbass v. The State (Criminal Appeals Nos. 257 
of  2000  and  others)  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  High  Courts  being 
appellate  forum  against  the  orders  of  the  ATA  in  suitable  and 
appropriate  cases  can  exercise  powers,  as  required  under  sections  435 
and 439, Cr.P.C.  
17.  This  Court  has  already  decided  the  issue  through  a  short  order 
dated  11.05.2018  which  discloses  that  the  question  of  law  has  been 
decided to the effect that only restriction of bail had been imposed under 
section 21(d) of ATA and Sections 435, 436, 439 of the Code have not 
been  restricted.  Despite  the  fact  that  it  was  a  short  order,  it  resolved  a 
question  of  law  and  it  appears  that  this  order  was  not  brought  to  the 
notice  of  the  learned  Full  Bench  at  Multan.  Further  it  has  also  been 
observed  that  before  this  Bench  the  matter  was  argued  by  the  learned 
Prosecutor General as well as representative of the Advocate General in 
favour  of  maintainability  of  revision  petition,  but  the  ultimate  decision 
rendered by this Court in the presence of learned Prosecutor General and 
the representative of the Advocate General was not conveyed to the Full 
Bench at Multan by their representatives during the course of arguments 
before the said learned Full Bench. Furthermore, through the same short 
order,  the  office  was  directed  to  convert  writ  petition  into  criminal 
revision, it was thus duty of the office to have conveyed this order to the 
administrative officers at the benches for further future references, but it 
appears that needful was not done.  From the above reasons perhaps, the 
order of this Full Bench, appears to have not been brought to the notice 
of the Full Bench at Multan and in addition to the above the judgment of 
the  apex  court  in  Syed  Hussain  Abbas  v.  The  State  (Criminal  Appeals 
Nos.257  of 2000  and  others), also  appears  to  have not  been  referred to 
the  learned  Full  Bench  at  Multan.  As  a  consequence  of  our  above 
discussion, the judgment dated 31.05.2018 passed by the Full Bench 
at  Multan  in  Criminal  Revision  No.417/2006  “Aziz  Ahmad  versus 
 
Page 22 of 22 
Syed Irshad Hussain Shah and others” is held to be per incuriam and 
may not be treated as a binding precedent.  
18.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  we  hold  that  ATC  is 
subordinate/inferior  court  to  the  High  Court;  in  ATA  no  restriction  has 
been  imposed  for  filing  of  revision  petition,  hence,  the  High  Court  has 
the  visitorial  power  over  ATC,  therefore,  can  entertain  petitions  in  the 
nature of those covered by Section 435, 439 of the Code, except to grant 
bail  or  release  an  accused  in  a  case  triable  by  ATC,  in  the  light  of 
restriction imposed under section 21(d) of the ATA, and writ petition is 
not  maintainable.  The  above  exhaustive  discussion  on  the  point  with 
reference to the case law, forms the reasoning of our above reproduced 
short order dated 11.05.2018. 
19.  Before  parting  with  this  Judgment,  we  observe  that  the  question 
before  us  was  not  only  complicated,  but  was  also  a  case  of  first 
impression, therefore, deep  rooted legal  acumen  was  expected  from  the 
learned  counsels  representing  the  respective  sides,  and  at  this  stage  we 
acknowledge  the  skill  of  all  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  who 
rendered  marvelous  assistance  to  this  Bench.  More  particularly  the 
determination  and  effort  put  in  by  Rai  Bashir  Ahmad,  Mr.  Muhammad 
Azhar Siddique, Mirza Naveed Baig, Mr. Azam Nazir Tarrar as well as 
Syed  Ehtisham  Qadir  (learned  Prosecutor  General),  Mr.  Muhammad 
Amjad  Rafiq  (Additional  Prosecutor  General)  and  Mr.  Sittar  Sahil, 
(Assistant  Advocate  General)  is  commendable.    At  the  same  time  we 
appreciate  the  effort  put  in  by  Mr.  Qaisar  Abbas,  Research  Officer,  of 
this  court,  as  by  his  assistance  we  have  been  able  to  lay  our  hands  on 
almost whole of case law on the subject by the superior courts. Thus, we 
would  like  to  bring  on  record  a  sense  of  appreciation  and  words  of 
gratitude in respect of valuable assistance rendered to this Court by all of 
the above. 
 (Muhammad Qasim Khan) 
Judge. 
(Sardar Ahmad Naeem)        
 
               Judge. 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
                    06.07.2018 
 
Javed* 
 
 
 
 
 (Miss Aalia Neelum)
              Judge. 
