 
 
ORDER SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
(Muhammad Azam 
Vs 
Shahzad Akhtar) 
S.No. of 
Order/ 
Proceeding 
 
Date of 
order/ 
Order  with  signature  of  Judge  and  that  of  parties  or 
counsel where necessary 
proceeding 
01.11.2018  Mr. Waqar-ul-Mohsin Lak, Advocate for the appellant. 
 
 
This  appeal  under  Section  417  (2-A)  Cr.P.C.  has 
been  filed  by  appellant  against  the  order  of  acquittal  of 
respondent  No.1  passed  by  the  learned  Sessions  Judge, 
Mandi  Bahuddin,  vide  judgment  dated  17.10.2011  in 
case  arising  out  of  F.I.R  No.527/2004  dated  20.8.2004 
registered  under  Sections  302,  34  PPC  at  Police  Station 
Sadder Mandi Bahauddin. 
2. 
Brief facts of the prosecution case as got recorded 
by complainant Muhammad Azam (present appellant) in his 
statement/Fard Bayan Exh.PG are that he was resident of 
Chelianwala and on 20.8.2004 he alongwith his brothers 
namely  Mazhar  Iqbal  and  Akhtar  Iqbal  were  present  in 
street  for  doing  some  work  in  a  plot  situated  in  front  of 
his  house  when  at  about  9.00  AM,  all  of  a  sudden, 
accused  namely  Shahzad 
(present 
respondent  No.1) 
alongwith  his  companions  namely  Naveed,  Shabbir  and 
Musthaq  (since  acquitted)  armed  with  firearms  weapons, 
came there and Shahzad raised lalkara that today Mazhar 
Iqbal  should  not  go  alive  whereupon  accused  Naveed 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
2 
(since  acquitted)  made  firearm  shot  hitting  at  left  thigh  of 
Mazhar  Iqbal  who  ran  to  take  shelter  of  the  wall,  then 
from  behind  Shahzad  accused  (present  respondent  No.1) 
made two firearm shots with his rifle 223 bore which hit 
Mazhar  Iqbal  at  his  back,  as  a  result  of  which  after  few 
steps,  he  fell  down.    Thereafter  all  the  accused  while 
making  firing  decamped  from  the  place  of  occurrence.  
The  occurrence  was  witnessed  by  Javed  Akhtar  son  of 
Fazal  Dad  and  Khalid  Mehmood.    Mazhar  Iqbal  was 
taken  to  RHC  Chelianwala  where  he  succumbed  to  the 
injuries.    This  occurrence  took  place  over  a  dispute  of 
plot and some money transaction. 
3. 
On  completion  of 
investigation, 
incomplete 
challan  report  under  section  173  Cr.P.C.  was  prepared 
and  submitted in  Court by  placing the names  of  Naveed 
and Mushtaq Ahmad in column No.2 and that of Shabbir 
Ahmad  accused  in  column  No.3,  however,  name  of 
Shahzad  Akhtar  (respondent  No.1)  was  placed  in  column 
No.2 with red ink as his arrest was yet pending.  Learned 
trial  Court  after  receipt  of  said  challan  report,  on  the 
request  of  Muhammad  Azam  complainant 
(present 
appellant) summoned Shahzad Akhtar (respondent No.1) also 
but due to non-service of process, his proclamation under 
Section 87 Cr.P.C. was ordered to be issued, thereafter no 
further  proceedings  were  done  in  this  regard  and  even 
statement of Process Server was not recorded. 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
3 
4. 
It  would  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  here  that 
since  respondent  No.1  was  no  arrested  so  his  trial  was 
kept  pending  whereas  his  co-accused  namely  Naveed 
Akhtar, Shabbir  Ahmad  and  Mushtaq  Ahmad  were  tried 
by  the  trial  Court  and  on  completion  of  trial,  they  were 
acquitted  vide  judgment  dated  30.9.2005  by  extending 
them the benefit of doubt. 
5. 
Shahzad Akhtar after getting protective bail joined 
investigation  on  7.2.2011  and  found  not  involved  in  the 
crime  and  his  name  was  placed  in  column  No.2  in  the 
report prepared and submitted under Section 173 Cr.P.C. 
in  the  Court.    Trial  commenced  and  charge  was  framed 
on 3.5.2011, to which, he pleaded not guilty and claimed 
trial whereafter evidence of prosecution was summoned.  
After  completion  of  prosecution  evidence,  respondent 
No.1  got  recorded  his  statement  under  Section  342 
Cr.P.C.  but  he  did  not  opt  to  record  his  statement  under 
Section  340  (2)  Cr.P.C.  on  oath,  however,  he  produced 
documentary  evidence  in  his  defence.    Thereafter,  the 
learned  trial  Court  after  hearing  both  the  sides  and 
scrutinizing  the  evidence  produced  from  both  sides, 
acquitted respondent No.1 from the charge by extending 
him  benefit  of  doubt  vide  judgment  dated  17.10.2011.  
Hence, this appeal. 
6. 
Having heard the learned counsel for the appellant 
and  gone  through  the  record  available  on  file,  we  find 
that  nothing  has  been  brought  on  record  which  could 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
4 
persuade us to hold that the conclusion arrived at by the 
learned  trial  court  is  against  law  and  evidence  produced 
during  the  trial.    Further  the  judgment  of  learned  trial 
court while acquitting respondent No.1 cannot be termed 
as perverse inasmuch as the reasons recorded therein for 
acquitting  him  are  also  not 
fanciful,  capricious, 
speculative  and  artificial,  in  absence  of  which,  the  order 
of  acquittal  cannot  be  interfered  with.    The  learned  trial 
court  has  dealt  with  all  the  contentions  of  the  learned 
counsel  for  the  appellant,  as  agitated  before  us,  in  the 
judgment  impugned.    From  the  perusal  of  the  impugned 
judgment,  it  reveals  that  according  to  the  version  of 
complainant (present appellant) in his Fard Bayan (Ex.PG), 
on the day of occurrence, respondent No.1 alongwith his 
other  acquitted  co-accused  came  at 
the  place  of 
occurrence and after raising lalkara, one of the acquitted 
co-accused  namely  Naveed  fired  with  rifle  7mm  at 
Mazhar Iqbal deceased, which hit on upper part of his left 
thigh  (Kulah)  whereas  Shahzad  Akhtar  (respondent  No.1) 
made  two  firearm  shots  upon  deceased  Mazhar  Iqbal 
hitting  at  his  back  but  during  trial  complainant  while 
appearing as PW-7 stated that “Naveed made fire which 
hit Mazhar, Shahzad accused made two fires, which hit 
Mazhar on left side of hip”, as such, his said deposition 
is  contradictory  to  his  previous  statements  got  recorded 
by him in Ex.PG and Ex.DB and during confrontation, it 
has  been  observed  that  complainant  has  dishonestly 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
5 
suppressed  seat  of  injury  allegedly  caused  by  Naveed 
(since 
acquitted) 
and 
also 
introduced 
dishonest 
improvement  qua  locale  of  injuries  allegedly  caused  by 
Shahzad  Akhtar  (respondent  No.1)  just  to  bring  ocular 
version in line with medical evidence.  Moreover, it is the 
case  of  the  prosecution  that  three  fire  shots  hit  to  the 
deceased,  one  by  accused  Naveed  and  two  by  accused 
Shahzad  but  PW-6  Dr.  Shafique  Ahmad  observed  two 
injuries  at  the  hip  of  deceased  during  his  autopsy.  
Blackening has been found on injuries No.1-A and 2 but 
according  to  site  plan  Ex.PM,  distance  from  where 
Shahzad Akhtr allegedly fired at deceased is 13 feet.  It is 
settled principle of Medical Jurisprudence that in case of 
blackening  maximum  range  of  firing  is  six  feet.    Thus 
medical  has  contradicted  ocular  account.    Reliance  is 
respectfully  placed  upon  the  cases  of  “Mst.  Jallan  Vs 
Muhammad Riaz and others” (NLR 2003 Crl. 577) and 
“Muhammad  Ali  Vs  The  State”  (2015  SCMR  137).  
Moreover,  the  learned  trial  Court  has  observed  major 
contradictions  relating  to  taking  the  deceased  to  RHC 
Chelianwala,  which  also  create  serious  doubt  regarding 
the truthfulness of the prosecution story.  Another aspect 
of the matter is that besides the appellant, the occurrence 
was witnessed by Akhtar Iqbal, Javed Akhtar and Khalid 
Mehmood but they were not produced in Court to prove 
the  charge  against  respondent  No.1  by  mentioning  them 
as  being  won  over,  and  in  that  scenario,  non-production 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
6 
of 
these  witnesses  goes  against 
the  prosecution.  
Complainant  during  cross  examination  denied  his 
relationship  with  above  mentioned  eyewitnesses, he  was 
confronted with his previous statement (Ex.DB) recorded 
on  oath  during  previous  trial,  it  was  found  that  in  said 
statement  he  has  admitted  that  Khalid  Mehmood  and 
Javed  Akhtar  PWs  were  his  “Khalazad”.    So  he  has 
denied admitted relationship.  Similarly he has denied his 
relationship  with  Amir  Mehmood  PW-5  whereas  Amir 
Mehmood  PW-5  has  clearly  stated  during  his  statement 
before the Court that he is son of sister in law  (Saali) of 
complainant. So, the complainant suppressed relationship 
with  PWs.    Reliance  is  placed  upon  the  case  of  “The 
State Vs Iqbal and 3 others” (1986 P.Cr.L.J. 215).  It has 
also  been  found  that  complainant  also  suppressed  the 
factum  of  receipt  of  injury  by  Shabbir  accused  (since 
acquitted)  which  goes  against  the  prosecution  and  in  this 
regard reliance is placed upon the cases of “Mst. Zahida 
Saleem Vs Muhammad Naseem and others” (PLD 2006 
SC 427) and “Muhammad Rahim and others  Vs Bakht 
Muhammad and others” (2006 SCMR 1217).  These all 
facts  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  occurrence  did  not  take 
place as alleged by complainant. 
Three  co-accused  have  been  acquitted  in  the  case 
and  now  strong  corroboration  required  to  prove  charge 
against  Shahzad  Akhtar  (respondent  No.1)  but  prosecution 
remained  failed  to  do  so  and  in  this  regard,  reliance  is 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
7 
respectfully  placed  upon  the  cases  of  “Mst.  Sughra 
Begum and another Vs Qaiser Pervez and others” (2015 
SCMR 1142), and “Irfan Ali Vs The State”(2015 SCMR 
840).  
Another vital aspect of the case is that prosecution 
itself brought on record documentary evidence before the 
Court  to  prove  that  Shahzad  Akhtar  (respondent  No.1)  is 
not  involved  in  the  alleged  occurrence  rather  he  was 
abroad i.e. in foreign country on the day of occurrence of 
this case.  Prosecution itself collected Passport Ex.P4, P5 
&  P6  of  Shahzad  Akhtar  during  investigation  and 
verified  his  travelling  record  through  letter  Ex.PJ  from 
Immigration  Authorities  and  produced  verification 
documents  qua  his  travel  history  as  Ex.PK  and  PK/1.  
Furthermore  Ex.DJ  and  DJ/1  alongwith  its  translation 
Ex.DJ  duly  verified  by  Sudan  Embassy  and  Embassy  of 
Pakistan  Khartoum  Sudan  about  his  presence  abroad  on 
the  fateful  day  of  occurrence  were  also  brought  on 
record,  which  even  were  not  challenged  by 
the 
prosecution.    No  recovery  of  any  incriminating  material 
was made during investigation.  Mere abscondance is no 
proof  of  guilt,  when  direct  evidence  is  not  trustworthy 
and  reliable, then abscondance  is of no  avail  and cannot 
cure  or  repair  defects  of  the  case  of  prosecution.  
Abscondance  is  mere  a  suspicion  and  cannot  prove 
charge  as  a  substantive  piece  of  evidence  and  in  this 
regard  reliance  is  placed  upon  the  case  of  “Rasool 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
8 
Muhammad  Vs  Asal  Muhammad  and  another”  (PLJ 
1995 SC 477).  Thus, learned trial Court while acquitting 
respondent No.1 has rightly observed in Para No.29 of its 
judgment, as under:- 
“The  upshot  of  the  above  discussion  is  that 
the prosecution remained failed to prove its 
case  beyond  all  shadow  of  doubts  against 
accused Shahzad Akhtar s/o Ghulam Sarwar 
and I found that the prosecution case is not 
free  from  all  doubts.    In  view  of  above,  I 
have  pondered  over  the  plea  of  alibi  of  the 
accused.    I  found  that  the  accused  and  the 
prosecution 
through  documentary 
evidence produced plausible and reasonable 
evidence  to  substantiate  the  absence  of  the 
accused  from  Pakistan  on  the  fateful  day.  
such 
Therefore, 
documentary 
almost 
remained  unchallenged,  the  first  version  of 
the accused i.e. plea of alibi is believed.  So, 
the  benefit  of  doubt  is  given  to  the  accused 
Shahzad Akhtar” 
evidence,  which 
keeping 
itself 
view 
in 
 
7. 
The  learned  trial  Judge  has  advanced  valid  and 
cogent  reasons  for  arriving  at  the  finding  of  acquittal  in 
favour of respondent No.1 and we see no legal justification 
to  disturb  the  same.    Even  otherwise,  when  an  accused 
person is acquitted from the charge by a court of competent 
jurisdiction,  then  double  presumption  of  innocence  is 
attached  to  such  order,  with  which  courts  do  not  interfere 
unless  the  impugned  order  is  found  to  be  arbitrary, 
capricious,  fanciful  and  against  the  record,  which  are  not 
found  available  in  the  present  case  and  in  this  regard 
reliance  is  placed  upon  the  case  of  “Haji  Paio  Khan  Vs 
Sher  Biaz  and  others”  (2009  SCMR  803).    Further  in 
appeal  against  acquittal, interference  is  made only  when  it 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.2045/2011 
9 
appears that acquittal is result of misreading or non-reading 
of evidence which too is missing in this case.  The ordinary 
scope  of  appeal  against  acquittal  is  considerably  narrow 
and  limited  as  held  in  the  cases  of  “Muhammad  Usman 
and  2  others  vs.  The  State”  (1992  SCMR  498)  and  “The 
State  vs.  Muhammad  Sharif  and  others”  (1995  SCMR 
635).    We  have  observed  that  prosecution  has  failed  to 
prove  the  charge  against  respondent  No.1  beyond  the 
shadow  of  doubt.    The  case  of  the  prosecution  is  fraught 
with  doubts.    Further  respondent  No.1  was  not  bound  to 
establish  number  of  circumstances  creating  a  reasonable 
doubt  in  the  prudent  mind  even  a  single  circumstance  is 
sufficient  to  extend  the  benefit  of  doubt  to  him.    In  this 
regard,  reliance  can  be  placed  upon 
the  cases  of 
“Muhammad  Zaman  vs.  The  State  and  Others”  (2014 
SCMR  749)  and  “Muhammad  Ashraf  &  Others  vs.  The 
State & Another” (PLD 2015 Lahore 1). 
8. 
In  view  of  the  foregoing  discussion,  we  have  not 
observed  any  legitimate  exception  to  interfere  in  the 
well-reasoned  judgment  of  the  learned  trial  court. 
Consequently,  the  appeal  in  hand,  having  no  merits,  is 
hereby dismissed in limine. 
 
(Ch. Mushtaq Ahmad)   
 
    Judge 
 
 
 
  (Farooq Haider) 
          Judge 
Naeem 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
    Judge 
 
 
 
          Judge 
 
 
