1 
 
Stereo.HCJDA 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
…. 
 
Review Application No. 45 of 2016. 
 
 
Waqas Amjad and others. 
 
 Versus 
 
Additional Sessions Judge and others. 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of hearing:   
06.12.2018 
 
Applicants by: 
 
M/s A. K. Dogar and Nadeem Sarwar, 
 Advocates. 
Respondents No. 2 to 4 by:  Ex-parte. 
 
MIRZA  VIQAS  RAUF,  J.  This  application  seeking  review  of 
judgment dated 9th of May, 2016 is before us in pursuance to order dated 
03rd of April, 2017 which reads as under:- 
“Publication  in  terms  of  order  dated 
08th of March, 2017 has been duly published in 
the  daily  “Nawa-i-Waqt”  but  nobody  has 
entered  appearance  on  behalf  of  respondents 
No.2 to 4. They are thus proceeded ex-parte. 
Learned  counsel 
for 
the  applicant 
submits  that  the  order  under  review  is  solely 
based  on 
the  principles 
laid  down 
in 
“MUHAMMAD HUSNAIN and another versus 
ADDITIONAL  SESSIONS  JUDGE,  MULTAN 
and 2 others” (PLD 2013 Lahore 1). He adds 
that law enunciated in the referred judgment is 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
2 
alien  to  the  general  principles,  as  appeal  is  a 
creation of statute which is a substantial right. 
Learned  counsel  contends  that  no  appeal  was 
provided  under  the  Illegal  Dispossession  Act, 
2005,  so  the  order  under  review  is  thus  not 
tenable.  He  further  adds  that  the  vires  of 
Section 3 of the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 
are  also  not  in  conformity  with  the  law  laid 
down  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  in  the  case  of  “ABRAR  HASSAN 
versus  GOVERNMENT  OF  PAKISTAN  AND 
ANOTHER”  (PLD  1976  Supreme  Court  315) 
and  the  provision also  offends  the  mandate  of 
Article 175 of The Constitution of The Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 
In  order  to  properly  appreciate  the 
contentions  raised  by  learned  counsel  for  the 
applicant at the bar, we deem it appropriate to 
refer  this  matter  to  the  Hon’ble  Chief  Justice 
to appoint a larger bench for the said purpose. 
Office to do the needful.”  
2. 
Facts in precision necessary for adjudication of instant application are 
that  the  applicants  filed  a  complaint  under  the  Illegal  Dispossession  Act, 
2005  (hereinafter  referred  as  “Act”)  before  the  learned  Sessions  Judge, 
averring therein that by virtue of an agreement to sell dated 21st of January, 
2008,  they  purchased  land  measuring  10  Kanals  15  Marlas  with  sale 
consideration  of  Rs.  22  lac  from  one  M.  Abbas  Panwar  and  in  terms 
thereof,  they  also  took  over  the  possession  of  the  land.  This  followed  a 
series  of  litigation  on  civil  as  well  as  criminal  side.  As  per  claim  of  the 
applicants,  respondent  No.4  with  connivance  of  respondent  No.5  finally 
dispossessed them from the land in question. The complaint was entrusted 
to  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Lahore,  who  proceeded  to  dismiss 
the  same  vide  order  dated  18th  of  July,  2011.  The  applicants  feeling 
aggrieved  though  filed  Writ  Petition  No.  18819/2011  but  same  was 
3 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
dismissed  by  the  learned  Single  Judge  in  Chamber,  through  order  dated 
27th  of  September, 2012, which  was  questioned by  way  of  an  Intra  Court 
Appeal  No.  730/2012.  The  appeal  was  ultimately  dismissed  through 
judgment dated 9th of May, 2016, being hit by proviso to section 3 of the 
Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972.  
3.  Record reveals that despite issuance of publication in terms of order 
dated  8th  of  March,  2017,  nobody  had  entered  appearance  on  behalf  of 
respondents  No.2  to  4,  so  they  were  thus,  proceeded  ex-parte  vide  order 
dated 3rd of April, 2017.  
4. 
 Mr.  A.  K.  Dogar,  Advocate  while  opening  his  submissions  in 
support  of  instant  application  contended  that  order  under  review  is  not 
tenable under the law. He added that complaint was filed under the “Act” 
which was a special law providing no remedy of appeal. Learned counsel 
submitted that unless right of appeal is provided under the law that cannot 
be availed. While proceeding further, learned counsel contended that Court 
trying  a  complaint  under  the  “Act”  is  a  special  Court  for  all  intent  and 
purposes  and  as  such  principles  laid  down  in  the  case  of  R.M.A.R.A. 
Adaikappa Chettiar and another vs. R. Chandrasekhara Thevar (PLD 
1947 Privy Council 279) are not applicable. Learned counsel emphatically 
argued  that  judgment  in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Husnain  and  another 
vs. Additional Sessions Judge, Multan and 2 others (PLD 2013 Lahore 
1) is based on wrong assumption of facts. Learned counsel maintained that 
in  absence  of  any  appeal  under  the  “Act”,  Intra  Court  Appeal  was 
competent.  Places  reliance  on  the  cases  of  Syed  Masroor  Shah  and 
others  vs.  The  State  (PLD  2005  SC  173),  Mst.  Inayatan  Khatoon  and 
others vs. Muhammad Ramzan and others (2012 SCMR 229) and Mian 
Sharif Shah vs. Nawab Khan and 5 others (PLD 2011 Peshawar 86).  
5.  After having heard learned counsel for the applicants at considerable 
length, we have also perused the record.  
6.  Before  pondering  upon  the  questions  raised  hereinabove,  we  must 
express that we are cognizant of the fact that we are seized with a review 
application which of course runs on a limited scope. A judgment or order 
can only be reviewed in the following eventualities:- 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
4 
Firstly, on discovery of new and important matter 
or  evidence,  which  after  the  exercise  of  due 
diligence,  was  not  within 
the  applicant’s 
knowledge or could not be produced by him at the 
time  when  the  decree  was  passed  or  order  was 
made; 
Secondly, mistake or error apparent on the face of 
the record; or  
Thirdly, for any other sufficient reason. 
The above mentioned principles have been outlined in Order 
XLVII  Rule  1  “C.P.C.”  Part  IV  Order  XXVI  of  the  Supreme  Court 
Rules, 1980 also bestows power of review upon  the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan which runs on the principles enshrined in Order XLVII Rule 1 
“C.P.C.”  While  interpreting  the  scope  of  review,  the  Hon’ble  Apex 
Court  in  the  case  Regarding  Pensionary  Benefits  of  the  Judges  of 
Superior Courts (PLD 2013 SC 829) held as under:- 
“The  other  objections  as  to  the  maintainability  are  with 
reference to the powers of this Court under Articles 184(3), 
187  and  188  of  the  Constitution  qua  applicability  of  the 
principles  of  "stare  decisis";  "res 
judicata";  "locus 
poenitentiae"  and  "past  and  closed  transaction".  In  this 
regard, when we have confronted the learned ASCs with a 
simple  but  important  question,  that  if  for  any  reason  the 
note of the Registrar dated 21-11-2012 is improper and its 
contents are discarded, but at the same time when the issue 
in relation to the illegality of a judgment, which has taken 
the form of a precedent laying down an incorrect law, and 
its  colossal  fallout  on  the  public  exchequer,  which  has 
brought  it  within  the  domain  of  public  interest  litigation, 
has  come  to  our  notice  in  any  form,  whether  for  some 
technical  reasons  alone,  the  Court  should  still  desist  from 
exercising its jurisdiction vested under Articles 184(3), 187 
and 188 of the Constitution, the unanimous answer to this 
question  was  in  the  negative  i.e.  in  exercise  of  powers 
under 
the  constitutional  provisions, 
this  Court  has 
unlimited  jurisdiction  to  reopen,  revisit  or  review,  and  for 
5 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
this purpose examine any judgment earlier pronounced by 
this  Court  to  set  the  law  correct,  to  cure  injustice,  save  it 
from  becoming  an  abuse  of  the  process  of  law  and  this 
judicial system.”  
After having an overview of the principles referred hereinabove, it 
can  be  inferred  that  though  review  has  a  very  limited  scope  but  it  does 
not mean to abdicate the power of review in an omnibus fashion. If in all 
eventualities, review application is to be dismissed, then what is the fun 
in  keeping  the  remedy  of  review  in  the  Statute  books.  The  intent  of 
Legislature is thus, clear that while incorporating the power of review in 
the  Statute  ,  it  is  meant  that  no  error  in  the  judgment/order  which  is  so 
manifest or floating on the surface should be allowed to perpetuate. 
7.  We when have examined the points raised on the above perspective, 
we  are  unanimous  that  there is  a  considerable  weight  in  the  contentions 
of learned counsel for the applicants to persuade us to exercise power of 
review. 
8. 
The first and fore most important question is whether in absence of 
remedy  of  appeal  in  the  relevant  Statute,  it  can  be  held  that  Intra  Court 
Appeal is hit by the proviso of section 3 of the Law Reforms Ordinance, 
1972 (hereinafter referred as “Ordinance”). It is an admitted position that 
Intra  Court  Appeal  of  the  applicants  was  dismissed  in  the  light  of 
principles  laid  down  in  Muhammad  Husnain  ‘s  case(supra)  (PLD  2013 
Lahore 1). We have observed that while holding that right of appeal and 
revision  exists  against  the  orders  passed  by  the  Court  under  the  “Act” 
within  the  framework  provided  under  section  9  of  the  “Act”,  the  Court 
was  also  mindful  of  the  fact  that  right  of  appeal  and  revision  is  the 
creation  of  Statute.  The  judgment  in  Muhammad  Husnain’s  case  was, 
however, the outcome of the judgment of a Full Bench of Privy Council 
in  the  case  of  R.M.A.R.A.  Adaikappa  Chettiar  and  another  vs.  R. 
Chandrasekhara  Thevar  (PLD  1947  Privy  Council  279).  In  the  said 
judgment, it was held by the Honourable Judges that:- 
“The true rule is that where a legal right is in 
dispute and the ordinary Courts of the country 
are  seized  of  such  dispute  the  Courts  are 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
6 
governed  by  the  ordinary  rules  of  procedure 
applicable  thereto  and  an  appeal  lies,  if 
authorized  by  such  rules  notwithstanding  that 
the  legal  right  claimed  arises  under  a  special 
statute  which  does not in  terms  confer a right 
of appeal.” 
 
It  is  thus,  evident  that  the  above  principles  were  laid  in  a  case 
arising  out  of  execution  proceedings  started  in  pursuance  to  a  decree 
passed  in  a  suit  instituted  under  the  Civil  Procedure  Code,  1908 
(hereinafter  referred  as  “C.P.C.”).  During  execution  proceedings,  the 
Madras  Agriculturists  Relief  Act  (V  of  1922)  was  promulgated.  The 
judgment debtor moved an application under sections 8,19 and 20 of the 
Act ibid read with sections 47 and 151 of C.P.C. praying that execution 
proceedings  be  stayed  till  disposal  of  the  question  of  the  extent  of 
liability for debt under section 19 of the said Act and a declaration that 
the  debt  was  wholly  discharged  under  section  8  of  the  Act  ibid.  As  no 
appeal  was  provided  specifically  under  the  said  Act,  so  the  Privy 
Council laid down the principles referred hereinabove in the light of the 
said  facts  and  circumstances  as  the  original  proceedings  ensued  from  a 
suit instituted under “C.P.C”. 
9. 
In the instant matter, admittedly the proceedings were carried out 
under  altogether  a  different  Statute  which  was  a  special  law  and 
promulgated for an object and purpose to protect the lawful owners and 
occupiers  of  immovable  properties  from  their  illegal  or  forcible 
dispossession therefrom by the property grabbers. There is no cavil that 
no new Courts were established under the “Act” and by virtue of section 
2(a) Court of Session was declared as “Court” for the purposes of “Act” 
but the complaint under section 4 of the Act ibid was in no way equated 
with the complaint under section 193 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898(hereinafter  referred  as  “Cr.P.C.”).  Moreover  for  the  purpose  of 
investigation upon a complaint entirely different procedure was provided 
under section 5 of the “Act”. It is thus, manifestly clear from the scheme 
of  the  “Act”  that  it  was  promulgated  to  effectively  curb  the  detestable 
and illegal activities of dispossession and for that purpose very stringent 
7 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
provisions were inserted in the “Act” and entire procedure for enquiring 
into  the  trial  of  such  cases  was  made  summary  in  character.  No  doubt 
Court of Session was designated as Court under the “Act” but in view of 
nature  of  Statute  as  a  special  law,  Court  under  section  2(a)  cannot  be 
termed as ordinary Court of Session. We are thus, in agreement that law 
laid down by the Privy Council in the case of R.M.A.R.A. Adaikappa 
Chettiar  (supra)  was  not  applicable  to  the  cases  under  the  “Act”.  The 
judgment in Muhammad Husnain’s case (supra) was thus, not delivered 
on  the  basis  of  true  interpretation  of  law.  The  principles  enunciated 
therein are quite alien to the well recognized principles of law. Reliance 
in this respect can be placed on the case of Mst. Inayatan Khatoon and 
others vs. Muhammad Ramzan and others (2012 SCMR 229). 
10.  There can be no second opinion that right of appeal is a creation 
of Statute. Such right cannot be availed unless it is conferred in a clear 
manner by some enactment or Statute or the rules having the sanctity of 
some  law.  The  right  of  appeal,  review  or  revision  is  to  be  specifically 
provided for and the same cannot arise by implication. Guidance in this 
respect  if  needed  can  be  sought  from  the  case  of  Syed  Masroor  Shah 
and others vs. The State (PLD 2005 SC 173), wherein the Honourable 
Apex Court has held as under:- 
“Where,  by  reason of  any  limitation  imposed 
by  statute,  charter  or  commission,  a  Court  is 
without 
jurisdiction 
to 
entertain 
any 
particular  action  or  matter,  neither 
the 
acquiescence  nor  the  express  consent  of  the 
parties  can  confer  jurisdiction  upon  the 
Court,  nor  can  consent  give  a  Court 
jurisdiction  if  a  condition  which  goes  to  the 
jurisdiction  has  not  been  performed  or 
fulfilled.  Where  a  Court  takes  upon  itself  to 
exercise a  jurisdiction it does not possess, its 
decision amounts to nothing” 
8 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
In  somewhat  similar  facts  and  circumstances,  a  learned  Division 
11. 
Bench  of  Peshawar  High  Court  in  the  case  of  Mian  Sharif  Shah  vs. 
Nawab Khan and 5 others (PLD 2011 Peshawar 86) held as under:- 
 
the  provisions  of  S.9  of 
“(b) Illegal Dispossession Act (XI of 2005)--- 
----Ss.  3,  5  &  9---Criminal  Procedure  Code  (V  of 
1898),  S.404---Constitution  of  Pakistan,  Art.199---
Constitutional  petition---Illegal  dispossession---
Right  of  appeal,  absence  of---Provisions  of 
Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898,  applicability---
Question  raised  before  High  Court  was  whether  in 
view  of 
Illegal 
Dispossession  Act,  2005,  right  of  appeal  provided 
under  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898  was 
available  to  cases  under  Illegal  Dispossession  Act, 
2005---Validity---To  provide  quick  justice/relief, 
right  of  appeal  and  revision  was  deliberately 
omitted from the provisions of Illegal Dispossession 
Act,  2005,  so 
that  such  grave  mischief  was 
suppressed  without  any  delay---For  such  reason, 
law  breakers  were  deprived  of  remedy/right  of 
appeal before High Court and finality was given to 
decision  of  Trial  Courts  to  accomplish  desired 
objectives---Legislature  enacted  S.9  of 
Illegal 
Dispossession  Act,  2005,  and  provisions  of 
Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898,  were  made 
applicable 
Illegal 
Dispossession  Act,  2005;  as  such  the  same  did  not 
convey  intent  of  law  maker  conferring  right  of 
appeal  on  aggrieved  person---If 
intention  of 
Legislature was to confer such right, it would have, 
thus  added  express  words  "Including  Proceedings 
before 
appeal"---Restricted 
applicability  of  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898, 
could not be given extended meaning and scope by 
incorporating  right  of  appeal  thereunder---Such 
right  being  substantive  in  nature  was  always 
conferred and taken away through express words---
At least one right of appeal was invariably provided 
against judgment of Trial Court---High Court advised 
Federal  Government  to  make  'immediate  necessary. 
arrangements 
Illegal 
Dispossession  Act,  2005,  through  Parliament  by 
providing  one  right  of  appeal  to  aggrieved  person 
against  final  judgment  of  Trial  Court---High  Court 
permitted  aggrieved  persons  to  avail  remedy  by  way 
of  maintaining  Constitutional  petitions  against  final 
judgment  of  Trial  Court,  till  the  time  law  would  be 
amended---High  Court  directed 
to 
fix  all  such 
petitions as Constitutional petitions.” 
to  all  provisions  under 
the  Court 
amending' 
suitably 
for 
of 
9 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
 
12.  There is yet another important aspect had there been the intent of 
Legislature  that  by  inserting  Section  9  in  the  “Act”,  it  was  meant  to 
provide  the  remedy  of  appeal  in  the  light  of  provisions  contained  in 
“Cr.P.C.”,  there  was  no  need  to  amend  the  Illegal  Dispossession  Act, 
2005  through  Act  No.  XXVIII  of  2017  dated  04.07.2017,  whereby 
section 8-A was inserted to the following effect:- 
“8-A. Appeal.—Any order made under sub-section 
(2) and sub-section (3) of section 3 and sub-section 
(1)  of  section  8  shall,  within  thirty  days  of  the 
order, be appeal-able before the High Court.” 
13.  After having threadbare discussion, we are of the candid and firm 
view that in the absence of remedy of appeal in the “Act”, Intra Court 
Appeal should not have been dismissed, being hit by proviso to section 
3  of  the  Law  Reforms  Ordinance,  1972.  For  ready  reference  and 
convenience same is reproduced below:- 
 
3.— Appeal to High Court in certain cases.  
(1)  An  appeal  shall  lie  to  a  Bench  of  two  or  more 
Judges of a High Court from a decree passed or final 
order  made  by  a  single  Judge  of  that  Court  in  the 
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction 
(2) An appeal shall also lie to a Bench of two or more 
Judges  of  a  High  Court  from  an  order  made  by  a 
single  Judge  of  that  Court  under  clause(l)  of  Article 
199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan  not  being  an  order  made  under  sub-
paragraph  (i)  of  paragraph  (b)  of  that  clause: 
Provided  that  the  appeal  referred  to  in  this  sub-
section  shall  not  be  available  or  competent  if  the 
application  brought  before  the  High  Court  under 
Article 199 arises out of any proceedings in which the 
law  applicable  provided  for  at  least  one  appeal  or 
one  revision  or  one  review  to  any  court,  tribunal  or 
authority against the original order. 
(3) No appeal shall  lie under sub-section  (1) or sub-
section  (2)  from  an  interlocutory  order  or  an  order 
which  does  not  dispose  of  the  entire  case  before  the 
Court. 
(4)  Nothing  contained  in  this  Ordinance  shall  be 
construed as affecting— 
R.A. No. 45 of 2016 
 
 
10 
(a)  any  appeal  under  the  provisions  of  the  Letters 
Patent  applicable  to  a  High  Court  or  under  section 
102 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which was 
pending  immediately  before  the  commencement  of 
this Ordinance ; or 
(b) any appeal or petition for leave to appeal from a 
decree, judgment or order of a single Judge of a High 
Court  made 
the 
commencement  of  the  Law  Reforms  (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1972.. 
to  the  Supreme  Court  before 
 
 
(underling supplied for emphasis) 
 
Bare perusal  of the  above  referred provision  of law postulates that 
an  appeal  under  section  3  would  not  be  competent,  if  the  application 
brought before the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 arises out of any proceedings in 
which the law applicable provided for atleast one appeal or one revision 
or  one  review  to  any  Court,  Tribunal  or  authority  against  the  original 
order.  In  the  light  of  settled  proposition  of  law,  the  dismissal  of  Intra 
Court  Appeal  being  hit  by  proviso  to  section  3  of  the  Law  Reforms 
Ordinance,  1972  was  unwarranted.  We  thus,  allow  this  review 
application  and  recall  the  judgment  dated  9th  of  May,  2016,  as  a  result 
thereof, Intra Court Appeal filed by the applicants shall be deemed to be 
pending, which shall be decided on merits. 
 
 
 
 
(Muhammad Tariq Abbasi) 
 
        (Mirza Viqas Rauf) 
Judge                                   
Judge 
 
 
(Sardar Muhammad Sarfraz Dogar) 
 
     Judge 
 
 
Announced in open Court on 17th of December, 2018. 
 
 
         
Judge                                   
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
     Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Riaz 
