 
 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
    
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
          Judgment Sheet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            WP No.32150 of 2015     
     Punjab Healthcare Commission  
 
Versus 
       Mushtaq Ahmad Chaudhary etc. 
 
  J U D G M E N T  
Date of Hearing 
6.7.2018 
Petitioners By: 
Khawaja  Issam  Bin  Haris,  Advocate  for 
Petitioner  in  WP  No.32150/15  and  for  Punjab 
Healthcare  Commission  in WP Nos.79690/17, 
2427/17  and  31831/15  along  with  Dr. 
Muhammad  Ajmal  Khan,  Chief  Operating 
Officer,  Punjab  Healthcare  Commission  and 
Khurram  Mushtaq,  Additional  Director 
(Legal), Punjab Healthcare Commission. 
Mr.  Mohammad  Ahmad  Qayyum,  Mr. 
Shumail  Arif,  Mr.  Omar  Ashfaq  and  Mr. 
Ghulam  Mustafa  Umair,  Advocates  for  the 
Petitioners  in  WP  Nos.79690/17,  2427/17, 
31831/15  and  for  Respondent  No.1  in  WP 
No.32150/15. 
Mr.  Nawab  Saeed  Ullah,  Advocate  for  the 
Petitioners in WP No.19597/15. 
Malik Zia ur Rehman, Advocate for Petitioner 
in WP No.38582/15. 
Mr.  Waheed  Ahmad,  Advocate 
Petitioner in WP No.28593/15. 
for 
the 
Mr.  Imtiaz  Hussain  Khan  Baloch,  Advocate 
for the Petitioner in WP No.11158/16. 
Mr.  Muazzam  Iqbal  Gill,  Advocate  for  the 
Petitioner in WP No.30210/16.  
Mian  Subah  Sadiq  Klasson 
and  Mr. 
Muhammad  Hayat  Klasson,  Advocates  for 
Petitioner in WP No.28517/16. 
Nemo for Petitioner in WP No.21753/15. 
WP No.32150/2015 
Respondents By: 
 
 
2 
Mr. Nasar Ahmad, DAG and Mr. Muhammad 
Zikria Sheikh, DAG. 
Mr. Anwaar Hussain, Addl. AG, Punjab along 
with  Barrister  Haris  Ramzan,  Legal  Advisor, 
M.  Aleem  Akhtar  Cheema,  Senior  Law 
Officer,  Muhammad  Khursheed,  Law  Officer 
on behalf of the Secretary Health, Lahore. 
Ch.  Muhammad  Umar  and  Mufti  Ahtsham-
Uddin-Haider,  Advocates 
Punjab 
Healthcare  Commission  in WP Nos.19597/15, 
28593/15,  38582/15,  21753/15,  11158/16  and 
28517/16.  
for 
Ayesha A. Malik J:  The instant  petition  filed  by  the  Punjab 
Healthcare  Commission  challenges  order dated 16.10.2015  issued  by 
Respondent  No.2,  District  and  Sessions  Judge,  Toba  Tek  Singh 
whereby  the  sealing  order  against  the  clinic  of  Respondent  No.1, 
Mushtaq Ahmad Chaudhary was set aside and it was held therein that 
the Punjab Healthcare Commission (“Commission”) did not have any 
power under the  Punjab  Healthcare  Commission  Act, 2010  (“Health 
Act”)  to  seal  a  healthcare  establishment.  In  the  first  round  the  case 
was  heard  on  20.11.2015  and  a  judgment  was  rendered  by  a  learned 
Single Judge of this Court holding therein that the action of sealing a 
healthcare establishment is without any backing of law, hence without 
lawful  authority.  Accordingly  the  order  passed  by  the  District  and 
Sessions  Judge,  Toba  Tek  Singh  dated  16.10.2015  was  upheld.  This 
judgment  was  challenged  before  the  august  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  in  C.A  213/2016  &  C.M.A  816/2016,  C.A  214/2016  & 
C.M.A  818/2016  &  C.Ps  768,  997  &  998  of  2016  wherein  with  the 
consent of the parties the following order was passed on 14.2.2017: 
Both  the  Appeals  are  allowed  and  the  cases  are  remanded  to  the  learned 
High Court to be tagged and heard alongwith Writ Petition No.2427/2017, 
filed by the Respondents challenging the vires of the Punjab Health Care 
Commission Act, 2010. The learned High Court will hear the parties and 
decide the matter in accordance with law. 
 
2. 
The  instant  petition  was  being  heard  along  with  two  other 
petitions.  Firstly  WP  No.31831/2015  filed  by  the  Punjab  Dental 
WP No.32150/2015 
3 
Practitioners  Association  wherein  it  is  prayed  that  the  Commission 
should  not  illegally  harass  the  members  of  the  Association  and  it 
seeks  a  declaration  that  all  persons  registered  under  the  Unani 
Ayurvedic  and  Homoeopathic  Practitioner  Act,  1965  (“Unani  Act”) 
be authorized to practice as dental technicians and dental hygienists, if 
they  possess  the  appropriate  diploma  by  the  Skill  Development 
Council. The second petition being WP No.2427/2017 is also filed by 
the  Punjab  Dental  Practitioners  Association  and  Mushtaq  Ahmad 
Chaudhary.  In  this  petition,  the  vires  of  the  Health  Act  have  been 
challenged  essentially  on  the  ground  that  the  Provincial  Government 
is  not  competent  to  legislate  on  the  subject  of  healthcare.  The 
aforementioned  three  petitions  are  being  heard  as  per  the  remand 
order,  along  with  connected  matters  being  WP  Nos.28593/15, 
21753/15,  19597/15,  38582/15,  79690/17,  11158/16  and  30210/16 
(Details  given in  Schedule  “A”).  Essentially  all  these  petitions either 
challenge  the  vires  of  the  Health  Act  or  challenge  the  act  of  sealing 
healthcare  establishments  by  the  Commission.  In  some  petitions  a 
declaration  is  sought  against  the  Respondents  from  stopping  the 
Petitioners from practicing as Hakeem or Homoeopathic doctors or in 
terms of their registration under the Unani Act.  
3. 
In  terms  of  the  above,  there  are  two  main  issues  before  this 
Court; (i) vires of the Health Act and (ii) whether the Commission has 
the power to seal healthcare establishments under the Health Act.  
Vires of the law 
The arguments 
 
4.  Mr.  Mohammad  Ahmad  Qayyum,  Advocate  for  the  Dental 
Association  and  Mushtaq  Ahmed  Chaudhary  explained  that  the 
Petitioners are qualified and registered under the Unani Act. That they 
are  carrying  out  their  lawful  business  in  the  field  of  traditional 
medicine,  essentially  as  tibbs  and  homoeopaths,  yet  are  being 
unlawfully  harassed  by  the  Commission.  He  argued  that  the 
WP No.32150/2015 
4 
Petitioners are regulated under the Unani Act, which essentially falls 
within the subject of medical profession. He argued that the Provincial 
Government  is  not  competent  to  legislate  on  matters  related  to 
medical profession. He argued that in terms of Entry 11, Part 2 of the 
Federal  Legislative  List  (“FLL”),  the  subject  of  legal,  medical  and 
other professions falls within the domain of the Federal Government, 
meaning  thereby  that  only  the  Federal  Government  can  legislate  and 
regulate the medical profession. He further argued that the Health Act 
attempts  to  regulate  the  medical  profession,  hence  it  is  ultra  vires  to 
the  Constitution  of 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973 
(“Constitution").  Further  that  it  requires  all  medical  practitioners  to 
register  with  the  Commission  which  is  against  the  law  as  the 
Petitioners  as  with  other  medical  practitioners  are  registered  under  a 
federal  law,  hence  are  not  liable  to  register  under  a  provincial  law. 
The  learned  counsel  contended  that  the  Petitioners  are  also  dental 
technicians  and  dental  hygienists  duly  qualified 
from  Skill 
Development  Council  and  therefore  competent  to  practice  as  dental 
hygienists  or  technicians.  However,  the  Commission  is  creating 
hurdles  in  the  way  of  the  Petitioners  from  practicing  as  dental 
hygienists or technicians and as tibbs and homoeopaths. In this regard 
the  Commission  requires  registration  of  the  Petitioners  under  the 
Health  Act  irrespective  of  the  registration  under  the  Unani  Act. 
Learned  counsel  stated  that  in  the  event  that  a  practitioner  is  not 
registered with the Commission, it can at best impose a penalty, yet in 
these  cases  the  Respondents  have  resorted  to  illegally  sealing  the 
establishments  of  the  Petitioners.  Learned  counsel  argued  that  the 
Respondents  have  initiated  a  crackdown  on  quackery  and  have 
included the clinics of the Petitioners who are not quacks, rather they 
are  qualified  dental  technicians  and  dental  hygienists  as  well  as 
homoeopaths  and  tibb.  Learned  counsel  further  argued  that  the 
Respondents have failed to take into consideration that the Petitioners 
WP No.32150/2015 
5 
are qualified and duly registered with their respective Councils under 
the  Unani  Act,  meaning  thereby  that  they  are  not  quacks.  He  argued 
that non-registration under the Health act does not qualify as being a 
quack  and  that  the  Respondents  have  no  authority  to  interfere  in  the 
lawful business of the Petitioners. Consequently, the Petitioners seek a 
declaration that they be allowed to practice if they are registered under 
the  Unani  Act  and  have  the  appropriate  diploma  by  the  Skill 
Development Council, as additional qualification.  
5. 
On  behalf  of  the  Commission,  Khawaja  Issam  Bin  Haris, 
Advocate  argued  that  the  Health  Act  was  promulgated  with  the 
mandate  to  improve  healthcare  services  and  ban  quackery.  This 
subject,  he  argued  falls  squarely  within  the  competence  of  the 
Provincial  Government  as  healthcare  services  do  not  fall  within  the 
federal subject of medical profession. Learned counsel argued that the 
Petitioners’  case  is  based  on  the  false  assumption  that  the  medical 
profession is wide enough to cover and regulate healthcare services or 
healthcare  establishments.  He  argued 
that 
the  falsity  of 
this 
assumption  is  apparent  from  the  constitutional  history  on  the  subject 
of  medical  profession  which  has  been  a  distinct  subject  from  public 
health, sanitation, hospitals and dispensary which was always within 
the  provincial  domain.  The  former  regulates  the  individual  while  the 
latter regulates the health care environment. Further that even with the 
widest  of  definitions  the  phrase  medical  profession  cannot  include 
healthcare services, the service provider or the establishment. Learned 
counsel  explained  that  the  Health  Act  regulates  healthcare  services, 
healthcare  service  providers  and  healthcare  establishments  and 
therefore  calls  for  registration  and  licensing  by  the  same.  In  such  a 
situation, it may be that a healthcare service provider or establishment 
is a qualified doctor or as in the cases before the Court a homoeopath 
or  tibb.  However,  since  the  doctor,  homeopath  or  tibb  is  running  a 
clinic or hospital or a diagnostic centre, as the case may be, then such 
WP No.32150/2015 
6 
an  establishment  will  fall  under  the  definition  of  a  healthcare 
establishment  and  healthcare  service  provider  which  requires 
registration  and  licensing  under  the  Health  Act.  He  argued  that  such 
an  overlap  if  any  with  the  Unani  Act  does  not  render  the  law 
unconstitutional.  Therefore  it  is  his  case  that  the  Health  Act  is  in 
accordance  with  the  Constitution  as  the  Provincial  Government  is 
competent  to  legislate  on  the  subject  matter.  Reliance  is  placed  on 
Inamur  Rehman  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (1992  SCMR 
563),  Messrs  Elahi  Cotton  Mills  Ltd.  and  others  v.  Federation  of 
Pakistan  through  Secretary  M/o  Finance,  Islamabad  and  6  others 
(PLD  1997  SC  582)  and  Syed  Aizad  Hussain  and  others  v.  Motor 
Registration Authority and others (PLD 2010 SC 983) in furtherance 
of  the  point  that  the  Court  shall  interpret  in  favour  of  the 
constitutionality of a statute.  
6. 
On behalf of the Provincial Government, Mr. Anwaar Hussain, 
Additional  Advocate  General  argued 
that 
there 
is  always  a 
presumption  in  favour  of  the  constitutionality  of  a  statute  unless  the 
statute  is  not  declared  to  be  unconstitutional,  which  situation  only 
arises if there is no way of reconciling or harmonizing the statute with 
the  Constitution.  In  the  instant  cases,  the  subject  of  healthcare  falls 
within  the  domain  of  the  Provincial  Government  and  requires  the 
Provincial  Government  to  legislate.  Learned  Law  Officer  further 
argued that historically the matter has always been with the Provincial 
Government  and  he  agreed  that  the  subject  medical  profession  does 
not include healthcare services, service provider or establishment. He 
argued that if a medical professional or in this case  a homoeopath or 
tibb  is  in  the  business  of  providing  healthcare  services  then  the 
services provided along with the establishment where the services are 
provided  all  fall  within  the  domain  of  Provincial  legislation.  He 
explained  that  the  intent  of  the  Constitution  is  clear,  such  that  the 
profession  is  regulated  at  the  federal  level,  to  maintain  uniformity  in 
WP No.32150/2015 
7 
education,  training  and  standards  throughout  the  country  but  the 
service provider and the establishment is regulated through Provincial 
legislation in order to ensure that the federal standards are maintained 
and  public  health  is  protected.  He  argued  that  in  pith  and  substance 
the Health Act aims to improve performance and quality of healthcare 
and  consequently  prevents  quackery.  Consequently  all  service 
providers and establishment have to be regulated at a Provincial level 
and cannot be regulated at a federal level.  
7. 
On  behalf  of  the  Federal  Government,  Mr.  Nasar  Ahmad, 
Deputy  Attorney  General  argued  that  the  primary  function  of  the 
Health  Act  is  to  improve  the  quality  of  healthcare  services,  clinical 
governance  and  to  ban  quackery  in  the  Punjab.  The  Commission  is 
empowered  to  take  all  necessary  steps  to  fulfill  the  mandate  of  the 
law.  He  argued  that  a  bare  reading  of  the  Health  Act  shows  that  the 
objective  of  the  law  is  to  regulate  healthcare  services  and  not  the 
profession.  He  further  argued  that  Federal  legislature  regulates  the 
profession,  meaning  thereby  that  it  regulates  the  practitioner  or  the 
education  and  not  hospitals,  clinics,  dispensaries,  allied  staff, 
essentially the entire ambit of the healthcare environment.  He further 
argued that the requirement of registration under the Health Act is not 
violative  of  the  Constitution  as  the  Federal  Government  seeks 
registration  of  medical  professionals  whereas  the  Commission  seeks 
registration  and  licensing  of  the  healthcare  service  provider  and  the 
healthcare  establishment.  Hence  there  is  no  overlap  or  conflict.  He 
also  argued  that  the  healthcare  is  a  broader  subject  whereas  the 
medical  profession  is  a  more  concise  subject  and  does  not  include 
healthcare. 
The law 
8. 
The  law  under  challenge  is  the  Health  Act.  In  terms  of  the 
preamble of the Health Act, the mandate of the law is to improve the 
quality of healthcare services and to ban quackery in all its forms and 
WP No.32150/2015 
8 
manifestation  and  to  provide  for  ancillary  matters.  Section  4  of  the 
Health Act provides for the functions and powers of the Commission, 
which  includes  the  function  to  improve  the  quality  of  healthcare 
services  and  clinical governance  and  to  ban  quackery. Sub-Section  2 
of  Section  4  of  the  Health  Act  provides  that  the  Commission  has  all 
the  powers  it  requires  in  furtherance  of  this  function.  Section  2  (xv) 
defines healthcare establishment to mean a hospital, diagnostic centre, 
medical  clinics,  nursing  home,  maternity  home,  dental  clinic, 
homeopathy  clinic,  tibb  clinic,  acupuncture,  physiotherapy  clinic  or 
any other premises or conveyance. Section 2 (xvi) defines healthcare 
services to mean services provided for diagnosis, treatment or care of 
persons  suffering  from  any  physical  or  mental  disease,  injury  or 
disability  including  procedures  that  are  similar  to  forms  of  medical, 
dental  or  surgical  care  but  are  not  provided  in  connection  with  a 
medical  condition  and  includes  any  other  service  notified  by  the 
Government. Section 2 (xvii) provides for healthcare service provider 
to mean an owner, manager or incharge of a healthcare establishment 
and  includes  a  person  registered by  the  Pakistan  Medical  and Dental 
Council  (“PMDC”),  Council  for  Tibb,  Council  for  Homeopathy  or 
Nursing Council. Section 13 of the Health Act calls for registration of 
the healthcare service provider and Section 14 calls for licensing of a 
healthcare establishment. Section 19 of the Health Act provides that a 
healthcare  service  provider  can  be  guilty  of  medical  negligence  if  it 
does  not  have  the  required  human  resource  and  equipment,  which  it 
professes  to  have  or  if  its  employees  do  not  have  reasonable 
competency  or  skill  that  they  possess.  Section  20  of  the  Health  Act 
requires  the  Commission  to  set  standards  for  healthcare  services  and 
under  Chapter-V,  the  Commission  can  inspect  any  healthcare 
establishment as per the procedure laid down.  
9. 
In  terms  of  the  provisions  of  the  Health  Act  and  its  preamble, 
the Health Act regulates healthcare which essentially is the provision 
WP No.32150/2015 
9 
of  services  related  to  treatment,  diagnosis  and  care  including 
procedures,  processes  involved  in  the  diagnosis,  treatment  and  care. 
Consequently, the Health Act regulates the healthcare service provider 
being  the  person  who  is  responsible  for  the  provision  of the  services 
and  the  healthcare  establishment  being  the  space  within  which  such 
services  are  provided  such  as  a  hospital,  diagnostic  centre,  medical 
clinic,  nursing  home,  maternity  home,  dental  clinic,  homeopathy 
clinic, tibb clinic and so on. Therefore the question that arises is what 
is  healthcare  and  clinical  governance  and  whether  healthcare  falls 
within the subject of medical profession.  
Opinion  
10.  The  Health  Act  regulates  the  healthcare  environment  which 
includes  regulating  the  service  provider,  the  establishment  and  the 
services. The Commission is  mandated to ensure that all those in the 
business  of  providing  healthcare  are  following  the  prescribed 
standards and are working towards improving the health of the people. 
Section  4  of  the  Health  Act  provides  that  the  Commission  shall 
improve  the  quality  of  healthcare  and  clinical  governance.  Neither 
healthcare nor clinical governance are defined under the Health Act as 
they  are  evolving  concepts  which  cover  the  entire  spectrum  of  the 
healthcare environment. Healthcare in its simplest of understanding is 
the  maintenance  or  improvement  of  health  through  diagnosis, 
treatment, testing and will include all procedures and manner of care 
undertaken  for  the  treatment  or  care  of  persons  suffering  from  any 
physical, mental or emotional injury or disability. Clinical governance 
is  the  creation  of  a  system  to  ensure  that  optimum  quality  of 
healthcare is given to  everyone. The term was used for the first time 
by  the  World  Health  Organization  (“WHO”)  in  1983  to  encapsulate 
the provision of high quality healthcare on four important dimensions; 
professional  performance,  risk  allocation,  risk  management  and 
patient satisfaction. Over time this concept evolved to mean a system 
WP No.32150/2015 
10 
which  is  responsible,  accountable  and  provides  qualitative  services 
and establishments, providing the highest standards of care to people. 
It  essentially  puts  the  principles of  good governance in healthcare  so 
as to ensure that all those involved in healthcare, the service provider, 
the establishment and those providing services are efficient, effective, 
responsive and accountable. Consequently the Commission addresses 
complaints,  undertakes  inspections  and  investigations  to  check  poor 
performance,  negligence  and  compromise  in  standard.  Hence  the 
primary function of the Commission under the Health Act is to govern 
the healthcare environment to maintain quality, safety and ensure that 
optimum level of care is experienced by the people.  
11. 
In  this  context  healthcare  services  cover  a  broad  spectrum, 
involving the process and procedures, the medicine and staff involved 
in diagnosis, treatment and care. It is therefore not limited to just the 
practitioner,  but  instead  covers  the  entire  establishment  which 
includes  the  staff,  the  equipment,  the  establishments  and  all  the 
services  provided  there.  It  also  takes  into  its  fold  persons  who  own, 
manage or run the establishment where the services are provided. This 
is  necessary  to  ensure  that  persons  who  are  in  the  business  of 
healthcare  take  full  responsibility  of  their  involvement  in  the 
provision of healthcare. Therefore healthcare covers a broad spectrum 
of services and people, all of  whom have a role to play in delivering 
quality  healthcare.  This  includes  amongst  others  administrators, 
technicians,  nurses,  pharmacists, 
therapist, 
assistances  Lab 
technicians,  sonographers,  radiologists,  dental  technician,  dental 
hygienists.  A  wide  range  of  regulatory  bodies  and  system  will 
therefore  regulate  the  healthcare  environment,  at  all  levels,  federal, 
provincial  and  even  local.  Essentially  the  regulatory  framework  is 
geared  to  protecting  public  well  being  and  health.  Therefore,  the 
argument  that  healthcare  regulations  are  limited  to  the  federal 
legislature is totally misconceived.        
WP No.32150/2015 
11 
12.  When  seen  in  the  context  of  the  constitutional  history  of 
Pakistan,  medical  profession  and  public  health,  sanitation,  hospitals 
and  dispensaries  have  been  two  separate  and  distinct  legislative 
subjects.  Under  the  1956  Constitution  the  subject  of  medical 
profession was included in Entry 1 of the Concurrent Legislative List 
(“CLL”) and public health, sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries was 
Entry  26 of  the  Provincial  Legislative  List  (“PLL”). Under  the  1962 
Constitution,  neither  the  subject  of  medical  profession  nor  public 
health  figured  in  the  Third  Schedule  to  the  Constitution  which 
provided for matters falling in the executive domain of the Federation 
and  enumerated  the  powers  of  the  Federal  legislature.  Therefore,  the 
subject of medical profession and public health fell within the domain 
of  Provincial  legislature  under  the  1962  Constitution.  Under  the 
interim Constitution of 1972 medical profession was again included in 
the  CLL  thereby  empowering  the  Federal  as  well  as  Provincial 
legislatures  to  make  laws  regarding  the  same  whereas  public  health, 
sanitation,  hospitals  and  dispensary  figured  in  Entry  30  of  the  PLL 
giving  exclusive  powers  to  the  Provinces.  So  far  as  the  1973 
Constitution,  prior  to  the  18th  Amendment  medical  profession  was 
Item 43 in the CLL and the subject of public health was neither in the 
FLL  nor  in  the  CLL,  hence  fell  within  the  domain  of  the  Provincial 
Government. After the 18th Amendment, medical and legal profession 
is  found  in  Entry  11,  Part  2  of  the  FLL  being  a  federal  subject  and 
since the subject of public health, sanitation, hospitals and dispensary 
is  not  included  in  the  FLL  it  means  that  this  subject  falls  within  the 
domain  of  Provincial  government.  Therefore, 
in 
terms  of 
constitutional  history,  medical  profession  and  public  health, 
sanitation,  hospitals  and  dispensary  are  two  different  and  distinct 
subjects.  Furthermore,  it  shows  that  the  constitutional  mandate 
requires  the  medical  profession  be  governed  by  the  Federal  law  and 
WP No.32150/2015 
12 
matters related to public health, sanitation, hospitals and dispensary be 
regulated by the Provinces. 
13. 
 When seen in the context of its meaning there is sound logic in 
the  fact  that  the  subject  of  legal  and  medical  profession  is  a  federal 
subject.  The  subject  regulates  educational  qualifications  and  requires 
uniformity  of  standards  in  training  and qualification  for the purposes 
of education and for the purposes of entry into the profession.  In this 
regard,  the  Punjab  Medical  and  Dental  Council  Ordinance,  1962 
(“1962  Ordinance”)  regulates  the  minimum  standards  of  higher 
educational  qualification  in  medicine  and  dentistry.  The  law  as 
amended from time to time essentially recognizes medical institutions 
as well as medical and dental qualifications. It recognizes hospitals or 
institutions  for  house  jobs  internship  or  foundation  courses.  It 
recognizes  all  medical  and  dental  qualifications  whether  obtained  in 
Pakistan  or  outside  of  Pakistan.  It  calls  for  the  registration  and 
licensing of medical and dental practitioners and all matters related to 
the  establishment  and  running  of  medical  and  dental  institutions 
including  its  recognition  are  regulated  by  the  PMDC.  Hence  any 
person  professing  to  be  a  medical  or  dental  practitioner  must  be 
recognized,  registered  and  licensed  with  the  PMDC  under  the  1962 
Ordinance.  Various  different  regulations  have  been  issued  under  the 
1962 Ordinance including the Regulations titled Pakistan Registration 
of  Medical 
and  Dental  Practitioners  Regulations, 
2008 
(“Regulations”).  In 
terms  of 
these  Regulations,  compilation, 
maintenance  and  publication  of 
registers  which  contain 
the 
registration of medical and dental practitioners are maintained as well 
as processes  for  removal of names  from  the  registers. It provides  for 
the  procedure  of  filing  a  complaint  against  a  medical  or  dental 
practitioner  and  provides  for  the  procedure  to  be  followed  in  such 
complaints.  The  1962  Ordinance  therefore,  governs  the  medical  and 
dental profession meaning thereby that it governs the  individual who 
WP No.32150/2015 
13 
is  qualified  to  practice  as  a  doctor  or  dentist  in  Pakistan.  It  also 
regulates  the  institution  from  which  the  professional  degree  for 
qualifying as a doctor or dentist is obtained. The 1962 Ordinance does 
not  regulate  any  of  the  healthcare  services  or  establishments  which 
will be used by the medical or dental practitioners during the process 
of  providing  medical  or  dental  services.  Hence  the  1962  Ordinance 
clearly does not regulate clinics, dispensaries and diagnostic centres or 
testing  procedures  or  any  other  related  area  which  forms  part  of  the 
ambit of healthcare services as defined under the Health Act.   
14.  The practice of Unani, Ayurvedic and Homoeopathic system of 
medicine  are  essentially  traditional  or  alternate  medicine  which  are 
popular  within  the  country  and  play  a  significant  role  in  providing 
healthcare to a large part of the population. Each system of medicine 
has its own unique characteristics and basis on which it provides cure 
and promotes good health. The argument of the Petitioners is that they 
are  governed  by  the  Unani  Act  which  essentially  means  that  their 
services  along  with  their  qualifications  are  regulated  under  the  said 
Act.  In  order  to  appreciate  this  argument,  it  is  necessary  to  examine 
the objective and mandate of the Unani Act. In terms of its preamble, 
it  is  an  Act  to  regulate  the  qualifications  and  to  provide  for  the 
registration  of  practitioners  of  Unani,  Ayurvedic  and  Homoeopathic 
system  of  medicine.  The  Unani  Act  provides  for  a  National  Council 
for Tibb and National Council for Homoeopathy. The function of the 
Council  as  per  Section  14  is  to  consider  applications  for  recognition 
made by the institutions imparting or desiring to impart instruction in 
the  system  of  medicine  with  which  the  Council  is  concerned.  The 
Council also maintains adequate standards of education in recognized 
institutions  and  call  for  the  registration  of  duly  qualified  persons. 
Teaching institutions and examinations are regulated under Chapter-II 
of  the  Unani  Act  and  the  registration  of  practitioners  is  provided  for 
under  Chapter-III.  In  terms  of  Section  24,  every  person  who  passes 
WP No.32150/2015 
14 
the  qualified  examination  in  the  Unani,  Ayurvedic  or  Homoeopathic 
system of medicine from a recognized institution must be registered in 
the respective register. Essentially there is a separate register for each 
system of medicine being Unani, Ayurvedic or Homoeopathic, hence 
practitioners of each system of medicine are required to be registered 
accordingly. Section 33 of the Unani Act provides for the privileges of 
a registered practitioner which entitles them to hold any  appointment 
as  physician  or  medical  officer 
in  any  Unani,  Ayurvedic, 
Homoeopathic dispensary, hospital, infirmary or as the case may be. It 
also  allows  them  to  vote  for  the  election  of  members  of  the  Council 
and  to  recover  fees  from  the  courts.  In  terms  of  this  Section,  such 
practitioners  cannot  use,  sale  or  stock  any  drugs  or  medicine  except 
for  those  which  are  stipulated  by  the  Council  for  the  purposes  of 
Unani,  Ayurvedic  or  Homoeopathic  system  of  medicine  or 
pharmacopoeia  as  approved  by  the  Federal  Government.  In  terms  of 
Section 37 of the Unani Act, no person other than a person registered 
or  listed  as  a  practitioner  shall  practice  or  hold  himself  out  to  be 
practicing  Unani,  Ayurvedic  and  Homoeopathic  system  of  medicine. 
The  said  Section  also  clearly  prohibits  Homeopaths  from  practicing 
surgery.  Therefore  the  mandate  of  the  Unani  Act  is  to  regulate  and 
maintain  quality  in  the  field  of  education  and  practitioners  of  Unani, 
Ayurvedic  and  Homoeopathic  system  of  medicine,  similar  to  the 
manner  in  which  the  1962  Ordinance  regulates  medical  and  dental 
practitioners.  It  regulates  individual  practitioners  through  registration 
under the Unani Act so as to ensure that their qualifications are from 
recognized  institutions  and  that  they  are  duly  qualified  to  practice  in 
their given field. The Unani Act does not regulate healthcare services 
or  establishments  where  these  traditional  system  of  medicine  are 
practiced.  Nor  does  it  hold  the  service  provider  responsible  in  any 
manner.  It  is  important  to  note  that  healthcare  is  not  limited  to  the 
work  of  the  practitioner.  It  is  the  entire  environment  within  which 
WP No.32150/2015 
15 
diagnosis treatment and care are provided. The Unani Act governs the 
licensing  and  registration  of  individuals  who  practice  in  the  field  of 
Unani, Ayurvedic and Homoeopathic system of medicine but does not 
regulate healthcare services, service providers or establishments. It is 
important 
to  note 
that 
the  profession  along  with  healthcare 
environment both need to be regulated because a person who requires 
any kind of healthcare will be subjected to the practitioner along with 
others  such  as  the  support  staff,  technicians,  procedures,  equipment, 
hospitals and clinics. The term medical profession does not cover the 
entire  healthcare  environment.  It  only  regulates  the  profession.  The 
federal  laws  being  the  PMDC  Ordinance  and  the  Unani  Act  provide 
for  the  system  of  licensing  and  registration  of  individuals  and  is 
totally  different  from  the  licensing  and  registration  called  for  under 
the  Health  Act.  Section  13  and  14  of  the  Health  Act  calls  for 
registration  of  the  service  provider  and  licensing  of  the  healthcare 
establishments.  This  is  separate  and  distinct  from  the  registration 
called  for  of  the  practitioners  under  Section  24  of  the  Unani  Act. 
Therefore the Unani Act does not regulate healthcare services, service 
provider or healthcare establishments, rather it regulates the individual 
practitioner.  
15. 
In  this  regard,  even  Section  19  of  the  Health  Act  which 
provides  for  medical  negligence,  confines  its  application  to  the 
healthcare service  provider  and not the  practitioner.  However, if in a 
given  case,  the  healthcare  provider  or  his  employee  did  not  exercise 
reasonable competence or skill which they claim to have, they can be 
made liable for medical negligence. There may be situation where the 
service provider and practitioner are the same individual as a doctor or 
dentist or homoeopath or tibb is running the clinic or diagnostic centre 
or hospital, however in such  a  situation  each law  will operate within 
its given sphere and the registration under one law will not mean that 
registration under the other law is not required. Hence the practitioner 
WP No.32150/2015 
16 
can  be  made  liable  under  the  federal  law  as  well  as  under  the 
provincial  law  not  only  in  the  capacity  of  practitioner  but  also  for 
being a healthcare service provider or establishment. It is important to 
note that a practitioner is registered and licensed to practice in his or 
her  individual  capacity  and  registration  or  licensing  which  regulates 
the profession will not include regulating all healthcare services  as it 
includes  those  services  that  are  not  provided  by  the  practitioner 
himself.  The  general  scheme  of  healthcare 
law  and  clinical 
governance  requires  efficiency,  responsibility  and  accountability  at 
every  level  where  healthcare  is  provided.  Hence  the  practitioner,  the 
services,  the  establishment  and  the  service  provider  are  all  regulated 
to  ensure  that  healthcare  works  at  its  optimum  for  the  benefit  of  the 
people. 
16.  To conclude it is clear that the Health Act does not regulate the 
medical  profession  as 
the  provision  of  healthcare  services, 
establishment  and  service  providers  are  to  be  regulated  by  the 
Commission. These  subjects  do  not  fall under  the subject  of  medical 
profession rather falls within the ambit of public health or healthcare 
which  requires 
the  sector 
to  be  regulated.  Standardized  and 
accountable.  In  any  regulatory  regime  registration  and  licensing  is 
fundamental  for  the  authority  to  fulfill  its  objective  and  mandate.  In 
these  cases  the  Commission  is  required  to  create  system  of  clinical 
governance and healthcare so that it can effectively monitor the work 
of all services, service provider and establishment in healthcare. This 
is  distinct  and  separate  from  registering  the  profession  of  the 
practitioner, therefore the Health Act is not ultra vires the Constitution 
and the mandate of the Health Act falls squarely within the provincial 
domain.  
Sealing Power 
17.  When  the  instant  petition  along  with  connected  petitions  were 
filed  pursuant  to  the  anti-quackery  drive,  the  question  of  whether  or 
WP No.32150/2015 
17 
not  the  Commission  has  the  power  to  seal  healthcare  establishments 
arose.  At  the  time  it  was  decided in  terms  of  the  judgment  delivered 
by  the  learned  Single  Judge  that  the  Commission  did  not  have  the 
power  to  seal  healthcare  establishments  as  there  were  no  rules  or 
regulations  on  the  basis  of  which  the  act  of  sealing  derived  legal 
sanctity.  The  Commission  exercised  this  power  on  the  basis  of  the 
Standing  Orders  of  the  Commission  for  banning  quackery  in  all  its 
forms  and  manifestations  for  dealing  with  quacks  which  were  duly 
approved by  the  Board of the  Commission.  However, the  Court held 
that  the  Standing  Orders  were  administrative  directions  of  the 
Commission  which  are  not  enforceable  against  an  individual or  third 
party.  Further  that  they  deal  with  internal  governance  and  at  best 
regulate  the  internal  working  of  the  Commission.  The  Court 
concluded  that  there  was  no  subordinate  or  delegated  legislation  as 
authorized by the parent legislation which empowers the Commission 
to  exercise  the  power  of  sealing.  Hence  it  was  declared  that  the 
Commission  did  not  have 
the  power 
to  seal  a  healthcare 
establishment.  After  the  judgment  was  passed,  the  Commission 
framed  regulations  being 
the  Punjab  Healthcare  Commission 
Regulations for Banning Quackery in all its Forms and Manifestations 
for  Dealing  with  Quacks,  2016  which  were  duly  published  in  the 
official  gazette  on  26.10.2016  and  thereafter  amended  in  the  official 
gazette  on  9.3.2017  (“Regulations”).  Accordingly  the  Commission 
now  acts  under  the  Regulations  which  provide  for  the  mode  and 
manner in which the power of sealing is to be exercised.  
18.  The  Petitioners  have  questioned 
the  authority  of 
the 
Commission  to  seal  clinics  and  to  take  action  against  quacks  on  two 
grounds. The first ground for challenge is that the power of sealing is 
not provided for in the parent statute being the Health Act, hence the 
Commission  can  at  best  levy  a  fine  but  does  not  have  the  power  to 
seal  any  healthcare  establishment.  The  second  ground  is  that  the 
WP No.32150/2015 
18 
Commission  could  not  have  taken  any  action  against  the  Petitioners 
since they are not quacks.  
19.  Learned counsel for the Commission argued that the mandate of 
the Health Act is to ban quackery in all forms and manifestations and 
in terms of Section 2(xxix) of the Health Act, a quack is a person who 
pretends 
to  provide  healthcare  services  without 
the  required 
registration  of 
the  PMDC,  Council 
for  Tibb,  Council 
for 
Homoeopathy  and  Nursing  Council.  These  are  the  relevant  federal 
authorities  which  register  and  license  a  practitioner  in  the  respective 
field. Without this registration and licensing a person cannot practice 
in that field and if he or she does then they fall under the definition of 
a  quack.  In  terms  of the  functions  and powers of  the Commission  as 
provided under Section 4 of the Health Act, the Commission has the 
power  to  take  all necessary steps to ban quackery.  The  Respondents 
counsel  argued  that  the  power  of  sealing  is  inherent  in  the  statutory 
requirement to take necessary step as sealing is a necessary step in the 
prevention  and  eradication  of  quacks  and  quackery.  Notwithstanding 
the  same,  the  Commission  has  framed  the  Regulations  which  clearly 
provide for the power of visit, seizure and sealing. It also provides for 
the  power  to  deal  with  complaints  and  prescribes  for  the  steps  that 
may  be  taken  thereafter.  Learned  counsel  for  the  Respondents 
explained to the Court that in each case pending before the Court the 
individuals  were  served  with  notices  and  were  given  ample 
opportunity  to  appear  before  the  Commission  to  provide  their 
registration and licenses to operate as healthcare service providers and 
to run healthcare establishments. However, they failed to do so, hence 
necessary  action  was  taken  by  the  Commission  after  following  due 
process  which  included  visits  to  the  clinics  before  sealing the  clinics 
of some of the Petitioners for want of registration and licenses.  
20.  Learned counsel for the Respondents also brought the attention 
of  the  Court  to  the  orders  passed  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  of 
WP No.32150/2015 
19 
Pakistan  in  Human  Rights  Case  No.19921-P/2018  and  Civil  Misc. 
Applications  No.1140-L,  1142-L,  1265-L,  1512-L  and  4389/2018, 
where  the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  vide  order  dated 
3.6.2018  has  directed  the  Commission  to  ensure  that  all  healthcare 
service providers and healthcare establishments are registered in terms 
of the requirement of the Health Act and that no person can operate an 
establishment  or  act  as  a  service  provider  without  registration  and 
licensing under the Health Act. Learned counsel stated that in terms of 
the  case  pending  before  the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan, 
homoeopaths, 
tibb, 
rehabilitation 
centre,  diagnostic  centres, 
dispensaries, all have  been directed  to  register  with the  Commission. 
Furthermore  in  terms  of  Suo  Motu  Case  No.1  of  2010  and  H.R.C. 
No.27813-Petitioner  of  2017,  the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan 
vide  order  dated  14.4.2018  directed  the  Commission  to  take 
immediate  steps  to  ban  all  such  businesses  including  sealing  of 
premises  where  quackery  is  being  practiced.  Consequently  the 
Commission  has  been  actively  pursuing  the  directions  of  the  august 
Supreme Court of Pakistan and has taken necessary action in the event 
of non-compliance of the requirements of registration and licensing.  
21.  Notwithstanding the directions of the august Supreme Court of 
Pakistan, since the question of the authority of the Commission to seal 
clinics  is  before  this  Court  consequent  to  the  remand  order  dated 
14.2.2017 by the august Supreme Court of Pakistan, the cases before 
this Court require consideration on the question of whether or not the 
Commission has the power to seal healthcare establishment.  
Opinion 
22.  As  already  stated  the  mandate  of  the  Health  Act  is  to  ban 
quacks  and  quackery.  It  goes  without  saying  that  any  person  who  is 
not  registered  or  licensed  under  the  federal  law  is  not  entitled  to 
practice  or  hold  themselves  out  to  be  practitioners  as  they  are  not 
recognized  or  authorized  under  the  relevant  law  to  practice  in  that 
WP No.32150/2015 
20 
profession. Therefore any person holding himself or herself out to be a 
practitioner, who is not duly licensed and registered under the relevant 
law  is  a  quack  and  has  to  be  stopped  from  practicing.  The 
Commission has also as part of its anti-quackery drive, initiated action 
against  healthcare  service  providers  and  healthcare  establishments 
which  are  not  registered  or  licensed  under  the  Health  Act.  It  is  their 
contention  that  without  registration  and  licensing  the  Commission  is 
unable to enforce its standards and will not be able to investigate and 
inspect  the  service  providers  and  establishments.  It  also  means  that 
people  are  practicing  in  the  health  sector  without  any  regulatory 
influence and are not answerable to any quality checks. This puts the 
public  at  risk  as  they  can  be  treated  by  establishment  which  are  not 
answerable  in  the  quality  of  services  they  provide.  Hence  the 
requirement of registration and licensing of the service providers and 
establishments  is  mandatory  under  the  Health  Act  and  any  person 
providing  healthcare  services  or  running  healthcare  establishment, 
without  registration  or  licensing  can  be  deemed  to  be  indulging  in 
quackery  as  they  are  not  in  compliance  with  the  Health  Act  and  are 
avoiding  making  themselves  liable  to  the  standards  and  the  Code  of 
Conduct  issued  by  the  Commission.  This  is  a  manifestation  of 
quackery as the service provider or establishment is not authorized to 
provide  healthcare.  In  this  regard  the  preamble  of  the  Health  Act 
mandates that the Commission shall improve the quality of healthcare 
services  and  ban  quackery  in  all  its  forms  and  manifestations. 
Therefore  the  meaning  of  all  forms  and  manifestations  will  include 
persons  providing  healthcare  services  or  running  a  healthcare 
establishment  without  being  duly  registered  or  licensed.    Such  a 
person  is  also  a  pretender  who  is  providing  services  without 
permission  from  the  required  authority.  Such  persons  may  not 
necessarily fall within the definition of a quack as per Section 2(xxix) 
WP No.32150/2015 
21 
of the Health Act, but the power to seal that establishment or service 
provider is exercised to ensure compliance of the law.  
23.  The  Petitioners  have  argued  that  the  only  power  that  the 
Commission has is to impose a fine and that sealing is not authorized 
under the Health Act. The primary objective of the Commission while 
regulating  healthcare  and  clinical  governance  is  public  safety  and 
public health. Any matter which puts the public health at risk or which 
compromises  the  health  and  care  of  a  person,  must  be  protected 
through  preventive  action.  This  Court  has  already  held  that  the 
precautionary  principle  is  applicable  to  the  Punjab  Food  Authority 
while  regulating  food  safety  laws  in  the  case  cited  as  Lung  Fung 
Chinese Restaurant through Atiq Ahmed and 2 others v. Punjab Food 
Authority through Secretary and 6 others (PLD 2017 Lahore 545) as 
the  precautionary  principle  enables  public  authorities  to  legitimately 
impose precautionary measures in response to situations that may lead 
to  imminent  harm  and  danger.  In  the  same  way  the  concept  of 
precaution  and  prevention  lies  at  the  heart  of  public  health  practice, 
Dealing  in  public  health  means  identifying  and  avoiding  risks  to  the 
life  and  health  of  a  person  as  well  as  ensure  that  protected  measures 
are taken to prevent any harm to persons who will require healthcare. 
The  precautionary  principle  addresses  uncertain  risks  and  enables 
action  to  take  place  before  any  harm  is  caused,  so  as  to  prevent 
irreversible  harm  to  the  health  of  a  person.  The  precautionary 
principle therefore enables an authority to take preventive measures to 
prevent the damage and the irreparable harm that can be caused. The 
WHO  has  published  several  reports  on  this  issue  starting  from  2003 
when the report of “Dealing with uncertainty: How the precautionary 
principle  can  help  protecting  the  future  of  our  children”.  In 
continuation  thereof  the  WHO  has  successively  published  reports  on 
the  use  of  the  precautionary  principle  as  a  means  to  promote 
protection to public health. The power of seizing and sealing is one of 
WP No.32150/2015 
22 
the  preventive  measures  that  is  recognized  as  being  essential  to 
prevent  continuous  harm  and  has  been  given  priority  and  preference 
so  as  to  allow  an  authority  to  act  immediately.  It  is  seen  that  the 
precautionary  principle  and 
the  preventive  powers  exercised 
thereunder  essentially  enable  the  authority  to  shift  its  response  from 
re-action to precaution. It requires taking preventive action in the face 
of  uncertainty  and  shifting  the  burden  of  proof  to  the  proponents  of 
the activity. It requires the system to ensure that its decisions are safe 
and efficient with public safety and health as its primary concern. By 
allowing the wrong to continue not only is public health at risk but the 
safety  of  persons  who  are  being  treated  by  pretenders  is  totally 
compromised.  Therefore  necessary  steps  as  per  Section  4  of  the 
Health  Act  includes  the  inherent  power  of  sealing  as  a  preventive 
measure.  The  Regulations  issued  under  Section  40(1)  of  the  Health 
Act  in  2016  prescribe  the  procedure  to  be  adopted  when  the 
Commission is to seal a healthcare establishment. Hence the power of 
sealing exercised by the Commission is in furtherance of the mandate 
of  the  Health  At  and  the  powers  given  to  it  under  the  law.  In  this 
regard  the  power  exercised  prior  to  the  framing  of  the  Regulations 
falls  within  the  inherent  power  to  seal  healthcare  establishment  to 
prevent any further risk or harm to persons under treatment or care by 
a  healthcare  establishment  or  healthcare  service  provider.  Hence  no 
illegality is made out against the act of sealing.   
On the merits of the cases against sealing clinics 
 
24.  With  respect  to  the  merits  of  the  individual  cases  before  the 
Court,  so  far  as  due  process  is  concerned,  the  record  shows  that  due 
process  in  each  case  was  duly  followed.  Notices  were  issued  to  the 
Petitioners  calling  for  their  registration  or  license  under  the  Health 
Act.  Since  they  did  not  produce  either  license  or  registration,  their 
clinics  were  sealed.  As  per  the  arguments  made  and  the  record 
produced,  sufficient  time  and  opportunity  was  granted  to  the 
WP No.32150/2015 
23 
Petitioners to appear before the Commission to show their licenses or 
registration, however they failed to do so. It is noted that in all these 
cases the Petitioners who essentially practice homoeopathy or tibb are 
also dental hygienists and dental technicians who believe that they do 
not require any kind of registration or licensing under the Health Act. 
It is their contention that since they are licensed and registered under 
the Unani Act, no further license or registration is required to run the 
clinic or to do the work of dental hygienists and dental technicians. In 
this regard, it is already been stated while discussing the vires of the 
Health Act that public health is regulated at different levels which will 
mean  regulating the  individual  as  well  as regulating the services,  the 
service  provider  as  well  as  the  healthcare  establishment.  Since  the 
requirement  of  registration  and  licensing  under  the  Health  Act  is 
mandatory,  its  compliance  is  necessary  and  any  person  who  fails  to 
comply  with  the  law  will  face  the  consequences  as  described  under 
the Health Act. 
25.  The  Petitioners  have  also  raised  issues  with  respect  to  their 
qualifications  and  ability  to  practice  as  dental  practitioners.  WP 
No.79690/17  is  filed  by  Zameer  Ali  Shah  who  states  that  he  is  a 
homoeopath  as  well  as  tibb  practicing  at  Gojra  for  the  last  two 
decades;  that  he  obtained  a  diploma  as  dental  hygienists  from  Skill 
Development  Council  and therefore  provides  the services  of  a  dental 
hygienists  at  his  clinic.  Initially  his  clinic  was  sealed,  however  after 
the  orders  of  the  Additional  District  Judge,  the  clinic  was  de-sealed. 
His  grievance  is  that  since  he  is  registered  under  the  Unani  Act,  the 
Respondents  are  illegally  harassing  him  and  stopping  him  from 
providing  services  of  dentistry  and  surgery.  Learned  counsel  for  the 
stated  Petitioner  relied  upon  the  diploma  issued  by  the  Skill 
Development  Council  and  the  registration  under  the  Unani  Act  to 
argue the point that the Petitioner is qualified to practice dentistry. He 
further  argued  that  the  sealing  power  exercised  by  the  Respondents 
WP No.32150/2015 
24 
was  totally  illegal;  that  the  sealing  report issued on 16.8.2017 shows 
that  the  Petitioner  was  not  carrying  out  any  invasive  procedure  and 
that it falls within the permitted functions of a homoeopath and tibb. 
He  further  argued  that  the  Petitioner  is  allowed  to  use  dental 
equipment even under the tibb and homoeopathic procedure, hence as 
such no illegality is made out against the Petitioners.  
26.  WP  No.28593/2015  is  filed  by  Naghma  Ashraf  who  claims  to 
be  homoeopath  duly  registered  under  the  Unani  Act  and  challenges 
the  sealing  of  her  clinic.  Learned  counsel  in  this  case  stated  that  in 
terms  of  the  letter  issued  by  Hakeem  Nazeer  Ahmed  Asad  who  is 
Assistant  Director  (Homeo  and  Unani),  homeopaths  and  Tibb  are 
allowed  to  use instruments  for diagnosis such  as thermometer, blood 
pressure apparatuses and stethoscope in their clinics, hence on account 
of usage of the same the premises should not be sealed.  
27.  WP  No.2427/2017  is  filed  by  the  Punjab  Dental  Practitioners 
Association as well as Mushtaq Ahmad who is a homoeopath and tibb 
and  has  a  diploma  from  Skill  Development  Council  as  a  dental 
hygienists  and  dental  technician.  His  clinic  was  sealed  on  4.9.2015 
which  was  ultimately  de-sealed  on  16.10.2015  by  the  District  and 
Sessions  Judge,  Toba  Tek  Singh.  In  this  case  also  the  Respondents 
stated  that  due  process  was  followed,  several  notices  were  issued, 
however,  the  Petitioner  Mushtaq  Ahmad  did  not  respond,  hence  the 
healthcare  establishment  was  sealed.  Learned  counsel  for  the 
Respondents  stated  that  the  Petitioner  was  running  an  establishment 
under  the  name  of  “Teeth  Hospital”  and  during  the  visit  to  the 
establishment  it  was  noticed  that  he  was  practicing  dentistry;  that  he 
was unable to produce any registration under the 1962 Ordinance nor 
a license under the Health Act.  
28.  WP  Nos.19597/2015,  38582/2015  and  21753/15  are  filed  by 
some  homoeopaths  and  tibbs.  In  WP  Nos.19597/2015,  38582/2015, 
the Petitioners have only challenged the vires of the Health Act. They 
WP No.32150/2015 
25 
hold  diplomas  from  the  Skill  Development  Council  and  they  seek  a 
direction  that  the  Respondents  should  not  interfere  in  the  lawful 
business.  WP  No.31831/2015 
is  filed  by 
the  Punjab  Dental 
Practitioners  Association  wherein  it  is  prayed  that  the  Commission 
should  not  illegally  harass  the  members  of  the  Association.  It  also 
seeks a declaration that all persons registered under the Unani Act be 
authorized  to  practice  as  dental  technicians  and  dental  hygienists,  if 
they  possess  the  appropriate  diploma  by  the  Skill  Development 
Council. 
29.  The  case  of  the  aforementioned  Petitioners  is  that  they  are 
qualified  and  permitted  to  act  as  dental  hygienists  and  dental 
technician  and  that  this  falls  within  the  scope  of  their  practice  as 
registered  and  licensed  under  the  Unani Act.  Chaudhary  Muhammad 
Umar, Advocate for the Commission during the course of arguments 
highlighted the nature and issues with reference to the diploma issued 
by  the  Skill  Development  Council.  He  argued  that  while  the 
Petitioners  have  placed  reliance  on  the  diploma  issued  by  the  Skill 
Development  Council,  the  Respondents  have  taken  strong  exception 
to  the  same.  He  explained  that  the  Skill  Development  Council  is  not 
authorized  under  the  National  Training  Ordinance, 1980  as  amended 
by  the  National  Training  (Amendment)  Ordinance,  2002  (“Training 
Ordinance”) to provide training in paramedical courses or courses for 
allied health professionals which includes dental hygienists and dental 
technician.  He  further  submitted  that  a  dental  hygienists  and  dental 
technician falls within the definition of allied health professionals and 
such persons are not authorized to practice independently without  the 
supervision of a qualified dentist. Learned counsel further argued that 
the  Punjab  Medical  Faculty  is  the  examining  body  which  conducts 
various  examinations  of  paramedics  and  allied  health  professionals 
including dental hygienists and dental technician. On the basis of the 
certificates  issued  by  the  Punjab  Medical  Faculty,  it  is  clearly 
WP No.32150/2015 
26 
provided that the holder of such certificate is not permitted to practice 
independently  or  to  open  a  private  clinic.  They  can  only  work  under 
the  supervision  of  qualified  dentists.  This  is  not  disputed  by  the 
Petitioners,  yet  they  argued  that  their  respective  Councils  under  the 
Unani  Act  permit  them  to  use  dental  equipment  and  as  part  of 
traditional medicine working on the gums and teeth falls within their 
prescribed areas of practice.    
30.  The  Unani  Act  provides  for  the  constitution  and  function  of  a 
Council for Homoeopathy and a Council for Tibb. The function of the 
Councils are prescribed in Section 14 of the Unani Act as follows: 
Functions  of  the  Council.-  The  following  shall  be  the 
14. 
functions of the Council, namely:- 
 
(a) 
(b) 
( c ) 
(cc) 
(d) 
(e)    
 
To consider applications for recognition under this Act 
made  by  institutions  imparting  or  desiring  to  impart 
instruction  in  the  system  of  medicine  with  which  the 
Council is concerned; 
To  secure  the  maintenance  of  an  adequate  standard  of 
education in recognized institutions;   
to  make  arrangements  for  the  registration  of  duly 
qualified  persons  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 
this Act; 
to  appoint  committees  or  sub-committees,  each  having 
due  representation  of  all  the  Provinces,  for  a  specific 
period,  to  perform  any  specified  function  concerned 
with the functions of the Council; 
to  provide  for  research  in  the  system  of  medicine  with 
which the Council is concerned; and  
to do such other acts and things as it may be empowered or 
 
required to do by this Act or the rules. 
 
 
 
Whilst the Councils are regulating the practice of the practitioners, the 
Councils  cannot  authorize  or  recognize  any  training  in  scientific 
medical practice as it tantamounts to encroachment in the jurisdiction 
of  the  authorities  regulating  the  scientific  medical  practice.  In  these 
cases  the  issue  is  specifically  related  to  the  practice  of  dental 
hygienists  or  dental  technicians.  The  individual  practitioners  and  the 
Dental  Associations  before  the  Court  want  to  practice  as  dental 
hygienists and dental technicians on the basis of their diplomas from 
Skill Development Council. This permission or recognition cannot be 
WP No.32150/2015 
27 
granted  by  the  Council  as  it  falls  under  the  scope  of  the  Training 
Ordinance and the Punjab Medical Faculty who are duly authorized to 
train dental hygienists or technicians.  The Councils are bound by the 
directives  prescribed  by  the  Punjab  Medical  Faulty  and  cannot 
prescribe anything to the contrary. So if a homoeopath or tibb, as the 
case  may  be,  want  to  practice  as  dental  hygienists  and  dental 
technician  they  will  have  to  follow  the  directives  issued  under  the 
Training  Ordinance  and  by  the  Punjab  Medical  Faculty.  They  will 
have to be trained by the recognized institution and are bound by the 
restrictions  prescribed  by  the  competent  authority,  in  this  case  being 
the  Punjab  Medical  Faculty.  Consequently  the  Petitioners  cannot 
practice  as  dental  hygienists  or  dental  technician  based  on  their 
diplomas  issued  by  the  Skill  Development  Council  because  these 
programs  are  not  recognized  programs  nor  is  the  Skill  Development 
Council permitted to train allied health professionals. In this regard, it 
is  necessary  to  note  that  only  authorized  programs  and  trainers  can 
offer such professional training and if additional training is taken then 
all regulatory requirements attached to the professional training  must 
be followed.   
31.  As  is  apparent  from  reading  the  prescribed  function,  the 
Council  regulates  education  standards,  qualifications  and 
the 
institutions which provide training in homeopathy and tibb. Section 18 
of  the  Unani  Act  provides  for  the  maintenance  of  standard  of 
efficiency  of  recognized  institutions,  authorizing  the  Councils  to 
inspect the institutions and to provide necessary information.  Section 
21 of the Unani Act allows the Councils to regulate  admission to the 
recognized  institutions  and  Section  24  calls  for  registration  of 
practitioners.  So  essentially  the  Unani  Act  regulates  professional 
education, the institutions and the practitioner. In doing so they form 
opinions on the practice of homoeopathic and tibb system of medicine 
by  practitioners  registered  under  the  Unani  Act.  The  Council 
WP No.32150/2015 
28 
considers  matters  related  to  the  practice  and  issues  directives 
accordingly.  In  these  cases,  the  Petitioners  are  all  specifically  reliant 
on their Skill Development Council diplomas as dental hygienists and 
dental  technicians  and  on  the  basis  thereof  want  to  provide  these 
services in their clinics. The risk in these cases are that the Petitioners 
being  trained  and  licensed  under  the  Unani  Act,  are  seeking  to  use 
scientific  or  modern  methods  of  healthcare  without  any  regulatory 
compliance.  This  cannot  be  permitted  as  it  puts  public  health  at  risk 
and  compromises  public  safety.  The  field  of  dental  hygienists  and 
technicians  is  regulated  under  the  Byelaws  of  the  Punjab  Medical 
Faculty  as  these  fields  fall  under  the  definition  of  Allied  Hospital 
Professionals and are registered accordingly. The Council therefore is 
not  competent  to  permit  or  recognize  Allied  Health  Professionals 
practice nor can they allow practitioners registration under the Unani 
Act to indulge in such practices.  
32.  Therefore 
in  view  of  what  has  been  discussed,  WP 
Nos.79690/17,  2427/17,  31831/15,  19597/15,  38582/15,  28593/15, 
11158/16  and  21753/15  are  dismissed  and  WP  No.32150/2015  is 
allowed and the impugned order dated 16.10.2015 is set aside.  
33.  WP  No.30210/2016  is  filed  by  seven  Petitioners  who  are  not 
registered  under  the  Unani  Act.  The  Petitioners  have  passed  the 
examination  of  professional  education  two  years  Diploma  course  in 
Dental Hygienist from Skill Development Council and on the basis of 
which  they  are  allowed  to  practice  dentistry.  In  this  petition,  the 
Petitioners seek  a direction that the  Respondents  should  not  interfere 
in  the  lawful  business  of  the  Petitioners  and  should  not  harass  or 
humiliate them.  
34.  At  the  very  outset,  it  is  noted  that  these  Petitioners  are  not 
registered  under  the  Unani  Act.  The  only  question  is  that  they  have 
diplomas from Skill Development Council as dental hygienist. So far 
as these Petitioners are concerned they clearly fall under the definition 
WP No.32150/2015 
29 
of  quack  under  the  Health  Act  and  any  action  taken  by  the 
Respondents with respect to their establishment is on the basis of the 
fact  that  they  are  not  registered  under  the  Unani  Act  and  are  not 
qualified to practice dentistry. Hence this petition is dismissed.   
35.  WP No.28517/2016 is filed by Mian Abdul Majeed who seeks a 
direction to Respondent No.1 for the issuance of license. This relief as 
such cannot be granted by this Court in its constitutional jurisdiction. 
The  Petitioner  may  apply  for  the  required  license  and  registration,  if 
so advised which will be duly considered by the competent authority 
in accordance with law. Hence this petition is also dismissed. 
 
 
 
 
 
   Allah Bakhsh* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 (AYESHA A.MALIK) 
             JUDGE 
JUDGE  
