Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
  IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
RAWALPINDI BENCH RAWALPINDI  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
W.P.No.3263/2018 
Naveed Ahmed 
VS. 
Mst. Mehwish Riaz etc. 
S.No. of 
order/  
Date of 
order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding. 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary. 
 
 
  28.11.2018.  Ch. Irfan Ahmed, Advocate for the petitioner. 
 
The  relevant  facts  for  the  decision  of  the  instant 
petition  are  that  Naveed  Ahmed,  petitioner  was  married  to 
Mst.  Mehwish  Riaz,  respondent  No.1  on  10-02-2017  and 
minor  Abdullah,  respondent  No.2  was  born  on  16-11-2017. 
Unfortunately, the petitioner divorced  her on 11-5-2018 and 
she  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of  dowry  articles,  gold 
ornaments  and  maintenance  allowance  at 
the  rate  of 
Rs.20,000/- for herself as well as for their minor son as well 
as  recovery  of  Rs.5,00,000/-  as  per  column  No.19  of  the 
Nikahnama.  The  petitioner  filed  a  contesting  written 
statement.  Thereafter,  as  many  as  eight  (8)  issues  were 
framed  vide  order  dated  10-10-2018  and  the  learned  Judge, 
Family  Court  also 
fixed 
the  ad-interim  maintenance 
allowance  for  respondent  Nos.  1  and  2  at  the  rate  of 
Rs.3,500/-  per  month  for  each.  This  order  has  been 
challenged  to  the  extent  of  granting  interim  maintenance 
allowance  to  respondent  No.1,  by  the  petitioner  through  the 
instant constitutional petition. 
2. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argued  that  the 
petitioner is ready to pay the interim  maintenance for minor 
Abdullah who is a suckling baby, however, respondent No. 1 
is not entitled for any such relief being a divorcee. He points 
out that it is the case of the lady, that Talaq was pronounced 
on  11.05.2018  and  Talaq  Nama  was  sent  to  her.  He  further 
argued that it is a matter of evidence that whether Abdullah, 
the minor son is being breast fed or not. However, he admits 
that  this  particular  ground  has  not  been  taken  in  the  instant 
writ  petition  but  he  hastened  to  add  that  this  particular  fact 
W.P. No.3263/2018 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
has  not  even  been  mentioned  in  the  plaint  filed  by  his  ex-
wife / respondent No.1. He has also relied upon Ayat No.233 
of Surah Al-Baqra from the Holy Qur’an. 
3. 
Heard. Record perused.  
4. 
I  have  gone  through  the  pleadings  of  the  parties  as 
filed before learned Family  Court as well as the instant writ 
petition.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  is  correct  in 
pointing  out  that  the  plaint  does  not  state  anything  about 
minor  Abdullah  to  the  effect  that  he  is  a  suckling  baby. 
However,  in  ground  (c)  of  the  instant  petition,  it  has  been 
stated as follows:- 
the 
learned 
trial  court  awarded 
That  the  respondent  No.2  is  a  suckling  baby 
“c. 
interim 
and 
maintenance for him @ Rs.3500/- and the petitioner is 
ready to  pay the interim maintenance as  per  order  of 
the Honourable Court, however the respondent No.1 is 
not entitled for any such relief being divorcee lady.” 
In  any  case,  the  learned  Family  Court  in  para  No.2  of  the 
impugned order dated 10.10.2018 has held as follows:- 
“2. 
Admittedly,  plaintiff  No.  2  is  issue  of  the 
parties  who  is  in  custody  of  plaintiff  No.  1.  Father  is 
duty  bound  to  provide  maintenance  allowance  to  his 
children, therefore the interim maintenance allowance 
@  Rs.3500/-  per  month  for  plaintiff  No.  2  is  fixed  till 
the  disposal  of  suit  in  hand  whereas  admittedly  the 
minor is below the age of two year who is in custody of 
plaintiff  No.  1,  meaning  thereby  plaintiff  No.  2  is  a 
suckling  baby  therefore  plaintiff  No.  1  is  also  entitled 
for  interim  maintenance  allowance  @  Rs.3500/-  per 
month  till  the  minor  reaches  the  age  about  two  years 
or  the  disposal  of  suit  in  hand  which-ever  is  earlier. 
Interim  maintenance  allowance  shall  be  paid  by 
defendant  on  or  before  14th  of  each  month  in  case  of 
any  failure  proceeding  u/s  17-A  shall  be  initiated 
against  him.  Interim  maintenance  allowance  shall  be 
payable from the first date of appearance of defendant 
in the suit.” 
In view of the above, it needs to be noted that the petitioner 
himself  refers  to  his  minor  child  Abdullah  as  “a  suckling 
baby”, as such, in these circumstances the principle of approbate 
and reprobate is  fully  applicable in  the  case of the petitioner and 
the  petitioner  cannot  blow  hot  and  cold  in  the  same  breath. 
Reliance  is  placed  on  the  cases  reported  as  A.R.  Khan  Vs.  P.N. 
Boga  through  LR  (PLD  1987  S.C.  107),  M/s.  Home  Comforts 
Vs.  Mirza  Rashid  Baig&  Others  (1992  S.C.M.R.  1290), 
W.P. No.3263/2018 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 3 
Federation of Pakistan Vs. Amir Hamza (2001 S.C.M.R. 1959), 
Noor Muhammad, Lambardar Vs. Member (Revenue), Board of 
Revenue,  Punjab,  Lahore  &  Others  (2003  S.C.M.R.  708)  and 
Overseas Pakistanis Foundation & Others Vs. Sqn. Ldr. (Retd.) 
Syed Mukhtar Ali Shah & Another (2007 S.C.M.R. 569). 
The  above  noted  para  from  the  impugned  order  shows  that 
the  learned  Judge,  Family  Court  completely  understanding 
the  wisdom  and  intention  of  the  legislature  in  promulgating 
the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  exercised  parental  jurisdiction, 
while  passing 
the 
impugned  order  dated  10-10-2018. 
Learned  Family  Court  is  a  quasi-judicial  forum  and  the 
impugned order is well within the four corners of the law. 
5. 
Almighty  Allah  through  various  verses  of  the  Holy 
Qur’an  has  laid  down  the  basic  rules  on  which  the  rights  of 
the  child  are  based,  in  the  above-noted  circumstances.  The 
English translation as well as commentary of Ayat No.233 of 
Surah Baqara by Mr. Abdullah Yusuf Ali in Volume-I (Two-
Volume  Edition  –  1977)  at  page  93  is  reproduced  as 
follows:-  
Translation: 
“The mothers shall give suck to their offspring for two 
whole years, if the father desires, to complete the term. 
But he shall bear the cost of their food and clothing on 
equitable terms. No soul shall have a burden laid on it 
greater  than  it  can  bear.  No  mother  shall  be  treated 
unfairly on account of her child, nor father on account 
of  his  child.  An  heir  shall  be  chargeable  in  the  same 
way  if  they  both  decide  on  weaning,  by  mutual 
consent, and after due consultation, there is no blame 
on  them.  If  ye  decide  on  a  foster-mother  for  your 
offspring,  there  is  no  blame  on  you,  provided  ye  pay 
(the mother) what ye offered,  on equitable terms. But 
fear Allah and know that Allah sees well what ye do.” 
Commentary: 
“As  this  comes  in  the  midst  of  the  regulations  on 
divorce, it applies primarily to cases of divorce, where 
some  definite  rule  is  necessary,  as  the  father  and 
mother would not, on account of the divorce, probably 
be  on  good  terms,  and  the  interests  of  the  children 
must  be  safeguarded.  As,  however,  the  wording  is 
perfectly  general,  it  has  been  held  that  the  principle 
applies  equally to  the father  and  mother in wedlock  : 
each must fulfill his or her part in the fostering of the 
child. On the other hand, it is provided that the child 
shall  not  be  used  as  an  excuse  for  driving  a  hard 
bargain  on  either  side.  By  mutual  consent  they  can 
agree to some course that is reasonable and equitable, 
both  as  regards  the  period  before  weaning  (the 
W.P. No.3263/2018 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 4 
maximum  being  two  years)  and  the  engagement  of  a 
wet-nurse or (by analogy) for artificial feeding. But the 
mother‟s  privileges  must  not  be  curtailed  simply 
because  by  mutual  consent  she  does  not  nurse  the 
baby. In a matter of this kind the ultimate appeal must 
be  to  godliness,  for  all  legal  remedies  are  imperfect 
and may be misused.” 
The English translation as well as commentary of 
Ayat No.6 of Surah Talaq by Mr. Abdullah Yusuf Ali in 
Volume-III  at  pages  1564  and  1565  (Three-Volume 
Edition – 1969) is reproduced as follows:- 
Translation: 
“Let the women live (In „iddat,) in the same style as ye 
live, according to your means : Annoy them not, so as 
to  restrict  them.5516  And  if  they  carry  (life  in  their 
wombs), then5517 spend (your substance) on them until 
they  deliver  their  burden  :  and  if  they  suckle  your 
(offspring),  give  them  their  recompense  :  and  take 
mutual counsel together, according to what is just and 
reasonable. And if ye find yourselves5518 in difficulties, 
let  another woman suckle  (the  child)  on  the  (father‟s) 
behalf.5519” 
Commentary: 
“5517. If there is pregnancy, a sacred third life comes 
on  the  scene,  for  which  there  is  added  responsibility 
(perhaps  added  hope  of  reconciliation)  for  both 
parents.  In  any  case  no  separation  is  possible  until 
after  the  child  is  born.  Even  after  birth,  if  no 
reconciliation  between  parents  is  possible,  yet  for  the 
nursing of the child and for its welfare the care of the 
mother remains the duty of the father, and there must 
be  mutual  counsel  between  him and the mother  in  all 
truth and sincerity. 
5518. “If ye find yourselves in difficulties”: e.g., if the 
mother‟s  milk  fails,  or  if  her  health  fails,  or  if  any 
circumstance  arises  which  bars  the  natural  course  of 
the  mother  nursing  her  own  child.  There  may  be 
psychological difficulties also. 
5519.  That  is,  the  father  must  stand  all  expenses, 
without  cutting  down  the  reasonable  allowance  to 
which the mother is entitled in the circumstances.” 
The above clearly shows that even the foster mother is to be 
paid  for  her  services.  The  right  of  such  a  child  is  so 
intertwined  with  the  mother  that  it  is  imperative  for  the 
mother  to  be  duly  supported,  provided  for  and  properly 
looked after for the period she feeds the child. 
Keeping  in  view  the  above  and  the  jurisprudence  on  the 
subject,  the  concepts  of  Razayat  and  Hazanat  are  well 
established.  Every  child  has  following  rights  over  its 
parents:- 
W.P. No.3263/2018 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 5 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Right of Razayat or being suckled; 
Right of fosterage and being brought up; & 
Right of being trained and educated. 
It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  here  that  a 
special  law  for  such  children  and  for  protection  of  breast 
feeding  has  been  promulgated,  titled  as  the  Protection  of 
Breast-Feeding  and  Child  Nutrition  Ordinance,  2002. 
Modern science also recognizes that mother’s milk is the best 
food  for  the  baby.  In  this  view  of  the  matter  the  impugned 
order dated 10-10-2018, the learned Family Court has rightly 
included the interim maintenance for the divorced mother of 
the minor. Reliance in this regard can safely be placed on the 
cases  reported  as  Muhammad  Aslam  Vs.  Muhammad 
Usman  and  others  (2004  CLC  473),  Captain  S.M.  Aslam 
Vs. Mst. Rubi Akhtar (1996 CLC 1) & Muhammad Ameen 
Vs.  Mst.  Mehar  un  Nisa  and  others  (PLD  1988  Federal 
Shariat Court 100).      
6. 
It also needs to be noted that the impugned order has 
been passed under the provisions of Section 17-A of the said 
Act  which  provides  for  the  interim  maintenance.  Moreover, 
sub-section (3) of the Section 14 of the said Act provides as 
follows:- 
“14.  Appeals.  –  (3)  No  appeal  or  revision  shall  lie 
against an interim order passed by a Family Court.” 
In  view  of  these  statutory  provisions  and  the  below  noted 
precedents,  it  is  clear  that  the  impugned  order  dated  10-10-
2018  is  only  tentative  in  nature  and  the  amount  of 
maintenance  will  finally  be  decided  after  recording  of 
evidence,  therefore,  it  is  not  liable  to  be  interfered  with  at 
this  stage,  while  exercising  constitutional 
jurisdiction. 
Reliance  can  be  placed  in  this  regard  on  cases  reported  as 
Syed  Saghir  Ahmad  Naqvi  Vs.  Province  of  Sindh  through 
Chief  Secretary,  S&GAD,  Karachi  and  another  (1996 
S.C.M.R.  1165),  Muhammad  Tabish  Naeem  Khan  Vs. 
Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore  and  others  (2014 
S.C.M.R. 1365) and Amjad Iqbal Vs. Mst. Nida Sohail and 
W.P. No.3263/2018 
 
 
 
 
P a g e  | 6 
others  (2015  S.C.M.R.  128)  &  Mst.  Tahira  and  4  others 
Vs. Muhammad Irfan and another (2018 M.L.D. 407). 
7. 
For  what  has  been  stated  above,  the  instant  writ 
petition being without any merits stands dismissed in limine.  
8. 
Office  is  directed  to  send  a  copy  of  this  order  to 
respondent No.1 for information. 
 
(SHAKIL-UR-REHMAN KHAN) 
JUDGE 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
Farhan 
