Stereo. HC JD A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
MULTAN BENCH MULTAN 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Criminal Appeal    No.277 of 2012 
(Masrafeen. Vs.    The State, etc.) 
 
JUDGMENT. 
 
 
Date of hearing: 
04.12.2018. 
Appellant by: 
Rana Muhammad Nadeem Kanjoo, Advocate. 
State by: 
Mr.  Sarfraz  Khan  Khichi,  Deputy  Prosecutor 
General.  
Complainant by: 
Mr. Mudassar Altaf Qureshi, Advocate.  
 
SADIQ  MAHMUD  KHURRAM,  J.  –  The  appellant  namely 
Masrafeen  was tried alongwith  his  co-accused  namely  Khadim  Hussain  
(since  acquitted)  and  Muhammad  Mushtaq  alias  Iqbal  and  Muhammad 
Bilal(  both  since  declared  Proclaimed  offenders)  by  the  learned 
Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Burewala,  in  case  FIR  No.98  of  2009 
dated 14.04.2009  registered  at  Police  Station  Fateh  Shah,  Burewala, 
under  Sections  302/301/148/149  PPC    for  committing    Qatl-e-Amd  of 
Rasheed  (deceased).  The  learned  trial  court  vide  judgment  dated 
14.3.2012 convicted the appellant Masrafeen under Section 302(b) PPC 
and sentenced him as infra: 
imprisonment  under  section  302(b)  PPC 
“Life 
for 
committing  Qatl-e-Amd  of  Rasheed  Ahmad  (deceased)  and 
pay  Rs.1  Lac  as  compensation  u/s  544-A,  Cr.P.C.  and  in 
default  thereof,  to  further  undergo  six  months  of  simple 
imprisonment.” 
Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. was also been extended to 
the appellant.  
learned 
The co-accused namely Khadim Hussain  was however acquitted by 
the 
two  co-accused  namely 
Muhammad  Mushtaq  alias  Iqbal  and  Muhammad  Bilal  were 
declared  as  Proclaimed  Offenders,  who  absented  themselves  after 
trial  court.  The  other 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
 
the  closure  of  prosecution  evidence  and  before  their  examination 
under section 342 Cr.P.C. was recorded. 
2. 
 Feeling  aggrieved,  Masrafeen  (convict)  lodged  Criminal  Appeal 
No.277 of 2012 against his conviction and sentence.  
2 
3. 
Precisely  the  facts  necessary,  as  divulged  in  the  statement  of 
Abdul Hameed (PW-5), are as under: 
“The deceased of the  case  Rasheed  Ahmed  was  my  real 
brother. We owned 22-Acres of land in Mauza Suldaira. 
Out of the said land, 16-Acres of land was leased out to 
Muhammad  Iqbal  alias  Mushtaq  and  Muhammad  Bilal 
accused.  The  remaining  6-Acres  of  land  was  cultivated 
by  Rasheed  Ahmed  himself.  On  12.04.2009,  at  about 
10.00  a.m.,  Bilal  accused  came  to  our  house  and  called 
for my brother Abdul Rasheed and took him into the land 
who did not come back till evening. When I rang him, his 
mobile  was  not  answering.  I  thought  that  he  might  held 
(sic)  been at  the  Dera  of  the  chak  to  pass  the night.  On 
the  following  morning  we  went  to  the  Dera  but  he  was 
not  found  there.  I  also  inquired  about  my  brother  from 
the  house  of  Bilal  and  Mushtaq  but  the  same  was  also 
locked. I asked for their whereabouts but could not trace 
them. Than (sic) I ranged (sic) to my cousins Hameed ud 
Din  and  Rasheed  ud  Din.  I  also  communicated  on 
telephone to my Chacha Shoukat Ali. I was intimated by 
them  that  my  brother  was  not  available  even  at  Patuki. 
They also came to Burewala and I alongwith them begin 
to  make  search  for  my  lost  brother.  In  the  evening  time 
on 13.04.2009 we were standing at the bus stop of Kachi-
paki  road.  When  at  about  10.00  p.m.,  a  car  came  there 
bearing  No.1022  of  Gray  colour.  On  the  front  seat, 
Musrafeen  was  sitting  with  driver  Khadam  Hussain 
whereas Bilal and Mushtaq accused were sitting on rear 
seats  with  some  unknown  person.  The  car  came  from 
Sahuka side and went towards Luddan. We suspected the 
car  and  we  chased  after  hiring  a  taxi.  The  said  car 
wherein  Musrafeen  etc.  were  boarding  could  not  be 
passed over by us hence we came back in vain. Early on 
the  morning  on  the  cable  there  was  a  news  that  a  dead 
body  has  been  taken  to  possession  by  P.S.  Fateh  Shah 
from P-I link and the same was brought to THQ, hospital 
Burewala  for  postmortem  examination.  I  alongwith  my 
Chacha, and my cousins Hameed ud Din and Rasheed ud 
Din  came  to  hospital and identified the dead body  there 
which was my brother Rasheed Ahmed. I told the police, 
escorting  the  dead  body  that  I  have  suspected  that  my 
brother was killed by the accused namely Mushtaq, Bilal 
and Musrafeen. Thus I moved the application against the 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
 
3 
from  Bilal  and  Mushtaq  about 
said  accused.  Earlier  to  the  occurrence  Musrafeen  had 
injured  my  brother  by  causing  a  fire  shot  and  for  the 
same a case was registered against him. We had to have 
the  amount 
to 
Rs.5,00,000/6,00,000/-  as  a  lease  money  and  given  to 
them for purchase of fertilizer etc. To usurp that amount 
my  brother  was  killed  by  the  accused  persons  with 
common intention. When the accused were apprehended 
by  the  police  and  as  per  instance  of  the  accused  the 
police got recovered a mobile and an identity card of my 
brother and the same was taken into possession. Identity 
card  P  4  and  the  mobile  Phone  P-5  were  got  recovered 
as  per  instance  of  Mushtaq  accused  in  police  custody 
after his arrest and physical remand of the police which 
were taken into possession vide memo Ex.PF. I alongwith 
Hameed  ud  Din  signed  the  memo  as  witnesses  of  the 
recovery  of  the  articles.  On  that  day,  Muhammad  Bilal 
accused in custody led to the recovery of ring (P 6) made 
of silver belonging to Rasheed deceased which was taken 
into  possession  by  the  I.O.  vide  memo  Ex.PG.  I  and 
Hameed-ud-Din  signed  the  memo  as  the  witnesses.  On 
the same day, Musrafeen accused in police custody led to 
the  recovery  of  Bugda  P  7 and  the same  was taken  into 
possessin by the I.O. vide memo Ex.PH. I and Hameed ud 
Din signed the memo as the witnesses. On the same day, 
the  blood  stained  earth  from  the  place  where  Rasheed 
accused  was  slaughtered  was  taken  into  possession  by 
the  I.O.  vide  Ex.PJ  alongwith  blood  stained  cot.  I  and 
Hameed ud Din signed the memo as the witnesses. In the 
hospital  when  I  met  the  I.O.  I  moved  a  written 
application to him which is Ex.PK and the same bears my 
signature  which  is  Ex.PK/1  alongwith  my  NIC  number 
and mobile number” 
4. 
The  learned  trial  court  framed  charges  against  the  appellant  and 
his  co-accused  on 28.07.2009  to  which  he  and  they  pleaded  not  guilty 
and  the  learned  trial  court  proceeded  to  examine  the  prosecution 
witnesses. 
5.     The prosecution in order to prove its case got recorded statements 
of as many as twelve witnesses. The evidence of  Abdul Hameed (PW-5) 
and Hameed ud Din (PW-7) particularly with respect to Masrafeen was 
to the effect that they saw a car bearing No. 1022/RLE on 13.4.2009 at 
10.00  p.m  wherein  Masrafeen  (  appellant),  Khadim  Hussain  (since 
acquitted)  and  Bilal  and  Mushtaq  (  both  since  declared  proclaimed 
offenders)  were  sitting  along  with  an  unknown  person.  Abdul  Hameed 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
4 
 
(PW-5)  also  gave  evidence  of  motive.  Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5)    and 
Hameed ud Din   (PW-7)  stated that they also witnessed the recovery of  
bugda  (Exh.P7)  allegedly  got  recovered  by  Musarafeen  (appellant). 
Abdul  Ghafoor    (PW-4  )  is  the  complainant  of  the  case  who  had 
discovered  the  body  of  the  deceased  out  of  a  box  .Muhammad  Arshad 
Rehman  draftsman      (PW-1)  prepared  the  scaled  site  plan  of  the 
occurrence  (Exh.PA)    and  another  scaled  site  plan  of  the  place  of 
recovery of Bugda (butcher’s knife) (Exh PB). Ghulam Rasool 1187/C 
(PW-2)  stated  that  on  22.4.2009  he  received  blood  stained  earth  for  its 
onward transmission to Lahore and on 16.5.2009 he witnessed the arrest 
of Musarafeen (appellant) and Ashiq and a car was taken into possession 
by 
the  Investigating  Officer 
through  recovery  memo  (Exh.PC). 
Muhammad  Shafqat  350/HC  (PW-3)  stated  that  he  received  the 
complaint  (Exh.PD)  and  recorded  the  formal  FIR  (Exh.PD/1).  Ghulam 
Abbas 896-C (PW-6) stated that on 14.4.2009 he took the dead body of 
an unknown person to the mortuary  and the postmortem was conducted 
on  15.4.2009  and  that  the  medical  officer  handed  over  the  last  worn 
clothes of the deceased which were taken into possession vide recovery 
memo  (Exh.PE)  by  the  Investigating  Officer.  Farooq  Ahmad  (PW-8) 
stated  that  he  along  with  Abdul  Ghafoor  (PW-4)  discovered    the  dead 
body  which  was  concealed  in  a  box  and  he  also  witnessed  recovery  of  
the  blood  stained  earth  which  was  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery 
memo  (Exh.PL)  and  the  box  (Exh.P8)  along  with  two  locks  Exh.P9/1 
and Exh.P9/2 which were taken into possession through recovery memo 
(Exh.PM). Yaseen (PW-9) stated that he broke the locks of box (Exh.P8) 
and witnessed the recovery of unknown dead body. Muhammad Rafique 
392/HC  (PW-10)  stated  that  on  14.4.2009  he  received  a  parcel  said  to 
contain  earth  which  he  on  22.4.2009  handed  over  to  Ghulam  Rasool 
1187/C  (PW-2).  Muhammad  Afzal  SI  (PW-11)  investigated  the  case 
from  14.4.2009  till  24.5.2009  and  detailed  the  facts  of  investigation 
before the learned trial court.  
6. 
The  prosecution  also  got  examined  Dr.  Muhammad  Ashgar 
(PW-12)  who  was  posted  as  Medical  Officer  at  THQ,  Hospital, 
Burewala and on 15.04.2009 had conducted the postmortem examination 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
 
of  Rasheed  Ahmad  (deceased).  Dr.  Muhammad  Ashgar  (PW-12)  while 
examining Rasheed Ahmad (deceased) observed as under:- 
5 
“INJURIES:  
1.  An incised wound 10x3 cm going deep inside the skull 
cavity.  
2.  An incised wound on left side of jaw with broken and 
fractured mandible. 20cm x 5 cm started from left side 
of chin extending to left ear going inside the face and 
skull. 
3.  An incised wound (cut) on neck started from right side 
of  neck  +back  side  (right  of  back)  extending  from 
front  side  to  left  side.  25  cm  x  3  cm.  All  neck         
(except a small on back and left side of neck) was cut.  
4.  An  incised  wound  on  right  shoulder  5  cm  x  2  cm 
muscle deep ( on top area) 
5.  An  incised  wound  on  front  of  left  shoulder  10cm  x  2 
cm ( muscle deep) 
6.  An  incised  wound  on  left  wrist,  (back  of  left  wrist) 
5cm x 2 cm muscle deep. 
7.  An incised wound on front side + lateral side ( outer 
side) of right knee 7 cm x 4 cm skin and muscle deep. 
I  also  noted  that  the  neck  was  cut,  only  small  area 
was intact. No ligature mark was found. It was a body 
of stout person and decomposition was started  
Thorax: 
Walls,  ribs,  cartilages  were  pale  and  healthy  and 
putrefaction  was  in  progress.  Plura,  right  and  left 
lungs  were  pale  and  healthy.  Larynx  and  trachea 
were  cut  at  the  level  of  shoulder.  Pericardium  and 
heart pale and healthy and both sides empties. Blood 
vessels were pale and healthy.  
OPINION:  
 
“After  conducting  postmortem  examination,  I  was  of 
the  opinion  that  death  occurred  due  to  injury  No.3  + 
contributing  injury  No.1  and  2  causing  sever  loss  of  blood 
and  hemorrhage  and  damage  to  spinal  cord  and  brain. 
Injuries were more than sufficient to cause death in ordinary 
course  of  nature.  All  the  injuries  were  antimortem  and 
caused by sharp edge weapon. 
Probable  time  that  elapsed  between  injuries  and 
 
death  immediate  whereas  between  death  and  postmortem 
was two to seven days.” 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
6 
 
7.     On  11.11.2010,  the  learned  DDPP  gave  up  PW  Rasheed-ud-Din 
being unnecessary and then on 3.2.2011 the learned DDPP gave up PWs 
Muhammad  Yousaf  and  Tanvir  being  unnecessary.    On  9.2.2011  the 
learned DDPP gave up PWs Rabnawaz 766/C and Niamat Ali 79/C2 as 
being  unnecessary.  On  29.9.2011  the  learned  DDPP  closed  the 
prosecution evidence after tendering the report of Serologist bearing No. 
870(Exh.PV),  the  report  of  Serologist  bearing  No.  1669  (Exh.PW)  and 
the report of Chemical Examiner bearing No.1564 (Exh.PU) . 
8. 
After  the  closure  of  prosecution  evidence  the  learned  trial  court 
examined  Masrafeen  (appellant)  under  section  342  Cr.P.C.  and  in 
answer  to  question  why  this  case  against  you  and  why  the  PWs  have 
deposed against you he gave the following reply: 
“I am innocent. I have no knowledge or concern about the 
alleged occurrence as stated in the present case. The PWs 
have  implicated  me  in  this  case  entirely  on  the  basis  of 
suspension  created  in  their  minds  due  to  previous 
litigation  between  the  deceased  and  me,  despite  the  fact 
that a compromise effected between deceased and  me and 
we  were  living  amicably  and  in  a  friendly  manner.  The 
PWs  have  badly  failed  to  connect  me  with  alleged 
occurrence.  The  evidence  advanced  by  the  PWs  does  not 
show  my  presence  or  participation  in  any  way  with  the 
murder of Rashid Ahmad deceased. My implication in this 
case  is  just  for  one  reason  that  Rashid  Ahmad  deceased 
had  got  registered  a  criminal  case  vide  FIR  No.283/08 
which  ended  in  a  compromise.  Both  the  PWs  are  related 
interse  with  the  deceased,  so,  they  have  deposed  falsely 
against me.”  
Neither  the  appellant  opted  to  get  himself  examined  under  Section 
340(2) Cr.P.C. nor adduced any evidence in his defence.  
9. 
On  the  conclusion  of  the  trial,  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 
Judge,  Burewala,  convicted  and  sentenced  the  appellant  as  referred  to 
above.   
10.  The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant precisely is 
that  whole  case  is  fabricated  and  false.  That  the  prosecution  remained 
unable 
to  prove 
the  facts 
in 
issue  and  did  not  produce  any 
unimpeachable, admissible and relevant evidence. He further contended 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
7 
 
that  the  statements  of  Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5)  and  Hameed  ud  Din 
(PW-7)  are  not  worthy  of  reliance  as  being  bereft  of  proof.  He  also 
argued that the medical evidence was not supportive of the prosecution 
case.    He  also  contended  that  Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5)  and  Hameed  ud 
Din  (PW-7)  examined  by  prosecution  were  related  to  the  deceased  and 
interested.  He  also  argued  that  the  recoveries  were  result  of  fake 
proceedings. He finally submitted that the prosecution has totally failed 
to prove the case against the accused beyond the shadow of doubt.   
11.  On the other hand, learned Deputy Prosecutor General along with 
the  learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5) 
contended  that  the  prosecution  has  proved  its  case  beyond  shadow  of 
doubt  by  producing  independent  witnesses.  Learned  counsels  further 
argued  that  the  deceased  died  as  a  result  of  act  of  the  appellant.  They 
further  contended  that  the  medical  evidence  also  corroborated  the 
statements of Abdul Hameed (PW-5) and Hameed ud Din (PW-7). They 
further  argued  that  the  recovery  of  Bugda  (Exh.P-7)    from  Masrafeen 
appellant, also corroborated the circumstantial evidence available. They 
contended that the appellant had enmity with the deceased and there was 
no  occasion  for  the  prosecution  witnesses,  who  were  related  to  the 
deceased, to substitute the real offenders with the innocent in this case. 
Lastly, they prayed for the rejection of appeal. 
12. 
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant,  learned Deputy 
Prosecutor  General  and  the  learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of 
Abdul Hameed (PW-5) and with their assistance perused the record and 
evidence detailed during the trial carefully. 
13.  The  whole  prosecution  case  revolves  around  the  statements  of 
Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5)  and  Hameed  ud  Din  (PW-7).  Their  evidence 
with  respect  to  Masrafeen  (  appellant) in total  was  to  the  effect  that  on 
13.4.2009 at 10.00 p.m , they i.e. Abdul Hameed (PW-5) and Hameed ud 
Din  (PW-7)  had  seen  a  car  bearing  No.1022/RLE  wherein  Masrafeen               
(appellant),  Khadim  Hussain  (since  acquitted)  and  Bilal  and  Mushtaq       
(both  since  declared  proclaimed  offenders)  were  sitting  along  with  one 
unknown  person.  They  did  not  witness  the  deceased  sitting  along  with 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
8 
 
the  abovementioned accused in  the said  car.  The trial  court has  already 
acquitted Khadim Hussain. I have queried the learned Deputy Prosecutor 
General  as  well  as  the  learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  Abdul 
Hameed  (PW-5)  regarding  the  filing  or  otherwise  of  an  appeal  against 
acquittal  of  the  said  co-accused,  who  have  stated  that  the  acquittal  of 
Khadim  Hussain  co-accused  (since  acquitted)  had  attained  finality  as 
neither  the State nor the complainant  or Abdul Hameed (PW-5) or any 
other  aggrieved  person    had  filed  any  appeal  against  the  acquittal  of 
Khadim  Hussain    co-accused  (since  acquitted).    The  question  for 
determination before this Court now is that whether the evidence which 
has  been  disbelieved  qua the  acquitted  co-accused of the  appellant, can 
be  believed  against  the  appellant.  The  proposition  of  law  in  Criminal 
Administration  of  Justice,  that  a  common  set  of  witnesses  can  be  used 
for  recording  acquittal  and  conviction against  the  accused  persons  who 
were  charged  for  the  commission  of  same  offence,  is  now  a  settled 
proposition. The condition for relying upon the same set of witnesses as 
against the convict but rejecting them as against the acquitted co-accused 
is  that  such  evidence  must  get  independent  corroboration  on  material 
particulars.  The  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  its  binding 
judgment  passed  in  the  case  of  Imtiaz  alias  Taj  Vs.  The  State  (2018 
SCMR 344) has enunciated the principle that if the witnesses have been 
disbelieved against some accused persons attributed effective  roles then 
the  same  eye-witnesses  cannot  be  believed  against  another  accused 
person,  attributed  a  similar  role,  unless  testimony  of  such  witnesses 
receives  independent  corroboration  qua  the  other  accused  person.  I  am 
unable  to  find  any  independent  corroboration  against  the  appellant  and 
I am  unable  to  distinguish  the  case  of  the  appellant  from  the  case  of 
Khadim  Hussain  co-accused  (since  acquitted).  I  am  thus  satisfied  that 
the  evidence  of  Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5)  and  Hameed  ud  Din  (PW-7) 
cannot be relied upon for convicting Masrafeen ( appellant)  and is to be 
rejected outright to his extent as there is no distinction in their statements 
with respect to the roles of Khadim Hussain co-accused (since acquitted) 
and Masrafeen (appellant). 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
9 
 
14. 
I  have  further  carefully  scrutinized  the  statements  of  Abdul 
Hameed  (PW-5)  and  Hameed  ud  Din  (PW-7).  Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5) 
during his cross-examination admitted that Hameed ud Din (PW-7) and 
Rasheed  ud  Din  (  given  up)  reached  Burewala  on  14.4.2009  at  about 
9.00/10.00 a.m at his dera in the village. Hameed ud Din (PW-7) stated 
that  Rasheed  deceased  was  his  paternal  cousin  and  he  Hameed  ud  Din 
(PW-7)  was  resident  of  Kot  Sardar.  This  totally  fragments  the 
prosecution  case  as  against  the  appellant  whereby  the  same  witness 
Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5)  had  stated  that  he  along  with  Hameed  ud  Din 
(PW-7) and Rasheed ud Din (given up PW) had seen the appellant riding 
a car on 13.4.2009 at about 10.00 p.m. It was not possible, as by his own 
admission,  Hameed  ud  Din          (PW-7)  and  Rasheed-ud-Din  (given  up 
PW) arrived on 14.4.2009. Furthermore during cross-examination Abdul 
Hameed (PW-5) admitted that if one was boarding in a car and the lights 
of car were on then the person sitting in the car cannot be identified by 
anyone  standing  in  front  of  the  car,  which  was  the  case  as  against 
Masrafeen ( appellant) that he had been recognized sitting in a car along 
with  the  other  co-accused.  After  this  admission  this  witness  cannot  be 
believed that he actually saw the appellant in the said car. In view of the 
above  I  am  of  the  considered opinion that  had  the said  witnesses being 
truthful  witnesses  and  had  they  witnessed  whatever  they  stated  before 
the police and the learned trial court then these contradictions would not 
have  cropped  up 
in 
their 
testimony.  These  self  negating  and 
contradictory  statements  of  the  witnesses  reflect  that  the  witnesses  are 
not  truthful  and  they  are  supporting  the  afterthought,  fabricated  and 
concocted story meant to create incriminating evidence to strengthen the 
case  of  unwitnessed    occurrence  against  the  appellant.  The  august 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Imran alias Dully and another 
Vs.  the  State  and    others  (2015  SCMR  155)  at  page  164  has  held  as 
under:- 
By  now,  it  is  a  consistent  view  that    when  any  case  rests 
entirely  on  circumstantial  evidence  then,  each  piece  of 
evidence  collected  must  provide  all  links  making  out  one 
straight chain where on one end its noose fit in the neck of 
the  accused  and  the  other  end  touches  the  dead  body.  Any 
link missing from the chain would disconnect and break the 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
 
10 
whole  chain  to  connect  the  one  with  the  other  and  in  that 
event conviction cannot be safely recorded and that too on a 
capital charge.  
To  carry  a  conviction  on  a  capital  charge  it  is  essential  that  the  courts 
should deeply scrutinize the circumstantial evidence because fabricating 
of  such  evidence  is  not  uncommon  and  very  minute  and  narrow 
examination of the same  is necessary to secure the  ends of justice.  It is 
imperative  for  the  prosecution  to  provide  all  links  in  chain,  where  one 
end  of  the  same  touches  the  dead  body  and  the  other,  neck  of  the 
accused. The present case is of such a nature that many links are missing 
in the chain. It would not be wrong to observe that in this particular case, 
it can be said that there is no link, what to talk about a chain. The august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Fiaz  Ahmad  Vs.  The  State 
(2017 SCMR 2026) has observed at page 2030 as under:- 
It may also be kept in mind that sometimes the investigating 
agency  collects  circumstantial  evidence  seems  apparently 
believable  however,  if  the  strict  standards  of  scrutiny  are 
applied  there  would appear  many  cracks and doubts in the 
same  which  are  always  inherent  therein  and  in  that  case 
Courts have to discard and disbelieve the same. 
15.  Learned Deputy Prosecutor General as well as the learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of Abdul Hameed (PW-5) have also relied upon the 
recovery  of  bugda  (Exh.P7),  from  Masrafeen,  appellant.  However, 
Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5)  stated  that  the  said  bugda  (Exh.P7)  was  got 
recovered from the house of co-accused Bilal and Mushtaq ( proclaimed 
offenders)  which  was  placed  under  a  cot  in  the  second  room  of  their 
house. Similarly, Hameed ud Din (PW-7) also stated that the said bugda 
(Exh.P7) was recovered from the house of Bilal and Masrafeen appellant 
was  not  a  resident  of  the  said  house.  The  said  recovery  of  the  Bugda 
(Exh.P7) cannot be believed as the same was neither made from a place 
which  belonged  to  Masrafeen  (appellant)  nor  was  under  his  exclusive 
possession.  Muhammad Afzal SI (PW-11), the Investigating Officer of 
the case, did not join any witness of the locality during the recovery of 
said bugda  (Exh.P7) which  was  in  clear violation  of  section 103  Cr.PC 
and  cannot  be  used  as  incriminating  evidence  against  Masrafeen 
(appellant),  being  evidence  which  was  obtained  through  illegal  means 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
 
and  is  hence  hit  by  the  exclusionary  rule  of  evidence.    The  august 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Muhammad Ismail and others 
Vs. The State ( 2017 SCMR 898) at page 901 has held as under:- 
11 
“For  the  above  mentioned  recovery  of  weapons  the 
prosecution had failed to associate any independent witness 
of the locality and, thus, the mandatory provisions of section 
103, Cr.P.C. had flagrantly been violated in that regard.”  
16.   Learned Deputy Prosecutor General as well as the learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of Abdul Hameed (PW-5) have also relied upon the 
motive which the alleged Masrafeen ( appellant) had for commission of 
the  offence.  As  per  Abdul  Hameed  (PW-5)  Masrafeen  (appellant)  had 
injured  his  brother  by  causing  a  fire  shot  in  the  year  2008  and  for  the 
same a case was registered against Masrafeen (appellant). I have noticed 
that the evidence with respect to the above motive was not supported by 
any  other  witness  during  the  trial  of  the  case.  Furthermore  Abdul 
Hameed  (PW-5)  during  his  cross-examination  admitted  that  the  said 
occurrence with respect to the motive, which dated as far as 25.2.2008, 
had  already  been  settled  and  a  compromise  had  already  been  effected  
between  the  deceased  and  Masrafeen  (  appellant).  A  tainted  piece  of 
evidence  cannot  corroborate  another  tainted  piece  of  evidence.  The 
august  Supreme  Court of  Pakistan in  the case  of  Muhammad Javed Vs. 
The State (2016 SCMR 2021) has held as under:- 
“The said related and chance witnesses had failed to receive 
any independent corroboration  inasmuch as no independent 
proof  of  the  motive  set  up  by  the  prosecution  had  been 
brought on the record of the case.” 
17 
  The  only  other  piece  of  evidence  left  to  be  considered  is  the 
medical evidence but the same is of no assistance in this case as medical 
evidence by its nature and character, cannot recognize a culprit in case of 
an unobserved incidence. As all the other pieces of evidence relied upon 
by  the  prosecution  in  this  case  with  respect  to  Masrafeen  (appellant) 
have  been  disbelieved  and  discarded,  therefore,  the  conviction  of 
appellant cannot be upheld on the basis of medical evidence alone. The 
August  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  its  binding  judgment  titled 
Crl. Appeal No.277 of  2012 
 
“Hashim  Qasim  and  another  Vs.  The  State”  (2017  SCMR  986)  has 
12 
enunciated the following principle of law: 
“The medical evidence is only confirmatory or of supporting 
nature  and  is  never  held  to  be  corroboratory  evidence,  to 
identify the culprit.”   
18.  Considering all the above circumstances, I entertain serious doubt 
in  my  mind  regarding  the  involvement  of  Masrafeen,  appellant,  in  the 
present case. It is settled principle of law that for giving benefit of doubt 
it is  not  necessary  that there  should  be  so  many  circumstances  rather if 
only  a  single  circumstance  creating  reasonable  doubt  in  the  mind  of  a 
prudent  person  is  available  then  such  benefit  is  to  be  extended  to  an 
accused  not  as  a  matter  of  concession  but  as  of  right.  The  august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Mansha  Vs.  The 
State ( 2018 SCMR 772) has enunciated the following principle: 
“Needless to mention that while giving the benefit of doubt 
to an accused it is not necessary that there should be many 
circumstances creating doubt. If there is circumstance which 
creates reasonable doubt in a prudent mind about the guilt 
of  the  accused,  then  the  accused  would  be  entitled  to  the 
benefit  of  such  doubt,  not  as  a  matter  of  grace  and 
concession but as a matter of right.” 
19.  
 For what has been discussed above, Criminal Appeal No. 277 of 
2012  filed  by  Masrafeen  (appellant)  is  accepted  and  the  conviction and 
sentences of the appellant awarded by the learned trial court through the 
impugned  judgment  dated  14.3.2012  are  hereby  set-aside.  Masrafeen 
(appellant) is ordered to be acquitted. The appellant is present  on bail as 
the  sentence of the petitioner had already been suspended by this Court, 
therefore, his surety shall stand discharged from his liability and the bail 
bonds submitted by the appellant are hereby cancelled. 
Saleem 
 
  
            
       
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
   (SADIQ MAHMUD KHURRAM) 
    
 JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Judge 
