Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.1178 of 2017 
Dr. Sajjad Nazir  
 
Versus 
Special Judge Rent Tribunal, Lahore and 2 others  
 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
proceeding 
 
Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel,      
where necessary 
    24.01.2017    Mr.  Muhammad  Ayub  Tahir  Joyya,  Advocate  for 
 
the petitioner. 
The petitioner namely Dr. Sajjad Nazir  by way of 
this  constitutional  petition  assails  the  vires  of  order 
dated  25th  of  October,  2016,  whereby  an  application 
filed  by  respondents  No.2  &  3  (hereinafter  referred  as 
“respondents”) for submission of affidavits in evidence, 
was allowed.  
2. 
Precisely  the  facts  necessary  for  adjudication  of 
instant petition are that “respondents” filed an ejectment 
petition  under  Section  15  of  The  Punjab  Rented 
Premises  Act,  2009  (hereinafter  referred  as  “The  Act, 
2009”)  for  eviction  of  the  petitioner.  The  ejectment 
petition  was  resisted  by  the  petitioner  by  filing  an 
application  for  leave  to  defend,  the  same  was  accepted 
whereafter  necessary  issues  were  framed  and  the  case 
was 
fixed 
for  evidence  of  “respondents”.  The 
“respondents”  moved  an  application  for  submission  of 
their  affidavits  in  evidence  which  was  contested  by  the 
petitioner, however, same was allowed vide order dated 
25th of October, 2016, hence this petition. 
3. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while referring 
Section 19 of “The Act, 2009” submitted that in terms of 
sub-section  4,  the  “respondents”,  being  the  landlords 
Writ Petition No.1178 of 2017 
 
 
-2- 
were  obliged  to  submit  their  affidavits  alongwith  the 
eviction  application.  He  added  that  non-submission  of 
affidavits  precluded  the  “respondents”  to  move  an 
application  at  a  belated  stage.  Learned  counsel 
contended that  impugned  order  is not  tenable  under  the 
law. 
4.  After  having  heard 
learned  counsel  for 
the 
petitioner at some length, I have examined the available 
record in the light thereof. 
5. 
The 
ejectment 
application  was 
filed  by 
“respondents” on 05th of May, 2005 which was resisted 
by  the  petitioner,  by  filing  an  application  for  leave  to 
contest in terms of Section 22 of “The Act, 2009”. The 
application was initially partly allowed vide order dated 
04th of January, 2016 by the Special Judge Rent, Lahore, 
however,  the  petitioner  feeling  aggrieved  from  the  said 
order  filed  an  appeal  under  Section  28  of  “The  Act, 
2009”  before  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge, 
Lahore.  The  appeal  was  accepted  vide  order  dated  15th 
of June, 2016 with the following observations :- 
“6. 
In view of the above facts, this appeal is accepted 
and impugned order is set aside while accepting leave to 
appear  and  defend  in  toto  in  the  subject  ejectment 
petition.  Learned  Trial  Court  is  directed  to  decide  vide 
single  order  whole  ejectment  petition  after  recording  of 
evidence of both parties. Copy of this order be certified to 
the  learned  Trial  Court  for  compliance.  No  order  as  to 
costs.” 
It  is  evident  from  the  record  that  the  “respondents” 
moved  an  application  on  18th  of  January,  2016 
immediately after framing of issues, seeking permission 
to submit affidavits in the evidence. The application was 
Writ Petition No.1178 of 2017 
 
 
-3- 
though  contested  by  the  petitioner,  however,  same  was 
allowed by way of impugned order. 
6. 
There is no cavil that in terms of sub-section 4 of 
Section  19  of  “The  Act,  2009”,  the  landlord  has  to 
submit  his  own  affidavit  as  well  as  affidavits  of  his 
witnesses alongwith the eviction application but it is not 
inflexible rule rather it is rule of procedure to streamline 
the  proceedings  before  the  tribunal  in  order  to  avoid 
unnecessary delay. 
7. 
So  far  contention  of  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  that  word  “shall”  used  in  the  said  provision 
makes the same mandatory, suffice to observe that mere 
use  of  word  “shall”  in  a  provision  does  not  make  the 
same  mandatory  in  all  eventualities.  The  litmus  test  to 
determine  the  mandatory  nature  of  a  provision  is 
outlined  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in 
the  case  of  “GHULAM  HASSAN  versus  JAMSHAID  ALI 
and others” (2001 SCMR 1001) and held as under:- 
“13.  It  is  an  established  principle  of  law  that  where  the 
Legislature  has  provided  a  penalty/consequences  for  the 
non-compliance,  the  said-  provision  would  be  mandatory 
in nature and where such consequences are not provided it 
would  be  termed  as  directory.  Reference  in  this  behalf  is 
made  to  the  case  of  Maulana  Nur-ul-Haq  v.  Ibrahim 
Khalili (2000 SCMR 1305) where it was held as under:-- 
"There  is  another  aspect  of  the  matter  to  which  it  is 
necessary to refer to section 32 of the Act appears to 
be  mandatory,  in  view  of  the  expression  'shall'  used 
therein,  but  in  fact  is  directory  for  want  of  a  penal 
clause. No doubt there exists no faultless acid test or 
a universal rule for determining whether a provision 
of 
law 
is  mandatory  or  directory  and  such 
determination  by  and 
large  depends  upon 
the 
intention  of  Legislature  and  the  language  in  which 
Writ Petition No.1178 of 2017 
 
 
-4- 
the  provision  is  couched  but  it  is  by  now  firmly 
settled  that  where  the  consequence  of  failure  to 
comply  with  the  provision  is  not  mentioned  the 
provision  is  directory  and  where  the  consequence  is 
expressly  mentioned  the  provision  is  mandatory.  It 
was  held  in  Niaz  Muhammad  Khan  v.  Mian  Fazal 
Raqeeb  (PLD  1974  SC  134)  that  as  a  general  rule  a 
statute is understood to be directory when it contains 
matters merely of direction but it is mandatory when 
those directions are followed by an express provision 
that  in  default  of  following  them  the  facts  shall  be 
null  and  void.  In  Major  Shujat  Ali  v.  Mst.  Surrya 
Begum (PLD 1978 SC (AJ&K) 118) it was held that 
in  the  absence  of  a  penalty  for  failure  to  follow  the 
prescribed procedure the provisions are to be taken to 
be  directory  and  not  mandatory.  The  provisions  of 
section  32  of  the  Act  being  directory  cannot  in 
manner  override  or  dilute  the  provisions  of  section 
31 of the Act which are mandatory by all standards." 
Reference is also made to the case of Mafizullah v. Manai 
Ullah  and  others  (PLD  1963  Dacca  318)  wherein  it  was 
observed as under:-- 
"9.  When  a  statute  is  passed  for  the  purpose  of 
enabling  something  to  be  done,  it  may  be  either  a 
mandatory  enactment,  or  a  directory  one, 
the 
difference being that a mandatory enactment must be 
obeyed  or  fulfilled  exactly,  but  is  sufficient,  if  a 
directory 
enactment  be  obeyed  or 
fulfilled 
substantially. If a mandatory enactment is not strictly 
complied  with,  the  thing  done  shall  be  invalid.  On 
the other hand, if an enactment is merely directory, it 
is  immaterial,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  validity  of  the 
thing done, whether the provisions of that enactment 
are  strictly  complied  with  or  not.  (See  Craies  on 
Statute Law, Fifth Edition, pages 240-241). There is 
no  general  rule  as  to  when  an  enactment  is  to  be 
considered  mandatory  and  when  merely  directory 
and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Court  to  ascertain  the  real 
Writ Petition No.1178 of 2017 
 
 
-5- 
intention  of  the  Legislature  having  regard  to  the 
whole  scope  and  purposes  of  the  enactment  to  be 
construed." 
The  same  view  was  further  reiterated  by  the  Hon’ble 
Apex  Court  in  the  matter  of:  HUMAN  RIGHTS  CASES 
NOS.4668 OF 2006, 1111 OF 2007 and 15283-G of 2010 (PLD 
2010 Supreme Court 759).  
8. 
It  is  thus  clearly  manifest  from  the  above  that 
unless  same  consequences  of  non-compliance  of  the 
provision are provided in the statute, the same cannot be 
termed  as  mandatory  despite  use  of  word “shall”  in  the 
same.  Even  the  words  “may”  and  “shall”  are  also 
interchangeable.  
9. 
The above mentioned view is also fortified by the 
judgment  of  this  Court  in  the  case  of  “EHSAN  ABBAS 
versus KHUSH ABBAS and others” (PLD 2011 Lahore 311). 
10.  Record  is  clearly  indicative  of  the  fact  that 
application  was  moved  by 
the 
“respondents” 
immediately  after  framing  of  issues  and  same  does  not 
cause  any  prejudice  to  the  petitioner.  The  object  of 
inserting any provision of law in the statute is always to 
promote the ends of justice and no such provision can be 
used  to  stifle  the  rights  of  the  parties  on  the  basis  of 
technicalities.  I  am  thus  of  the  considered  opinion  that 
learned  Rent  Tribunal  has 
rightly  allowed 
the 
application  filed  by  “respondents”  and  there  is  no 
illegality  or  perversity 
in 
the 
impugned  order, 
warranting  interference  by  this  Court  in  exercise  of 
constitutional  jurisdiction.  The  instant  petition  is  thus 
without  any  merits,  resultantly  same  is  dismissed  in 
limine. 
(MIRZA VIQAS RAUF) 
JUDGE 
Shahbaz Ali* 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
