Stereo HCJAD 38 
Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. W.P. No.130999 of 2018 
Aown Abbas Bhatti 
Versus 
Forman  Christian 
College and 2 others. 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Decision: 
23.02.2018 
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 
 
Mr.  Hamayun  Sarfraz  Chattha, 
Advocate.  
 
Mian  Zafar 
Advocate.  
Mr.  Ashfaq  Ahmed  Kharal, 
Assistant-Advocate General. 
 
Iqbal  Kalanauri, 
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J.-    Through  the  instant  Constitutional 
Petition  (the  “Petition”), filed under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution 
of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (the  “Constitution”),  the 
Petitioner has challenged the letter dated 27.10.2017 (the “Impugned 
Letter”)  whereby  the  Petitioner  was  suspended/expelled  by  the 
Respondent/Forman Christian College (the “FC College”). 
 
2. 
The main grievance of the Petitioner is that due to his alleged 
poor  academic  performance,  he  was  suspended  on  probation  for  the 
Fall  Semester  2017  and  his  registration  for  the  Fall  Semester  2017 
was cancelled and he was told that his case can be reviewed for the 
registration  for  Spring  2018,  however  his  probationary  status  will 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
2 
remain until his CGPA reaches the requirement of 2.0. The Impugned 
Letter was issued to the Petitioner on 27.10.2017. 
 
A. The Petitioner’s Arguments: 
 
3. 
The learned counsel for the Petitioner inter alia submitted that 
the  Impugned  Letter  has  been  issued  by  the  Respondents  in  clear 
violation  of  Articles  10-A,  18,  25-A  of  the  Constitution;  that  the 
decision  of  the  Respondent  is  against  the  rules  and  regulations;  that 
the Petitioner is being deprived of  his fundamental right of education 
guaranteed  under  the  Constitution;  that  no  opportunity  of  personal 
hearing  was  ever  afforded  to  the  Petitioner,  as  such  the  decision  of 
the  Respondents  is  arbitrary  and  against  the  principle  of  natural 
justice;  and  that  having two registrations/roll numbers is not against 
the rules and regulations. 
 
B. The Respondents’ Arguments: 
 
4. 
In  response  to  order  dated  16.02.2018,  the  Respondents  have 
submitted  report  and  parawise  comments  denying  all the  allegations 
levelled in the Petition and prayed for dismissal of the Petition. It is 
submitted  in  the  report  and  parawise  comments  that  this  petition  is 
not  maintainable  on  the  ground  that  the  Respondents  does  not  fall 
within  the  definition  of  a  person;  that  the  setup  of  the  Board  of 
Governors of the Respondents is not under the dominative control of 
the  Federal  or  the  Provincial  Government;  that  the  Respondents  do 
not  get  any  operating  funds  from  the  Government  of  the  Punjab  or 
the Federal Government; that Petitioner has not been able to point out 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
3 
any violation of any provision of law or any rules and regulations by 
the  Respondents;  that  the  Petitioner  may  avail  alternate  remedy 
before appropriate forum; that the instant petition has been filed just 
to harass and blackmail the Respondents.   
         
5.  Mian  Zafar  Iqbal  Kalanauri,  Advocate  for  the  Respondents, 
vehemently contested the arguments advanced by the learned counsel 
for the Petitioner and prayed for dismissal of the Petition mainly on 
the ground that the same is not maintainable; that the Respondent is a 
private  body  and  does  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of  definition  of  a 
person as defined under Article 199 (5) of the Constitution; that there 
are  plethora  of  judgments  on  the  maintainability  of  the  petition 
against the private educational institutions. It was further argued that 
the  Petitioner  should  first  cross  the  hurdle  of  maintainability  before 
going  into  the  merits  of  the  case.  The  learned  Law  Officer  while 
relying  upon  the  case  of  Anoosha  Shaigan  v.  Lahore  University  of 
Management  Sciences  through  Chancellor  and  others  (PLD  2007 
Lahore 568) has contended that the matter in issue has already been 
discussed in detail in the said judgment and it was a test case. He also 
placed    reliance  on  the  case  titled  Maqsood  Toor  v.  Federation  of 
Pakistan  etc  (2000  SCMR  928),    Tanvir  Iqbal  v.  The  Principla, 
OPF  Girls  School  (1994  SCMR  958)  and  Muhammad  Sharif  v. 
Secretary  (PLD 1973 SC 497).  
 
6. 
In rebuttal, the learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that 
the  instant  petition  is  maintainable  and  relied  upon  the  case  titled 
Saira  Rana  v.  University  of  Central  Punjab  (2014  YLR  475),  AF 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
4 
Industries  through  Proprietor  and  2  others  v.  Federation  of 
Pakistan  through  Secretary  Law  and  7  others  (2010  CLD  1765), 
The  State  and  others  v.  Director  General,  FIA  and  others  (PLD 
2010  Lahore  23),  Muhammad  Iqbal  Khan  Niazi  v.  Vice 
Chancellor,  University  of  Punjab  etc.  (PLD  1979  Supreme  Court 
1),  Aitchison  College,  Lahore  through  Principal  v.  Muhammad 
Zubair and another (PLD 2002 Supreme Court 326), and Human 
Rights  Commission  of  Pakistan  and  2  others  v.  Government  of 
Pakistan and others (PLD 2009 Supreme Court 507). 
 
7. 
I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  both  the  sides  at  length  and 
perused the record myself minutely.  
 
C. Maintainability of the Petition to be decided first: 
 
8. 
At the very outset it is observed here that the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court of Pakistan in its  judgment  reported  as  Government of  Sindh 
through  Secretary  Education  and  Literacy  Department  and  others 
v.  Nizakat  Ali  and  others    (2011  SCMR  592)  has  held  that  every 
Court  prior  to  taking  cognizance  and  adjudicating  upon  an  issue 
should first resort to the question of assumption of jurisdiction of the 
Court  and  if  it  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  jurisdiction  can  be 
assumed  only  then  it  can  adjudicate  upon  the  issue.  The  question 
regarding  assumption  of  jurisdiction  and  its  exercise  has  very 
comprehensively  been  dealt  with  and  decided  by  the  Hon‟ble 
Supreme  Court of  Pakistan  in the  case titled  Fauji Foundation  and 
another  v.  Shamimur  Rehman  (PLD  1983  SC  457).  Even  at  the 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
5 
hearing,  question  as  to  the  maintainability  of  the  Petition  being  of 
crucial importance and touching the root of the case was posed to the 
learned counsel for the Petitioner. 
 
9. 
In view of above, this Court first has to dilate upon the issue of 
maintainability  of  the  petition  as  without  crossing  the  hurdle  of 
maintainability,  it  cannot  be  proceeded  towards  the  merits  of  the 
case.  Therefore,  the  essential  question  before  proceeding  with  the 
merits of the case is that whether the Respondent/FC College against 
which  a  direction  has  been  sought  from  this  Court,  falls  within  the 
definition of a person or not.  
 
D. The Forman Christian College, Lahore Act 2004: 
 
10.  Before  rendering  the  decision  on  maintainability  of  the 
Petition, it is essential to see and study the constitutional document of 
the  FC  College  under  which  it  is  currently  working  and  operating. 
Admittedly,  the  FC  College  was  granted  the  status  of  University  in 
the  private  sector  under  the  Forman  Christian  College,  Lahore  Act 
2004  (the  “Act”).  The  Act  recognizes  the  FC  College  as  a  Society, 
and  defines,  in  Section  2(p),  the  “Society”,  as  “the  educational 
society of the Forman Christian College, Lahore registered under the 
Societies Registration Act 1860”. 
 
11.  Section 3(1) of the Act clearly gives the FC College status of a 
University in the private sector and reads as follows: 
 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
6 
“3.  Establishment  of  the  University.–  (1)  There  shall 
be  established  a  University  to  be  called  the  Forman 
Christian  College,  Lahore  in  the  private  sector  with 
its campus located at Lahore.” (emphasis added) 
 
Section  4  of  the  Act  provides  the  academic  functions  and  powers  of 
the FC College and Section 5 of the Act restricts its jurisdiction to the 
Province  of  Punjab.  Under  Section  6(1)  of  the  Act,  the  Governor  of 
the Punjab is the Patron of the FC College, who or his nominee shall 
preside at the convocations of the FC College.  
 
12.  Section  7  of  the  Act  gives  the  power  to  the  Patron  for  an 
inspection  or  inquiry  in  respect  of  any  matter  connected  with  the 
affairs  of  the  FC  College,  who  shall  refer  the  matter  to  a  committee 
consisting  of  at  least  three  (3)  members  including  a  nominee  of  the 
Government not below the rank of an Additional Secretary, a nominee 
of the Punjab Higher Education Commission not below the rank of a 
member  of  the  Commission  and  a  nominee  of  the  Chairman  of  the 
Society. The Patron is required to communicate to the Board his views 
with  regard  to  the  result  of  the  inspection  or  inquiry  and  can,  after 
ascertaining the views of the Board, advise the Board on the action to 
be  taken  by  it.  If  the  Board  of  the  FC  College  does  not,  within  the 
time specified, take action to the satisfaction of the Patron, the Patron 
may issue such directions as he thinks fit and the Board shall comply 
with all such directions, and the Patron may, on the recommendations 
of  Accreditation  Committee,  take  any  appropriate  action.  Further, 
under Section 7(7) of the Act, the Patron may, on the recommendation 
of  Accreditation  Committee,  annul  any  decision  of  the  Board  on  the 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
7 
ground of academic excellence, religion, culture, ideology or national 
integrity. 
 
13.  Section  8  of  the  Act  provides  appointment  of  a  Rector,  who 
should be an eminent scholar of repute or distinguished administrator 
who  is  appointed  by  the  Government  on  the  recommendation  of  the 
Board on such terms and conditions as the Board may determine. The 
Rector is the Chief Executive Officer of the FC College and performs 
such  functions  as  are  assigned  to  him  by  the  Board.  Further,  under 
Section  9  of  the  Act,  the  FC  College  is  empowered  to  appoint  such 
persons  in  its  services  as  may  be  necessary  on  such  terms  and 
conditions as may be determined by the Board. 
 
14.  Section  10  of  the  Act  constitutes  “the  Forman  Christian 
College,  Lahore  Fund”,  which  vests  in  the  FC  College  to  credit  all 
sums  received  by  the  FC  College.  The  Board  of  the  FC  College  is 
empowered to approve the budget of the FC College and to maintain 
and audit accounts under Section 11 of the Act.  
 
15.  Section  12  of  the  Act  provides  the  Authorities  of  the  FC 
College, which include (a) the Board of Governors; (b) the Academic 
Council;  (c)  the  Board  of  Faculties;  (d)  the  Board  of  Advanced 
Studies  and  Research;  (e)  the  Selection  Board;  (f)  the  Finance  and 
Planning  Committee;  and  (g)  such  other  Authorities  as  may  be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
 
16.  Section  13  of  the  Act  provides  constitution  of  the  Board  of 
Governors,  which  consist  of  (i)  the  Chairman  of  the  Society;  (ii) 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
8 
members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Society  subject  to  a 
maximum  of  ten  (10)  members;  (iii)  five  (5)  eminent  persons  of 
national repute to be nominated by the Society other than members of 
its  Board  of  Directors;  (iv)  the  Chairman,  Higher  Education 
Commission  or  his  nominee  not  below  the  rank  of  an  Executive 
Director; 
(v)  Chairperson  of 
the  Punjab  Higher  Education 
Commission  or  his  nominee  not  below  the  rank  of  a  whole-time 
member  of  the  Punjab  Higher  Education  Commission;  (vi)  three  (3) 
members of the Provincial Assembly of the Punjab, including at least 
one female member of the Assembly, to be nominated by the Speaker 
of the Assembly; (vii) a Vice Chancellor of a public sector University 
in  the  Punjab  nominated  by  the  Patron;  (viii)  the  Rector;  and  (ix) 
Secretary to Government of the Punjab, Higher Education Department 
or  his  nominee  not  below  the  rank  of  Additional  Secretary.  Further, 
the  Chairman  of  the  Society  is  the  Chairman  of  the  Board,  and  the 
quorum  for  a  meeting  of  the  Board  is  one-half  (1/2)  of  the  total 
number of members with at least two (2) official members. 
 
17.  Under  Section  14  of 
the  Act, 
the  administration  and 
management of the affairs of the FC College vests in the Board, and 
under Section 15 of the Act, the meetings and business of the Board is 
conducted  in such  manner  and  in accordance  with such  procedure  as 
may  be  prescribed  in  the  Regulations  and  until  these  matters  are 
prescribed, as may be determined by the Board. Section 16 of the Act 
empowers  the  Board  to  delegate  any  of  its  powers,  duties  and 
functions to any person or a committee.  
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
9 
 
18.  Section  17  of  the  Act  constitutes  the  Academic  Council, 
consisting of (i) the Rector (Chairman); (ii) all the Deans; (iii) all the 
Heads of the Departments/Institutes; (iv) all Professors and Associate 
Professors of the University; (v) all full-time members of the teaching 
faculty who hold appointments as Assistant Professors and Lecturers, 
who have been on the faculty for at least one (1) year; (vi) any senior 
administrative  officer  of  the  FC  College  to  be  nominated  by  the 
Rector; (vii) an expert in the field of education to be nominated by the 
Secretary  to  the  Government,  Higher  Education  Department,  from  a 
panel of  experts  recommended  by  the  Board;  and  (viii)  the  Registrar 
(Member/Secretary).  These  members  appointed  by  nomination  shall 
hold  office  for  three  (3)  years,  and  the  quorum  for  a  meeting  of  the 
Academic Council is one-half (1/2) of the total number of members, a 
fraction being counted as one. 
 
19.  Section  18  of  the  Act  provides  powers  and  duties  of  the 
Academic  Council,  which  is  the  academic  body  of  the  FC  College, 
which  has  the  powers  to  lay  down  proper  standards  of  instruction, 
research, publication and examination and to regulate and promote the 
academic life of the FC College, specifically inter alia to regulate the 
admission  of  students  to  the  courses  of  studies  and  examinations  in 
the  FC  College,  and  to  make  Regulations  prescribing  the  courses  of 
studies,  the  syllabi  and  the  outlines  of  tests  for  all  the  FC  College 
examinations  subject  to  approval  of  the  Board.  Moreover,  under 
Section  21  of  the  Act,  the  Board  is  empowered,  by  notification,  to 
make  Regulations  for  the  administration  and  management  of  the 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
10 
affairs  of  the  FC  College.  Lastly,  the  the  Board  is  required  to  give 
such  directions,  not  inconsistent  with  the  Act,  as  it  may  consider 
necessary for the removal of such difficulty arising in giving effect to 
any of the provisions of the Act.  
 
20.  Having gone through the Act in detail, which is governing the 
management and operations of the FC College, it is equally necessary 
to  look  at  the  law  settled  by  the  Hon‟ble  Courts  in  view  of 
maintainability  of  the  petition  against  a  “person”.  It  is  unequivocal 
from the Article 199(5) of the Constitution that a person includes any 
body  Politic  or  Corporate,  any  Authority  of  or  under  the  control  of 
the Federal Government or of a Provincial Government. For the sake 
of clarity, the said Article is reproduced below and is as follows: 
 
“(5) 
In  this  Article,  unless  the  context  otherwise 
requires; 
 
„person‟  includes  any body Politic or Corporate, any 
Authority  of  or  under  the  control  of  the  Federal 
Government or  of  a Provincial Government, and any 
Court  or  Tribunal,  other  than  the  Supreme  Court,  a 
High Court or a Court or Tribunal established under 
a Law relating to the Armed Forces of Pakistan;” 
 
E. The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court’s  view on  the  maintainability of 
the  writ  petition  against  ‘Person’  under  Article  199  (5)  of  the 
Constitution: 
 
21.  The  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has  time  and  again 
tried  to  define  the  concept  of 
'person'  for  the  purposes  of 
maintainability  of  a  petition  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution, 
against  different  Statutory  Corporations  or  other  Corporate  and 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
11 
Juridical persons. In the  case of  Salahuddin and 2 others v. Frontier 
Sugar  Mills  &  Distillery  Ltd.  (PLD  1975  SC  244),  the  Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan laid down an exhaustive test to determine 
whether any entity falls within the definition of a 'person', performing 
functions  in  connection  with  the  affairs  of  the  Federation  etc.  and 
observed as follows: 
 
“However  private  organizations  or  persons,  as 
distinguished  from  government  or  semi-government 
agencies  and  functionaries  cannot  be  regarded  a 
persons  performing  functions  in  connection  with  the 
affairs of the Federation or a Province simply for the 
reason that their activities happen  to be regulated by 
laws  made  by  the  State.  …  The  primary  test  must 
always  be  whether  the  functions  entrusted  to  the 
organization  or  person  concerned  are 
indeed 
functions  of  the  State  involving  same  exercise  of 
sovereign or public power; whether the control of the 
organization  vests  in  a  substantial  manner  in  the 
hands  of  Government;  and  whether  the  bulk  of  the 
funds is provided by the State. If these conditions are 
fulfilled,  then  the  person,  including  a  body  politic  or 
body corporate, may indeed be regarded as a person 
performing functions in connection with the affairs of 
the  Federation  or  a  Province;  otherwise  not.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
22.  
In  another  case 
titled  Pakistan 
International  Airlines 
Corporation v. Tanweer ur Rehman (PLD 2010 SC 676), the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan has further elaborated and laid down the 
principles of Salahuddin case supra, and ruled as follows: 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
12 
  
"Now  let  us  see  what  is  meant  by  the  expression 
„performing functions in connection with the affairs of 
the  Federation'.  The  expression  clearly  connotes 
governmental or State functions involving an element 
of exercise of public power. The functions may be the 
traditional police functions of the State, involving the 
maintenance  of  law  and  order  or  they  may  be 
functions  concerning  economic  development,  social 
welfare,  education,  public  utility  services  and  other 
State  enterprises  of  an  industrial  or  commercial 
nature. Generally, these functions are to be performed 
by persons or agencies directly appointed, controlled 
and  financed  by  the  State;  either  by  Federation  or  a 
Provincial Government. …” 
 
23. 
In  Aitchison  College  Lahore  through  Principal  v.  Muhammad 
Zubair  and  another  (PLD  2002  SC  326)  and  Maqsood  Toor  v. 
Federation of Pakistan (2000 SCMR 928), the Hon‟ble Supreme Court 
has  again  resonated  the  test  laid  down  in  Salahuddin  case  supra. 
However,  the  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court,  in  Aitchison  College  case 
supra,  held  that  the  Aitchison  College  falls  within  the  definition  of 
'person'  under  Article  199(5)  of 
the  Constitution,  which 
is 
distinguished  from  this  captioned  case  as  the  dominating  control  in 
Aitchison  College  is  (1)  taken  over  under  MLO  (2)  Governor–
President  and  also  on  the  Board  (3)  Provincial  Secretaries  –  Corp 
Commanders  etc.  members  (4)  included  as  Special  Institution  under 
Provincial  Rules  of  Business  and  (5)  ability  to  transfer  Government 
servants to Aitchison College. 
 
 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
13 
 
F. The Hon’ble High Courts’ view: 
 
24.  The  question  of  maintainability  involved  in  the  Petition  has 
elaborately  been  answered  in  the  Anoosha  Shaigan  v.  LUMS  (PLD 
2007  Lahore  568)  cited  by  Mian  Zafar  Iqbal  Kalanauri,  Advocate, 
wherein  this  Court  dismissed  the  petition  against  the  Lahore 
University of Management Sciences (LUMS) and held as under: 
 
“5.  …  The  word  "control"  appearing 
in 
the 
aforementioned definition [of the person] is also quite 
significant  and  it  is  not  restricted  to  the  financial 
control  of  the  Government  over  a  body  but  the 
executive control as well; it does not necessarily mean 
the  financial  control  over  the  bodies  that  are  under 
the  dominative  control  of  the  Federal,  or  Provincial 
Government,  which  are  amenable  to  the  jurisdiction 
under Article 199 of the Constitution. … 
 
7.  …  I  am  of  the  considered  view  that  the  absolute 
control  over 
the  management  of  a  body/an 
organization  by  the  federation  etc.,  is  a  condition 
most  important  for  declaring  it  to  be  a  "person" 
performing its functions in connection with the affairs 
of the Federation etc; the Federation etc. should have 
a  complete  domination  to  do  and  undo  whatever  it 
decides  in  running  the  affairs  of  such  a  body  and 
should  have 
the  exclusive,  complete  and 
final 
authority  to  take  the  vital  policy  decisions.  Such 
control  must  be  absolute,  unfettered,  unbridled  and 
exclusive,  besides,  the  State  must  also  have  the 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
14 
financial  control  of  the  Organization;  the  power  of 
hiring  and  firing  the  employees  thereof  appointing 
and  removing  the  management  body  meant  for 
running  the  routine  affairs  of  the  Organization.  But 
from  the  Presidential  Order  of  1985,  though  the 
President  is  the  Chancellor  of  the  LUMS,  but  this  is 
notional  and  more  with  the  status  of  a  Patron-in-
Chief; in practical terms except for the nomination of 
the persons on the Board or the Council, he does not 
have  the  administrative  or  policy-making  control, 
which is the authority of the Board of Trustees and the 
Council  of  LUMS,  which  manages  its  affairs.  It  has 
been  rightly  pointed  out  by  the  respondents  counsel 
that the funds to LUMS are not being provided by the 
Government on regular basis, those are generated by 
the LUMS itself either from the  fees or the donations 
and may be occasionally in the nature of donation, the 
government  also  contributes,  but  this  contribution 
cannot  be  held  to  be  within the  concept of "financial 
control" of the Organization. …”  
 
25. 
In Dr. Kamran Jahangir v. Chancellor Shifa Tameer-E-Millat 
University  and  others  (2015  PLC  (C.S.)  710  (Islamabad)),  it  has 
been held that the University under question is not a person in context 
of  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  by  following  the  principles 
elaborated in Anoosha Shaigan case supra, and further held as under: 
  
“11. The  High  Court's  exercise  powers  and 
jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  in 
rare  and  exceptional  cases  when  the  relief  is  being 
sought  against  an  educational  institution.  In  case  of 
educational  institutions,  Courts  are  conscious  of  the 
doctrine of in 'loco parentis', Latin for 'in the place of 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
15 
a  parent'.  It  relates  to  a  presumption  that  an 
educational  institution  is  the  best  judge  of  the 
interests of the students and ought to be allowed to act 
as  it  may  deem  appropriate.  This  doctrine  has  been 
upheld  by 
the  august  Supreme  Court 
in  "The 
University  of  Dacca  v.  Zakir  Ahmed",  PLD  1965  SC 
90.  It  was  observed  that  '---  we are not unmindful of 
the necessity of maintaining discipline in educational 
institutions or other institutions or departments where 
the  maintenance  of  discipline  is  essential  for  the 
orderly  conduct  of  the  institution  or  department 
concerned,  nor  are  we  unmindful  of  the  fact  that 
persons 
in  charge  particularly  of  educational 
institution must be given full authority to correct those 
placed in their charge in the same manner as a parent 
or guardian would be able to do". The law was later 
resonated  in  the  judgment  of  "Ahmed  v.  Vice-
Chancellor  University 
of 
Engineering 
and 
Technology",  PLD  1981  SC  464.  The  Courts, 
therefore,  show  restrain  while  interfering  in  the 
administrative  matters  and  decisions  of  an 
educational  institution.  This  self-restraint  in  the  case 
of educational institutions is to safeguard and protect 
the  autonomy,  independence  and  sanctity  of  an 
educational  institution.  It  is  also  to  ensure  that  the 
discipline of the students, and authority of the faculty, 
is  not  eroded.  In  the  case  before  this  Court,  the 
petitioner  served  the  University  for  a  considerable 
time.  Resorting  to  litigation  by  a  faculty  member  or 
officer  of  an  educational  institution,  and  making  the 
latter  stand  before  the  Court  in  an  adversarial 
position,  is  certainly  not  desirable.  Such  litigation 
erodes  and  undermines  the  authority  and  prestige  of 
an educational institution, and inevitably has adverse 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
16 
effects  on  the  impressionable  minds  of  the  students 
enrolled  in  such  institutions.  The  jurisdiction  of  this 
Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  is 
equitable  and  discretionary  in  nature.  Even  if  the 
petitioner would have been successful in making out a 
case  in  favour  of  maintainability  of  the  petition,  yet 
this  Court  may  not  have  exercised  its  discretionary 
jurisdiction, so as to uphold the authority and prestige 
of  the  educational  institution  i.e.  the  University.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
G. The Functional Test: 
 
26.  Mr. Justice (R) Fazal Karim in Second Addition (2018) of his 
book  Judicial  Review  of  Public  Actions  in  Volume-3,  Chapter-5  at 
Page-1511  under    the  heading  Persons  performing  functions  in 
connection with the affairs of Government has stated as under: 
“As  we  shall  see,  the  word  „person‟  has  a  special 
significance  for  the  purposes  of  Article  199.  However, 
what  needs  to  be  highlighted  here  is  that  to  engage 
Article  199,  clause  (1),  sub-clause  (a),  it  is  not  enough 
that  the  respondent  functionary  is  a  „person‟  within  the 
meaning of Article 199, but it must be shown further that 
the  act  in  question  was  done  in  the  performance  of 
functions in connection with the affairs of the Federation, 
a  Province  or  a  local  authority,  that  is  to  say,  it  was  a 
public function.”  
 
27.  The review of the above produced case laws indicates that the 
test  relevant  for  the  determination  of  the  status  of  a  "person", 
performing functions in connection with the affairs of the Federation 
or the Province, is manifested on following principles: 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
17 
 
 
(i)  whether  the  functions  entrusted  to  the  organization  or 
person  concerned  are  indeed  functions  of  the  State 
involving same exercise of sovereign or public power;  
 
(ii)  whether  the  absolute,  unfettered,  unbridled  and 
exclusive  administrative  and  management  control  of  the 
organization  vests in  a  substantial  manner in  the  hands  of 
the Government, which means that the Government should 
have  (a)  complete  domination  to  do  and  undo  whatever  it 
decides in running the affairs of such a body, including the 
power  of  hiring  and  firing  the  employees  and  appointing 
and removing the management body, and (b) the exclusive, 
complete  and  final  authority  to  take  the  vital  policy 
decisions; and 
 
(iii)  whether  the  Government  has  financial  control  of  the 
organization and whether the bulk of the funds is provided 
by the Government. 
The above mentioned conditions determine a test for a statutory body 
to  fall  under  definition  of  a  „person‟  under  Article  199(5)  of  the 
Constitution  and  if  these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  then  a  body  may 
indeed  be  regarded  as  a  person  performing  functions  in  connection 
with the affairs of the Federation or a Province; otherwise not.  
 
H. The Application of the Test on the FC College: 
 
28.  As  discussed  above,  the  Preamble,  as  well  as  Section  3(1),  of 
the  Act  clearly  gives  the  FC  College  status  of  a  University  “in  the 
private  sector”,  and  the  Act  also  recognizes  the  FC  College  as  an 
Educational  Society  registered  under  the  Societies  Act,  1860.  The 
Board has administrative and management control of the affairs of the 
FC College, which consist of total of twenty-four (24) members from 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
18 
which  only  five  (5)  are  government  officials,  including  (i)  the 
Chairman,  Higher  Education  Commission  or  his  nominee,  (ii) 
Chairperson  of  the  Punjab  Higher  Education  Commission  or  his 
nominee,  and  (iii)  three  (3)  members  of  the  Provincial  Assembly  of 
the  Punjab,  and  the  Board  has  majority  of  members,  being  nineteen 
(19) from private persons. The meetings and business of the Board is 
conducted  in  a  manner  determined  by  the  Board  in  absence  of 
prescribed  Regulations.  Even  the  Rector,  being  the  Chief  Executive 
Officer,  is  appointed  by  the  Government  on  the  recommendation  of 
the  Board  on  terms  and  conditions  determined  by  the  Board  and 
performs  such  functions  assigned  by  the  Board.  The  FC  College  is 
empowered  to  appoint  persons  in  its  services  on  such  terms  and 
conditions  determined  by  the  Board, and  the  Board  is  empowered  to 
approve  the  budget  of  the  FC  College  and  to  maintain  and  audit 
accounts.  The  Board  is  also  empowered  to  make  Regulations  for  the 
administration and management of the affairs of the FC College, and 
can  give  such  necessary  directions  for  the  removal of  such difficulty 
arising in giving  effect  to  any  of  the  provisions  of the  Act. Even  the 
Patron,  Governor  of  the  Punjab,  is  only  required  under  the  Act  to 
preside at the convocations and to advise the Board on the action to be 
taken after inspection or inquiry conducted through a committee.  
 
Administrative Control of Government under the Rules of 
I. 
Business: 
 
29. 
It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  even  the  Government  of 
Punjab  has  no  direct  control  of  the  FC  College  because  it  is  not  an 
autonomous body of the Higher Education Department as per Rules 2 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
19 
and  3  read  with  First  Schedule  of  the  Punjab  Government  Rules  of 
Business,  2011  (the  “Rules”).  The  Rules  have  First  and  Second 
Schedule which are made as per Rules 3 and 4 for the Allocation of 
Business and Organizations of the Departments of the Government of 
Punjab.  In  Schedule  I,  in  Column  I  the  names  of  Departments  are 
listed, in Column II the names of attached Departments are listed and 
in Column III the names of Autonomous Bodies and Companies are 
listed.  The  Higher  Education  Department  has  only  one  attached 
Department  i.e.  Director  Public  Instructions  (Colleges),  Punjab  in 
Column  II  and  has  the  names  of  many  Universities  enlisted  in 
Column III but it does not has the name of FC College in Column III 
as its Autonomous Body. The only reference of FC College under the 
Rules is mentioned in Schedule II under Item 37 (xxx) in which the 
Higher  Education  Department  can  frame  Rules  for  FC  College. 
Therefore, while applying the above laid down test FC College does 
not  fall  within 
the  definition  of  a  „person‟  against  which 
Constitutional petition is maintainable. 
30.  Mr. Justice (R) Fazal Karim in Second Addition (2018) of his 
book  Judicial  Review  of  Public  Actions  in  Volume-3,  Chapter-5  at 
Pages-1516  &  1517  has  analysed  the  Aitchison  College  Judgment, 
Supra as under: 
“The Provincial Rules of Business were amended to treat the College 
as  an  attached  department  of  the  Provincial  Education  Department, 
with the status of a special institution. Aggrieved by certain orders of 
the  Principal,  the  Respondents  filed  petitions  under  Article  199, 
which were defended by the Principal mainly on the ground that the 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
20 
College was not a “person” and was not amendable to the jurisdiction 
of the High Court.  
The High Court held that “dominant control of the said Board 
is that of the Provincial Government and therefore it falls within the 
definition of the word „person‟ as defined in sub-Article (5) of Article 
199  of  the  Constitution,  thus  it  is  amenable  to  the  constitutional 
jurisdiction of this Court” 
The Supreme Court affirmed holding that with the amendment 
of  the  Rules  of  Business,    the  College  had  been  brought  under  the 
administrative  control of the  Education  Department  of the  Province, 
that the Board was authorized to  formulate the budget of the College 
for the approval of the Government  and that in the circumstances the 
fact that the College was not getting any financial assistance from the 
Government  did  not  mean  that  it  was  an  educational  institution  not 
functioning  under 
 
the 
control  of  Provincial  Education 
Department…..‟.    As  management  and  control  and  all  other  matters 
.….  “to  run  its  affairs  through  a  statutory  body…  under  MLO  .…. 
vests  in  the  Provincial  functionary,  therefore,  the  institution  would 
fall  within  the  definition  of  person  under  article  199  (5)  of  the 
Constitution.” 
 
31.  Furthermore, this Court in case titled  Sheikh Nadeem Ahmed 
v. G.C. University and others (2016 MLD 1966) has held as under: 
“I have also noted that Government of Punjab vide notification dated 
11.03.2011 made Rules of Business (Rules) under Article 139 of the 
Constitution. Rule  3(1)  provides that the Secretariat shall consist of 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
21 
the departments specifying in column 2 of the first schedule of Rules. 
Higher  Education  Department  is  mentioned  at  Sr.No.16  of  Column 
No.2  and  one  of  the  attached  departments  to  Higher  Education  is 
Government  College  University  Lahore  given  in  Sr.  No.XII  of 
Column 4 of the first schedule. Similarly Rule 3(3) of Rules provides 
that  business  of  government  shall  be  distributed  amongst  several 
departments  in  the  manner  indicated  in  second schedule.  Clause  37 
of  second  schedule  deals  with  administration  of  laws  and  rules 
framed  thereunder  and  at  Sr.No.XI,  Government  College  University 
Lahore  Ordinance,  2002  is  one  of  law  which  is  to  be  administered 
and  rules  to  be  framed  for  said  Ordinance  by  Higher  Education 
Department.  The  aforementioned  Rules  show  that  G.C.  University 
Lahore  is  not  only  an  attached  institution  of  the  Government  of 
Punjab,  Higher  Education  Department  but  laws  and  rules  of  G.C. 
University are also being administered by Punjab Higher Education 
Department.”.      
 
32. 
In view of above tests, there is no doubt that as the FC College 
is  not  mentioned  in  Column  III  as  Autonomous  Body  and  the  only 
reference of FC College under the Rules is mentioned in Schedule II 
under Item 37 (xxx) of the Rules, therefore, the FC College does not 
fall  within  the  definition  of  a  „person‟  and  this  petition  is  not 
competent against it. 
 
33. 
It, therefore, follows from above that the FC College, being a 
private  entity,  is  not  in  dispute,  and  the  language  of  the  Act  of  the 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
22 
Parliament reflects the legislative intention. The FC College does not 
fall  within  the  definition  of  a  „person‟  for  which  a  test  has  been 
determined above because the setup of the Board of Governors of the 
FC College is not under the dominative control of the Federal or the 
Provincial  Government,  and  the  FC  College  does  not  get  any 
operating  funds  from  the  Government.  Therefore,  when  both  the 
"administrative"  and  the  "financial"  control  of  the  Government  over 
Respondents is lacking, I am constrained to hold that the FC College 
is  not  a  "person"  within  the  meaning  of  Article  199(5)  of  the 
Constitution,  which  could  be  held  to  be  performing  its  duties  in 
connection  with  the  affairs  of  the  Federation  or  the  Province.  If  the 
Parliament  in  its  wisdom  creates  a  juridical  person  through  the 
legislative  process  and  does  not  provide  for  the  control  of  the 
Government  over  it,  then  obviously  it  is  intended  not  to  bring  it 
within  the  ambit  of  a  'person'  in  the  context  of  Article  199  of  the 
Constitution. 
 
34.  As  a  corollary,  it  is  not  enough  for  this  Court  to  assume 
jurisdiction  against  any  body  politic  or  corporate  merely  because  it 
has been established through an Act of the Parliament. For the 'body 
politic' or  'corporate' to be amenable to  the  jurisdiction under Article 
199,  it  simultaneously  has  to  be  a  "person",  as  defined  in  Article 
199(5)  of  the  Constitution. The  FC College  is  indeed  a  'body  politic' 
or 'corporate' but not a "person", and therefore, is not amenable to the 
jurisdiction of this Court.  
 
W.P. No.130999 /2018 
23 
35.  Even  otherwise,  the  Petitioner  has  not  been  able  to  point  out 
any violation of any provision of law or any rules and regulations by 
the FC College, and the case law relied upon by the learned counsel 
for  the  Petitioner,  in the light of the  catena  of  judgments  mentioned 
and cited above, is not only distinguishable, rather do not apply to the 
facts and circumstances of the present case.  
 
36. 
In view of what has been discussed above, the instant petition is 
not competent before this Court, therefore, relying upon the same, the 
instant petition stands dismissed being not maintainable. 
  
                                          
 
 
 
 
*M.NAVEED* 
 
       
                                
   
 
      (JAWAD HASSAN) 
   JUDGE 
 
      
Approved for reporting  
JUDGE 
