Form No:HCJD/C-121 
 
ORDER SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, 
MULTAN  
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Case No.    W.P.No.11435-Q/2018 
 
Muhammad Asghar & 3 others     Vs.  SHO & 2 others 
of 
S.No. 
order/ 
Proceedings 
 
of 
Date 
order/ 
Proceedings 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, 
where necessary. 
 
 
          29.11.2018.   Malik  Ali  Muhammad  Dhol,  Advocate,  for  the 
 
 
 
 
Petitioner. 
Mahar Nazar Abbas Chawan, Assistant Advocate 
General  Punjab  with  Imran  Faraz,  Agriculture 
Officer,  Abdul  Hayee  Abid,  ADA(PP),  Shahid 
Munir,  and  Ashfaq  Ahmad,  Assistant  Agri 
Chemist, and Ali Abbas/SI.  
Through this single order I intend to decide Writ 
Petition  Nos.  11435-Q/2018,  13486-Q/2018  and  13700-Q/ 
2018 as a common thread weaves through them. In all these 
petitions the Petitioners seek quashing of the FIRs registered 
against them under Section 21 of the Agricultural Pesticides 
Ordinance, 1971 (the “Ordinance”). 
2.  
The  facts of all the three  petitions  are somewhat 
similar.  However,  for  the  sake  of  brevity  I  would  refer  to 
those  of  W.P.  No.  11435-Q/2018.  In  this  case  Petitioner  
No. 1 is the vendor of agricultural inputs, including fertilizer 
and  pesticides,  and  is  carrying  on  business  at  Chowk 
Saleem-Abad Aali-Wala, Dera Ghazi Khan, under the name 
and  style  of  Asghar  Traders.  Petitioner  No.2  is  his  Stock 
Incharge.  On  17.7.2018,  the  Assistant  Director  (Plant 
Protection) and his team inspected the aforementioned shop 
of  Petitioner  No.1  and  collected  samples  of  the  pesticide 
called Chlorfenapyr 36% SC marketed by Petitioners No. 3 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
2 
&  4  which  were  sent  to  the  Pesticides  Laboratory,  Multan, 
for  quality  check  and  was  found  adulterated.  Consequent 
thereupon,  FIR  No.441/2018  dated  1.8.2018  was  registered 
against the Petitioners at Police Station Kot Chutta, District 
Dera  Ghazi  Khan,  for  an  offence  under  Section  21  of  the 
Ordinance read with the relevant rules.  
3.  
Malik  Ali  Muhammad  Dhol,  Advocate,  who 
represented  the  Petitioners  in  all  these  petitions,  submitted 
that  the  Ordinance  inter  alia  aimed  at  providing  quality 
pesticides to the farmers and prosecuting those who supplied 
adulterated or substandard products. In order to achieve this 
objective, in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 
29  of  the  Ordinance,  the  Government  of  the  Punjab  had 
framed  Punjab  Agricultural  Pesticides  Rules,  2018 
(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Rules”),  which  prescribed  a 
comprehensive procedure for sampling and laboratory tests. 
Rule  22  mandated  that  the  pesticides  laboratory  should  be 
certified 
by 
the 
International  Organization 
for 
Standardization  (ISO).  He  contended  that  the  laboratory 
which analyzed the samples in the present cases did not have 
the  requisite  certification  so  its  reports  had  no  legal  value 
and  the  Petitioners  could  not  be  prosecuted  on  the  basis 
thereof  and  the  FIRs  registered  against  them  were  liable  to 
be quashed. 
4.  
On the other hand, Mahar Nazar Abbas Chawan, 
Assistant  Advocate  General,  contended  that  Rule  22  was 
directory  in  nature  and  not  mandatory.  Its  non-compliance 
does  not  render  any  legal  action  void.  Referring  to  the 
present  cases  he  submitted  that  Province  of  the  Punjab  had 
set  up  four  Pesticides  Quality  Control  Laboratories  located 
in Kala Shah Kaku, Faisalabad, Multan and Bahawalpur and 
one Provincial Pesticides Reference Laboratory at Kala Shah 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
3 
Kaku. All of them were duly notified under Section 13(1) of 
the Ordinance and were manned by competent staff and had 
the requisite equipment to perform the tests. They  analyzed 
the  samples  referred  to  them  as  per  Rules  43  &  44  by 
following the Food and Agriculture Organization guidelines. 
The  laboratory  at  Multan  whose  reports  are  impugned  in 
these  petitions  was  also  accredited  to  the  Pakistan  National 
Accreditation  Council  (PNAC)  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements  of  ISO/IEC  17025:2005  with  effect  from 
2.7.2018.  Scope  of  enhancement  (i.e.  inclusion  of  more 
products for testing under ISO 17025) of an ISO-accredited 
laboratory  was  a  continuous  activity.  At  the  moment  the 
aforesaid 
accreditation 
was 
only 
for 
four 
products/chemistries  but  74  more  were  in  the  pipeline, 
including Chlorfenapyr 36% SC, Pyriproxyfen 10% EC and 
Emainectin Benzoate 1.9 EC, which were involved in these 
three cases. The learned Law Officer further contended that 
the  Petitioners  were  supplying  substandard  and  adulterated 
pesticides to the farmers and were not only exploiting them 
but  also  causing  loss  to  the  national  economy.  It  was  time 
that they  should be dealt  with  an iron hand. He  argued that 
proper place of procedure in any system of administration of 
justice was to help people get their rights and not to stand in 
their  way.  All  technicalities  should  be  avoided  unless  their 
compliance was essential on the ground of public policy. He 
prayed that these petitions be dismissed with costs. 
5.  
I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  and  have 
perused the record. 
6. 
In  the  year  1971  the  President  of  Pakistan 
promulgated the Ordinance to regulate import, manufacture, 
formulation,  sale,  distribution  and  use  of  pesticides  in 
agriculture  throughout  the  country.  Thereafter  the  Federal 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
4 
Government framed the Agricultural Pesticides Rules, 1973, 
to  operationalize  it.  In  the  wake  of  the  Constitution 
(Eighteenth  Amendment)  Act,  2010,  the  Punjab  Assembly 
enacted  the  Punjab  Agricultural  Pesticides  (Amendment) 
Act,  2012  (XXV  of  2012),  and  adopted  the  Ordinance 
which is still in force. Subsequently, the Punjab Government 
framed  the  Agricultural  Pesticides  Rules,  2018,  under 
Section  29  of  the  Ordinance  which  were  published  in  the 
Punjab  Gazette  vide  Notification  No.79  of  2018  dated 
31.5.2018.  The  controversy  in  the  present  cases  revolves 
around  the  consequence  of  Rule  22  or,  to  put  it  in  another 
way,  whether  the  said  Rule  is  mandatory  or  directory.  For 
facility of reference, it is reproduced hereunder: 
 
 
 
22.  Pesticide  laboratory.-  (1)  The  pesticide  laboratory 
shall  be  duly  certified  by  international  organization  for 
standardization 
following 
functions: 
(ISO)  and  perform 
the 
(a) analyze and test samples of pesticides; and  
(b)  carry  out  such  duties  as  may  be  entrusted  by  the 
Secretary Agriculture.  
7.  
It  is  by  now  well  settled  that  the  rules  validly 
made under a statute have the same effect as the statute itself 
and  are  enforced  as  such.  The  Supreme  Court  of  India 
highlighted this point in State of Uttar Pradesh and others 
v. Babu Ram Upadhya (AIR 1961 SC 751) as under: 
 
“Rules  made  under  a  statute  must  be  treated  for  all 
purposes  of  construction  or  obligation  exactly  as  if  they 
were  in  the  Act  and  are  to  be  of  the  same  effect  as  if 
contained in  the Act,  and are to  be judicially noticed for 
all purposes of construction or obligation.” 
In  view  of  the  foregoing,  the  same  principles  that  are 
followed  for  interpretation  of  statutes  are  employed  for 
construction of rules.  
8.  
In  his  opinion  in  Muhammad  Shafi  v.  Deputy 
Superintendent of Police (Malik Gul Nawaz), Narowal and 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
5 
5 others (PLD 1992 Lahore 178), Fazal Karim, J. wrote that 
statute  was  an  authentic  expression  of  the  legislative  will 
and  it  was  the  function  of  the  Court  to  interpret  that 
document  according  to  the  will  of  the  people  who  made  it. 
In an earlier case, reported as Province of West Pakistan v. 
Mahboob Ali and another (PLD 1976 SC 483), the Hon‟ble 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  observed  that  “it  is  the  duty  of 
the  Court  to  find  out  the  intention  of  the  lawmaker.  The 
whole purpose of interpretation of statute is to ascertain the 
intention of the lawmaker and to make it effective”.  
9.  
The  term  “intent”  has  various  connotations.  In 
one sense it carries the concept of purpose and signifies the 
general aim or policy which pervades a statute (60 Harv. L. 
Rev.  370-375).  Therefore,  while  construing  a  particular 
provision  the  Court  would  attend  to  the  nature,  scope  and 
object  of  the  statute  and  consider  the  consequences  of 
interpreting the said provision one way or the other. It would 
also  look  at  the  reason  why  that  enactment  was  passed. 
“Perhaps  the  reason  was  to  remedy  some  existing  evil  or 
correct  some  difficulty  in  existing  law  or  to  create  a  new 
right  or  a  new 
remedy.” 
(Crawford  on  Statutory 
Construction).  
10.  
Generally speaking, where a mode of performing 
a  duty  is  laid  down  by  law,  it  must  be  performed  in  that 
particular  manner  or  not  at  all.  This  rule  flows  from  the 
maxim  Expressio  unius  est  exclusio  alterius.  However,  the 
question  arises  as  to  whether  non-compliance  with  the 
prescribed  procedure  would  invalidate  the  entire  action  or 
proceedings. There is no principle of universal application to 
categorize a provision as mandatory or directory. It depends 
upon the intent of the legislature rather than the phraseology 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
6 
used.  Maxwell  on  The  Interpretation  of  Statutes  (Twelfth 
Edition) at p.314 writes: 
 
is 
“It  is  impossible  to  lay  down  any  general  rule  for 
determining  whether  a  provision 
imperative  or 
directory.  „No  universal  rule‟,  said  Lord  Campbell  L.C., 
„can  be  laid  down  for  the  construction  of  statutes  as  to 
whether  mandatory  enactments  shall  be  considered 
directory only or obligatory with an implied nullification 
for disobedience. It is the duty of court of justice to try to 
get  at  the  real  intention  of  the  Legislature  by  carefully 
attending  to  the  whole  scope  of  the  statute  to  be 
construed‟. And Lord Penzance said: „I believe, so far as 
any  rule  is  concerned,  you  cannot  safely  go  further  than 
that  in  each  case  you  must  look  to  the  subject-matter, 
consider  the  importance  of  the  provision  that  has  been 
disregarded,  and  the  relation  of  that  provision  to  the 
general  object  intended  to  be  secured  by  the  Act;  and 
upon  a  review  of  the  case  in  that  aspect  decide  whether 
the matter is what is called imperative or only directory.”   
11. 
Similarly, 
in  Taxmann’s 
Interpretation  of 
Statutes (Second Edition) D.P. Mittal states: 
“There  are  no  ready  tests  or  invariable  formula  to 
determine whether a provision is mandatory or directory. 
The broad principle of the statute is important. The object 
of  a  particular  provision  must  be  considered.  The  link 
between  the  two  is  most  important.  The  weighing  of  the 
consequences of the holding a provision to be mandatory 
or  directory  is  vital  and  more  often  than  not,  it  is 
responsible for determination of the very question that the 
provision is mandatory or directory. Where the design of 
the  statute  is  the  avoidance  or  prevention  of  the  public 
mischief,  but  the  enforcement  of  a  particular  provision 
literally  to  its  letter  will  tend  to  defeat  that  design,  the 
provision  must  be  held  to  be  directory,  so  that  proof  of 
prejudice  in  addition  to  non-compliance  of  the  provision 
is necessary to invalidate the act complained of.”  
The  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has  approved  this 
view in Niaz Muhammad Khan v. Mian Fazal Raqib (PLD 
1974  SC  134)  and  Apollo  Textile  Mills  Ltd.  and  others  v. 
Soneri Bank Ltd. (PLD 2012 SC 268 = 2012 CLD 337).  
12. 
Ordinarily the words “shall” or “must” show that 
the  Legislature  intended  to  make  the  provision  mandatory 
while use of the word “may” would indicate that it wanted to 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
7 
make  it  directory  but  they  are  often  used  interchangeably. 
N.S. Bindra’s Interpretation of Statutes (Tenth Edition) says: 
 
in 
its  ordinary  signification 
“The  word  „shall‟ 
is 
mandatory  though  there  may  be  considerations  which 
influence  the  Court  in  holding  that  the  intention  of  the 
legislature  was  to  give  discretion.  But  this  word  is  not 
necessarily  mandatory,  not  always  mandatory.  Whether 
the  matter  is  mandatory  or  directory  only  depends  upon 
the  real  intention  of  the  legislature  which  is  ascertained 
by carefully attending to the whole scope of the statute to 
be construed.” 
13.  
Crawford  in  “The  Construction  of  Statutes” 
(2014 Edition) at pp.520 to 522 states: 
 
“If the language of the statute, considered as a whole and 
with  due  regard  to  its  nature  and  object  reveals  that  the 
Legislature  intended  the  words  „shall‟  and  „must‟  to  be 
directory,  they  should  be  given  that  meaning.  Similarly, 
under the same circumstances, the word „may‟ should be 
given  a  mandatory  meaning,  and  especially  where  the 
statute concerns the rights, and interests of the public, or 
where  third  persons  have  a  claim  de  jure  that  a  power 
shall be exercised, or whenever something directed to be 
done  for  the  sake  of  justice  or  the  public  good,  or  is 
necessary to sustain the statute‟s constitutionality.” 
14. 
In Muhammad  Saleh  v.  The  Chief  Settlement 
Commissioner,  Lahore  and  2  others  (PLD  1972  SC  326), 
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of Pakistan observed: 
 
“It  is  now  well  settled  that  the  words  “may”  and  “shall” 
in  legal  phraseology  are  interchangeable,  depending  on 
the  context  in  which  they  are  used,  and  are  not  to  be 
interpreted with the rigidity which is attributed to them in 
ordinary parlance.”  
15. 
As  a  general  rule,  it  is  now  firmly  settled  that 
where the consequence of failure to comply with a particular 
provision is not mentioned it is taken as directory and where 
the  consequence  is  expressly  mentioned  the  provision  is 
mandatory. In Niaz Muhammad Khan v. Mian Fazal Raqib 
(PLD 1974 SC 134), the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of Pakistan 
held: 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
 
8 
“As a general rule however, a statute is understood to be 
directory when it contains matter merely of direction, but 
not  when those directions are followed up by an  express 
provision  that,  in  default  of  following  them,  the  facts 
shall be null and void.  To put  it differently, if the Act  is 
directory, its disobedience does not  entail any invalidity; 
if the Act is mandatory disobedience entails serious legal 
consequences amounting to the invalidity of the act done 
in disobedience to the provision.” 
The  above  view  was  reiterated  in  Maulana  Nur-ul-Haq  v. 
Ibrahim  Khalil  (2000  SCMR  1305)  and  Apollo  Textile 
Mills  Ltd,  and  others  v.  Soneri  Bank  Ltd.  (PLD  2012  SC 
268). 
16.  
In  a  nub,  there  is  no  litmus  test  to  determine 
whether  a  statutory  provision  or  rule  is  mandatory  or 
directory.  The  court  has  to  find  out  the  intention  of  the 
legislature  by  adopting  the  purposive  rather  than  literal 
approach and would prefer an interpretation which advances 
the objects of the Act over that which defeats it.   
17. 
In  view  of  the  foregoing,  it  is  necessary  to 
understand  the  legislative  intent  of  the  Ordinance  and  the 
scope  of  the  Rules. The  objective of the Ordinance is  well-
identified.  It  seeks 
to  regulate 
import,  manufacture, 
formulation,  sale,  distribution  and  use  of  pesticides  in 
agriculture  and  ensure  provision of  quality  pesticides to the 
farmers.    It  lays  special  emphasis  on  their  quality  and 
contains extensive provisions to control it. Sections 13 & 14 
obligate  the  Government  to  set  up  a  pesticides  laboratory 
and  appoint  analysts  therein.  Sections  15  to  17  provide  for 
appointment  of  Inspectors  and  empower  them  to  take 
samples  from 
the  pesticides 
imported,  formulated  or 
intended  to  be  sold  in  the  market  and  despatch  them  to  the 
pesticides laboratory. Section 18 stipulates that the report of 
the  pesticides  laboratory  duly  signed  by  the  Government 
Analyst  would  be  a  conclusive  evidence  of  the  particulars 
stated  therein  unless  the  person  from  whose  possession  the 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
9 
sample  was  taken  disputes  its  correctness  in  which  case  he 
may  make a representation to the Government to repeat the 
test.  Section  21  criminalizes  sale  of  adulterated  and 
substandard  pesticides  and  holding  them  in  stock.  It  is 
important to note that sampling and their credible laboratory 
analysis  is  pivotal  in  realizing  the  objective  and  purpose  of 
the Ordinance.  
18. 
The Rules have been framed under Section 29 of 
the  Ordinance  to  carry  out  its  purposes.  Rules  23  to  37, 
prescribe  the  procedure  for  collection  of  samples,  their 
transmission to the laboratory and testing. Rule 43 stipulates 
the  analytical  methods 
that  are 
to  be  adopted  for 
examination of the samples in the pesticides laboratory. Rule 
22,  however,  requires  the  said  laboratory  to  have  ISO 
Certification.  
19. 
The  Agricultural  Pesticides  Rules,  1973,  which 
were  previously  in  force  contained  identical  provisions  so 
far  as  analytical  methods  are  concerned.  However,  there 
were complaints from all quarters that most of the pesticide 
laboratories  notified  by  the  Government  were  not  up  to  the 
mark  and  there  were  vast  variations  in  their  results.  It  is  in 
this  backdrop  that  the  Agricultural  Pesticides  Rules,  2018, 
mandate that the pesticides laboratory shall be duly certified 
by  the  ISO. The  following excerpt  from  Paragraph-6 of the 
report submitted by the Additional Secretary (Task Force) in 
these constitutional petitions is quite instructive: 
“The  aforesaid  Punjab  Agricultural  Pesticides  Rules  were 
got approved from the Competent Authority during the year 
2018 and it became obligatory thereafter to get ISO-17025 
Accreditation.  Prior  to  the  approval  of  these  rules  it  was 
blamed  by  all  the  stakeholders  particularly  by  the  people 
from  pesticide  business  that  the  Pesticide  Regulatory 
Laboratories  were  incompetent  in  all  respects  inclusive  of 
trained  manpower  viz-a-viz  equipment/machinery  and 
Certified  Reference  Materials(s)  etc.  Now  with  the  advent 
of  ISO-17025 Certification, labs proved that they have the 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
10 
required potential and professional capabilities in rendering 
analytical services.” 
20. 
By  requiring  the  pesticide  laboratories  to  have 
ISO  Certification,  Rule  22  ensures  reliable  means  to  check 
the  quality  of  the  pesticides  supplied  in  the  market  and 
punish  those  who  engage  in  any  malpractice.  Inasmuch  as 
Section 18(3) attaches evidentiary presumption to the report 
of the pesticide laboratory, it has to be authentic. If it is not 
it  will  not  only  prejudice  an  accused  being  tried  for  an 
offence  mentioned  in  the  Ordinance  but  would    also  defeat 
his  right  of  fair  trial  guaranteed  under  Article  10-A  of  the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  
21.  
In  The  State  through  Regional  Director  FIA  v. 
Imam Bakhsh  and  others  (2018  SCMR 2039)  the  Hon‟ble 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  was  confronted  with  a  similar 
question  as  has  been  raised  before  me  in  the  present 
petitions. The Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 (the 
“Act”),  has  been  enacted  to  control  production,  processing 
and 
trafficking  of  narcotic  drugs  and  psychotropic 
substances  and  provides  punishments  for  contravention. 
Section 34 of the Act calls for establishing Narcotics Testing 
Laboratories  and  Section  36  mandates  that  the  Government 
Analyst shall deliver a report in the prescribed manner after 
carrying out tests and analysis of the sample of the narcotics. 
The  said  report  under  Section  36(2)  is  conclusive  and  is 
admissible 
in  evidence  without 
formal  proof.  The 
Government has framed the Control of Narcotics Substances 
(Government  Analysts)  Rules,  2001,  to  carry  out  the 
purposes  of  the  Act  and  Rule  6  thereof  provides  that  “the 
report should contain full protocols of the test applied.” The 
State  urged  that  Rule  6  was  directory  as  it  did  not  specify 
any  consequence  for  non-compliance.  The  Apex  Court 
rejected the contention holding that the rule in question was 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
11 
mandatory.  Syed  Mansoor  Ali  Shah,  J.  speaking  for  the 
Court said: 
 
the  Act  underlines 
“Our  Court  has  held  while  determining  the  status  of  a 
mandatory  or  directory  provision  that  „perhaps  the 
cleverest indicator is the object and purpose of the statute 
and  the  provision  in  question‟  and  to  see  the  „legislative 
intent  as  revealed  by  the  examination  of  the  whole 
Act‟….Non-compliance  of  Rule  6  can  frustrate  the 
purpose  of 
the  Act.…The  evidentiary  assumption 
attached  to  a  report  of  the  Government  Analyst  under 
Section  36(2)  of 
the  statutory 
significance  of  the  report.  Therefore,  details  of  the  test 
and analysis in the shape of the protocols applied for the 
test became fraudulent and go to the root of the statutory 
scheme.  Rule  6  is,  therefore,  in  the  public  interest  and 
safeguards the rights of the parties. Any report (Form-II) 
failing  to  give  details  of  the  full  protocols  of  the  test 
applied  will  be  inconclusive,  unreliable,  suspicious  and 
untrustworthy  and  will  not  meet 
the  evidentiary 
assumption  attached  to  a  Report  of  the  Government 
Analyst  under  Section  36(2).  Resultantly, 
it  will 
hopelessly fail to support conviction of the accused. This 
Court  has  already  emphasized 
importance  of 
protocols in Ikramullah‟s case [2015 SCMR 1002]. 
the 
22.  
The ratio of Imam Bakhsh‟s case (supra) is fully 
applicable to the present cases. Rule 22 is fundamental to the 
statutory scheme of the Ordinance. It is in the public interest 
and  safeguards  the  rights  of  all  concerned.  Furthermore,  it 
aims  at  creating  confidence  of  the  general  public  in  the 
Pesticide  Regulatory  Laboratories  and  addressing  their 
complaints  about  their  results.  For  all  these  reasons,  I  hold 
that  Rule  22  is  mandatory.  The  excerpts  from  the  report  of 
the  Additional  Secretary  (Task  Force)  reproduced 
in 
Paragraph-19,  above,  not  only  support  my  opinion  but  also 
admit 
that 
the 
legislative 
intent  was 
to  make  ISO 
Certification mandatory.  
23. 
Admittedly,  in  the  present  cases  FIRs  were 
registered on the basis of non-ISO certified lab reports. The 
Petitioners  cannot  be  prosecuted  on  the  basis  thereof. 
Therefore,  Writ  Petition  Nos.11435-Q/2018,  13486-Q/2018 
and  13700-Q/2018  are  accepted.  The  FIRs  impugned 
W.P.No.11435/2018. 
 
 
12 
therein  are  declared  to  be  without  lawful  authority  and  are 
hereby quashed. No order as to costs.  
 
 
 
                  
 
 
   (TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH)                  
 
     JUDGE 
 
 
ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 7.2.2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
 
*M.Khalid* 
 
