Stereo.HCJDA-38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.1399 of 2014 
Muhammad Irfan 
Vs. 
Naseer Ahmad 
 
J U D G M E N T  
Date of Hearing 
PETITIONER BY 
23.11.2018 
 
Adnan Saeed Chaudhry, Advocate. 
  
RESPONDENTS BY  Muhammad Zakria Ghumman, Advocate.  
 
 
Rasaal  Hasan  Syed,  J.  Judgment/order  dated 
27.3.2014  of  the  learned  Addl.  District  Judge, 
Gujranwala  whereby  the  appeal  of  the  respondents 
was partially allowed and the case was remanded to 
the  learned  Executing  Court  for  execution  of  a 
decree  to  the  extent  of  delivery  of  symbolic 
possession  of  the  shop  roof,  has  been  assailed  in 
this  revision  petition  by  the  petitioner/decree-
holder. 
2. 
Facts  out  of  which  this  revision  petition 
emerges  are  that  the  petitioner  filed  a  suit  for 
possession  of  the  roof  of  a  shop  inter  alia  alleging 
that  he  had  purchased  the  said  roof  through  a 
registered  sale  deed  dated  17.1.2009,  he  was  also 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
owner of the shop by virtue of a separate registered 
sale  deed  in  his  favour  and  that  the  respondents 
had no right or entitlement to possession of the roof 
in question and that the petitioner being entitled to 
the  possession 
thereof,  a  decree  be  passed 
accordingly. 
3.  Respondent  No.1 
filed  written  statement, 
wherein  it  was  alleged  that  the  petitioner  had  no 
cause of action, the petitioner approached the court 
with  unclean  hands  and  that  the  plaint  was  liable 
to  be  rejected  under  Order  VII,  Rule  11,  C.P.C.  On 
facts,  evasive  denial  was  made  and  no  defence, 
counter claim or set-off was claimed. 
4. 
After evidence, the learned Civil Judge decreed 
the  suit  of  the  petitioner  vide  judgment  and  decree 
dated  28.1.2010  holding  that  the  petitioner  was 
absolute owner and entitled to the possession of the 
suit  property  and  also  entitled  to  the  decree  for  its 
possession. 
5.  Respondents  filed  appeal  to  assail  the  decree 
dated 28.1.2010 that was dismissed by the learned 
Addl. District Judge, Gujranwala vide judgment and 
decree  dated  12.7.2012.  Civil  Revision  No. 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2888/2012  was  filed  to  assail  the  judgment  and 
decree  of  the  two  courts  below  which  too  was 
dismissed  by  this  Court  on  01.10.2012.  It  was 
observed in para 5 of the judgment that the pivotal 
issue  of  the  case  was  issue  No.1  whereby  the 
petitioner  was 
required 
to  prove 
exclusive 
ownership  of 
the  suit  property, 
the 
three 
documents,  Ex.P3  to  Ex.P5,  proved  the  ownership 
of the petitioner in the shop as also the roof. It was 
observed  that  the  petitioner  was,  therefore,  proved 
to  be  owner  and  as  such  was  entitled  to  claim 
possession  of  the  property.  It  appears  that  the 
respondents  did  not 
further  assail  the  three 
judgments. Resultantly  judgment and decree  of the 
learned Civil Judge attained finality. 
6. 
Petitioner 
filed  an  execution  petition 
for 
delivery  of  possession  of  the  roof  through  the 
process of the court. Respondents at this stage filed 
an  objection  petition  claiming  that  over  the  roof  of 
the  shop  construction  existed  and  that  there  being 
no specific order for the delivery of the possession of 
the construction over the roof, the decree could not 
be  executed.  It  was  claimed  that  actual  possession 
could  not  be  delivered  only  symbolic  possession 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could  be  given  and  that  the  execution  petition  for 
the delivery of the possession was incompetent. 
7. 
The 
learned  Civil  Judge  dismissed 
the 
objection  petition  vide  order  dated  30.10.2012 
observing  that  the  matter/grounds  raised  in  the 
objection  petition  having  been  decided  against  the 
judgment-debtor  by  the  competent  court  through 
judgment dated 28.1.2010 had attained finality. The 
executing  court  could  not  re-adjudicate  the  same 
nor  could  it  move  beyond  the  decree  and  that  the 
subject-matter  raised  being  pre-decretal  in  nature, 
could  not  be  entertained  or  adjudicated  by  the 
learned  Executing  Court  through  the  objection 
petition. 
8.  Respondent  filed  an  appeal  against  the  order 
of  rejection  of  objection  petition  dated  30.10.2012, 
which  was  partially  allowed  vide 
impugned 
judgment/order  dated  27.3.2014  in  terms  whereof 
the  case  was  remanded  to  the  learned  Executing 
Court  for  limited  execution  of  the  decree  to  the 
extent  of  delivery  of  symbolic  possession  instead  of 
physical  possession.  It  is  this  judgment/decree  of 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  learned  Addl.  District  Judge,  which  has  been 
impugned in the present revision petition. 
9. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  vehemently 
submitted  that  the  appellate  court  committed 
material  illegality,  the  petitioner  was entitled to the 
roof  along  with  all  appurtenances  and  that  the 
respondent  having  failed  to  raise  the  plea  of 
construction  in  his  written  statement  nor  ever 
attempted to challenge the judgment of the learned 
Civil  Court  on  the  plea  of  existence  of  any  alleged 
construction  in  appeal  or  in  revision  before  this 
Court,  the  objection  could  not  be  agitated  in 
execution  proceedings  where  the  Executing  Court 
was  supposed  to  execute  the  decree  as  it  was.  It 
was  added  that  the  respondent  being  person  in 
possession  was  bound  by  the  decree  in  terms  of 
Order  XXI,  Rule  35(1),  C.P.C.  being  in  actual 
possession  of  the  roof  in  question,  of  which  the 
decree for possession was granted in a case wherein 
they  were  party,  the  respondent  could  not  be 
allowed  to  expect  alteration  or  modification  of  the 
decree in the execution proceedings nor the learned 
Executing  Court  had  any  authority  in  law  to  treat 
the  decree  for  actual  possession  as  decree  for 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
symbolic possession. It was also contended that the 
impugned 
judgment 
suffers 
from 
serious 
jurisdictional error as the Executing Court travelled 
beyond its authority permissible in law. 
10.  To  the  contrary 
learned  counsel 
for  the 
respondent  supported  the  impugned  judgment  and 
re-agitated  the  same  submission  which  prevailed 
with 
the 
learned  Addl.  District  Judge 
for 
modification  of  the  order  of  objection  and  for 
treatment  of  the  decree  as  decree  for  symbolic 
possession. 
11.  Points  raised  and  submissions  made  by 
learned  counsel  for  the  parties  have  been  duly 
analyzed  and considered in the light of the material 
annexed  with  this  revision  petition  inclusive  of  the 
impugned  judgment,  objection  petition,  original 
pleadings  of  the  suit,  the  evidence  therein,  the 
decreed  passed  by  the  Court,  the  decree  of  the 
Appellate  Court  and  also  the  Order  of  this  Court 
upholding the decree, and it is observed that for the 
reasons  hereafter  the  order  under  appeal  cannot 
sustain  and  that  the  learned  Addl.  District  Judge 
committed serious error of law and travelled beyond 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its  jurisdiction  while  modifying  the  order  of  the 
Executing  Court  or  converting  the  decree  in  a 
decree for symbolic possession. 
12. 
It 
is  manifest 
from  the  plaint  that  the 
petitioner  clearly  asserted  therein  that  he  was  the 
owner of the roof by virtue of a sale deed Ex.P3 and 
that  he  purchased  the  shop  vide  sale  deed  Ex.  P4 
and that  the  respondents  did not have any  right  to 
decline  possession  of  the  roof  to  the  petitioner.  In 
this  backdrop  a  decree  for  possession  of  the  roof 
was  claimed.  Importantly,  the  respondent,  in  the 
written  statement  though  raised  certain 
legal 
objections  regarding  cause  of  action  and  the 
conduct  of  the  petitioner,  yet  on  merits  responded 
in  an  evasive  manner.  The  perusal  of  the  written 
statement reveals that it was nowhere claimed that 
the respondent had raised any alleged construction 
over  the roof of  the  shop and that  the suit  was not 
maintainable  in  its  existing  form.  So  much  so  the 
respondent did not claim any compensation  for the 
structure,  if  any.  There  was  no  counterclaim, 
counter-defence  or  any  set  of  pleadings  in  the 
written  statement.  Respondent  No.1  appeared  as 
D.W.1  and  simply  deposed  that  in  the  division  of 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  property,  the  roof  did  not  fall  to  his  share.  He 
claimed  that  by  virtue  of  an  iqrar  nama  the  shop 
had  been  given  in  his  share  and  that  the  suit  was 
false  and  groundless. 
In  his  statement 
the 
respondent  did  not  claim  any  construction  nor  he 
had raised any objection on such plea although this 
was  one  of  the  basic  pleas  that  could  be  taken  in 
the written statement. Respondent produced D.W.2 
who 
too  did  not  depose  about  any  alleged 
construction  over  the  roof  of  the  shop  but  only 
deposed that the roof was not sold to the petitioner.  
13. 
In this backdrop, the learned Civil Judge while 
returning  findings  on  issue  No.1  to  the  effect  as  to 
whether  the  petitioner  was  exclusive  owner  of  the 
suit  property,  declared  that  the  petitioner  was  the 
lawful  owner  of  the  shop  as  also  the  roof;  and  was 
entitled  to  the  possession  of  the  roof.  Another 
noticeable  factor  is  that  in  the  grounds  of  appeal 
against  the  decree  which  has  been  appended  with 
the 
revision  petition  as  Annexure 
“E”, 
the 
respondent  did  not  raise  any  plea  of  construction 
nor challenged the decree on any such alleged plea.  
So much so if in the judgment of the appellate court 
whereby the decree of the trial court was affirmed, it 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is  observed  that  the  respondent  never  raised  the 
plea  of  any  alleged  construction.  Same  is  the  case 
with 
the  grounds  of 
revision  petition 
(CR 
No.2888/2012)  and  final  judgment  of  this  Court 
observing that no such plea was ever raised. In this 
view of the matter, it is obvious that throughout the 
trial and till its final decision up to the stage of this 
Court,  the  respondent  never  raised  the  objection 
which  was  being  attempted  to  be  raised  through 
objection  petition.  The  learned  Executing  Court, 
therefore, rightly concluded that the grounds taken 
by  the  judgment  debtor  No.1  in  the  objection 
petition could not be raised at the stage of execution 
as  the  subject-matter  thereof  was  a  pre-decretal 
matter  which  could  have  been  entertained  and 
adjudicated  in  the  suit  and  not  through  the 
execution  petition  where  the  decree  has  to  be 
executed as it is. 
14. 
In  the  impugned  judgment  of  appellate  court, 
the  learned  Addl. District  Judge  modified  the  order 
of  the  learned  Executing  Court  and  assumed  that 
despite  the  fact  the  decree  was  for  possession  of 
roof,  the  construction  over  the  roof  of  shop  could 
not  be  demolished,  and 
that  only  symbolic 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possession  could  be  given.  In  other  words,  the 
learned  Addl.  District  Judge  modified  the  decree 
which  was  for  physical  possession,  to  a  decree  for 
symbolic  possession  in  the  execution  proceedings. 
The  order  passed  by  the  learned  Addl.  District 
Judge suffers from serious error of law.  
15. 
It  is  a  settled  rule  that  all  questions  that 
pertain to the pre-decretal matters shall be raised in 
defence during trial and could not be allowed to be 
raised  in  execution  proceedings.  Executing  court 
cannot go behind or beyond the decree. In a similar 
case  “Mst.  Naseem  Akhtar  and  4  others  v.  Shalimar 
General  Insurance  Limited  and  2  others”  (1994 
SCMR  22)  wherein  a  decree  for  recovery  of  money 
granted in a suit against insurance company as well 
as  the  truck  driver  in  an  accident  case,  the  civil 
court  granted  decree  against  both  of  them  jointly 
and  severely  for  the  suit  amount.  In  the  execution 
proceedings  an  objection  was  raised  that  the 
liability  of  the  insurance  company  was  limited  to 
the extent of Rs. 16,000/- and therefore, the decree 
pertaining  to  insurance  company  with  full  decretal 
amount  of  Rs.  400,000/-  was  without  jurisdiction 
and  impermissible.  The  objection  sustained  at  the 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High Court level but the order was set aside by the 
August  Supreme  Court  on  the  ground  that  the 
executing court could not go beyond the decree, and 
that  pre-decretal  matters/questions  could  not  be 
agitated  in  execution  proceedings.  The  operative 
part  of  the  judgment  for  facility  of  guidance  is 
reproduced hereunder: 
for 
filed 
non-prosecution. 
“After  hearing  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
parties  at  length  and  perusing  the  record 
and the precedents we are of the view that 
no doubt that the liability of the appellants 
was  limited  under  the  relevant  statute.  In 
the  suit  filed  by  the  appellants,  the 
respondent  No.1 
the  written 
statement.  It  did  not  take  the  plea  of 
limited liability. It produced its Manager as 
D.W.1,  however  decree  was  passed  in 
favour  of  the  appellants  and  against  the 
respondents. The respondent No.1 filed an 
appeal but did not prosecute  it  and it  was 
dismissed 
The 
respondent  No.1  then  filed  an  application 
for  restoration  but  did  not  prosecute.  This 
too,  was  dismissed.  Thus,  the  decree 
became final. In the execution proceedings, 
it  was  not  open  to  the  respondent  No.1  to 
take  up  the  plea  which  he  had  not  taken 
before  the  learned  trial  court  during  the 
course of the hearing of the suit which was 
ultimately  decreed  and  the  decree  was 
allowed 
these 
circumstances,  the  respondent  No.1  itself 
is  responsible  for  the  decree  against.  It  is 
pertinent  to  mentioned  here  that  even 
though  its  liability  was  limited  it  is  not 
open  to  the  respondent  No.1  judgment 
debtor now to contend that its liability has 
not been correctly assessed or determined. 
If it  were permissible, there will be no end 
or  finality  to  the  judgment  and  decree 
which had become final. Precedents noted 
to  become 
final. 
In 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-12 
and analysed above make quite clear that 
once  a  decree  is  passed  it  has  to  be 
executed  in  its  terms  and  it  is  not  open  to 
the executing Court to go behind it and re-
determine the liability of the parties. In this 
view of the matter, there is no option but to 
allow  this  appeal  and  hold  that  the 
learned  Judge  in  the  High  Court  fell  in 
error  in  giving  effect  to  the  plea  of  the 
respondent  No.1  which  had  not  been 
raised before  the learned  trial court  which 
granted the decree to the appellants….” 
16.  In  the  present  case  too,  whether  or  not  there 
was any construction on the roof, and if there was, 
whether the respondent had to remove the same or 
to  claim  compensation,  could  have  been  raised 
through  the  written  statement.  The  respondent 
neither objected to the maintainability of the suit on 
this  account  nor  challenged  the  decree  on  account 
of any alleged deficiency. So much so that no claim 
for  compensation  of  structure,  if  any,  was  ever 
made  in  the  written  statement  or  in  the  deposition 
of  respondent  or  even  at  the  stage  of  appeal  or 
revision  against  the  decree  passed  in  favour  of  the 
petitioner.  In  result,  the  decree  became 
final 
whereafter 
the  respondent  could  not  during 
execution be allowed to raise pre-decretal matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. Insofar as the reliance of the learned counsel for 
the  respondent  on  the  case  of  “Mst.  Razia  Bibi.vs. 
Muhammad  Sharif  and  others”  (PLD  2011  Lah. 
450) the facts of the said case are distinguishable in 
as  much  in  the  said  suit,  no  decree  was  passed 
against the objector, the construction was raised as 
a  purchaser  and  after  getting  sanction;  but  in  the 
present case, the decree having been passed against 
the  respondent  in  a  suit  which  was  filed  against 
them  for  the  delivery  of  the  vacant  possession. 
Under  Order  XXI,  Rule  35(1),  C.P.C. 
the 
respondent/judgment-debtor being in possession  is 
bound  to  restore  the  same  to  the  petitioner.  The 
objection  as  to  the  demolition  of  structure  or  its 
removal  by 
the 
judgment-debtor 
is 
totally 
misconceived.    In  “Noor  Muhammad  Khan  v.  Haji 
Muhammad Ali Khan and 24 others” (PLD 1973 SC 
218) it  was ruled by the  August Supreme Court  as 
follows:  
“…In  section  13  of 
the  Urban  Rent 
Restriction  Ordinance,  the  word  used  is 
“eviction” and the “eviction” would include 
the removal of super-structure also” 
 
18.  The  learned  Addl.  District  Judge  by  directing 
Executing Court to execute the decree of possession 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as  a  decree  for  symbolic  possession,  had  virtually 
modified the terms of the decree, which was beyond 
the  purview  of  the  executing  Court.  In  “Sardar 
Ahmad Yar Khan Jogezai  and 2 others v Province of 
Balochistan  through  Secretary  C  &  W  Department”  
(2002  SCMR  122),  it  was  ruled  by  the  August 
Supreme Court that: 
that 
reveal 
learned  High  Court  on           
“An in depth scrutiny of the entire record 
would 
judgment/decree 
passed  by 
04-11-1985  had  attained  finality  and 
furthermore  the  modification  as  allowed 
vide  said  judgment/decree  was free from 
any  ambiguity  and  accordingly 
the 
question  of  any  clarification  by 
the 
executing  Court  does  not  arise.  The 
learned  executing  Court  has  modified  the 
decree  which  had  already  attained 
finality  by  means  of  order,  dated           
13-4-1989 … A bare perusal would reveal 
that “simple interest  at  the rate of 6% per 
annum  from  the  date  of  decrees”  as 
awarded  by  the  learned  High  Court  vide 
judgment/decree  dated  04-11-1985  was 
substituted  by  holding  that  “the    decree 
holders  are  entitled 
the  awarded 
to 
amount,  work  plus 
interest  awarded 
added  thereto  from  1960  to  the  date  of 
application  with  the  rate  of  interest  given 
in  the  award  and  till  the  date  of  the 
decrees  dated  21-5-1977  and  thereafter 
till  the  realization  of  the  whole  decretal 
amount  at  6%  per  annum  with  simple 
interest”.  The  said  substitution  or  drastic 
amendment could not have been made by 
the learned Executing Court  which  in fact 
amounts  to  a  futile  attempt  to  frustrate 
the  object  of  judgment  and  decree  dated 
4-11-1985  which  had  already  attained 
finality  and 
13-4-1989  passed  by  the  learned  District 
the  order  dated           
thus 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
court) 
(executing 
Judge  Loralai 
is 
arbitrary,  capricious  and  corum  non 
judice.  It  worth  mentioning  that  executing 
court could not go beyond the decree. It is 
well-settled  by  now  that  “when  decree 
passed  attained  finality  it  had  got  to  be 
executed  even 
it  was  erroneously 
passed.    Executing  Court  cannot  rectify 
any  mistake 
in  decree  which  would 
tantamount  to  going  behind  decree”  …  A 
court executing a decree cannot go behind 
the  decree;  it    must  take  the  decree  as  it 
stands,  for  the  decree  is  binding  and 
conclusive  between  the  parties  to  the 
suit…”  
if 
19. 
In  the  instant  case,  the  decree  was  not  for 
symbolic possession, rather, it mandated delivery of 
physical  possession  of  property.  The  respondent 
was  bound  to  comply  with  this  directive.  Such 
afterthought  claim  of  construction  could  not  be 
entertained  during  proceedings  for  execution  of 
decree, as the Executing Court is bound to execute 
the  decree  strictly  in  the  terms  provided  therein. 
Even otherwise pre-decretal questions, if not raised 
during the trial or in the appeal till the stage of High 
Court,  could  not  be  permitted  to  be  urged  as 
objection  to  the  execution  of  decree  as  the  conduct 
of judgment-debtor will preclude him from doing so. 
The learned Addl. District Judge committed serious 
error  of  law  in  modifying  the  order  passed  by  the 
learned  Executing  Court.  In  result,  the  impugned 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.1399 of 2014 
 
 
Page-16 
order  being  without  jurisdiction  and  suffering  from 
serious legal error, cannot be approved.   
20.  Therefore  this  revision  petition  is  allowed, 
order  of 
the 
learned  Executing  Court  dated 
30.10.2012 is restored and that of the learned Addl. 
District Judge dated 27.3.2014 is set aside.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  (RASAAL HASAN SYED) 
     JUDGE 
Announced in open Court on 13.12.2018. 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
*Mian M. Rabbani*   
 
