Judgment Sheet 
    IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,LAHORE 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
 
    Writ Petition No.168265 /2018 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
Muhammad Nawazish Ali Pirzada 
       Vs. 
Election Commission of Pakistan and 6 others 
Date of Decision:     
 
Petitioner by:  
 
Respondents by: 
 
 
 
  
01.03.2018 
In person 
 
Mr.  Muhammad  Shahzad  Shaukat, 
Mr.  Taha  Asif  and  Rana  Imran 
Advocates for the Respondent No.4. 
Mr.  Nasar  Ahmed  &  Mr.  M.  Zikarya 
Sheikh, DAG. 
Mr. Ashfaq Ahmad Kharal, A.A.G. 
Ch. Mohammad Arshad Virk, A.A.G. 
Ch.  Umar  Hayat,  Director  (Legal) 
E.C.P. 
 
 
 
 
 
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J:-    Through  this  petition, 
filed  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (the “Constitution”),  the Petitioner 
has  challenged  the  order  dated  17.02.2018  passed  by  the 
Appellate  Tribunal  whereby  the  Election  Appeal  filed  by  the 
Respondent No.4 was accepted and the order dated 12.02.2018 
passed by the Returning Officer rejecting the nomination papers 
of the Respondent No.4 was set aside. 
2. 
The  Petitioner 
inter  alia  submitted 
that 
the 
impugned order is illegal and void ab initio; that the Appellate 
Tribunal  has  not  taken  into  consideration  the  fact  that  the 
Respondent  No.4  was  disqualified  under  the  law  on  being 
W.P. No.168265/2018 
2 
deficient  on  the  score  of  qualification  of  Technocrat;  that  the 
Respondent  No.4  does  not  hold  educational  qualification 
requiring  16  years  of  education;  that  the  Respondent  No.4  did 
not  annex  his  degree  of  Bachelors  with  his  nomination  papers 
rather  only  supplied  a  provisional  certificate  and  that  too 
without  any  equivalence  certificate  by  the  Higher  Education 
Commission; that a candidate can either submit his nomination 
papers  on  the  seat  as  ‘Aalim’  or  ‘Technocrat’  and  his 
nomination  papers  are  liable  to  be  rejected  on  the  sole  ground 
of  false  information;  that  the  observation  of  the  Respondent 
No.2  that  the  Petitioner  was  not  an  objector  at  the  time  of 
scrutiny  is  against  the  law  as  any  person  can  bring  the  matter 
under  the  ambit  of  information  to  the  Appellate  Tribunal,  as 
such the order of the Appellate Tribunal is liable to be set aside. 
3. 
On  the  other  hand  learned  Law  Officers  assisted 
by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  No.4  vehemently 
controverted  the  arguments  advanced  by  the  Petitioner  and 
prayed for dismissal of the same on the ground that there is no 
irregularity  or  legal  infirmity  in  the  impugned  order  and  the 
same is liable to be upheld. Learned counsel for the Respondent 
No.4  has  relied  upon  the  case  titled  Election  Commission  of 
Pakistan  through  its  Secretary  v.  Javaid  Hashmi  and  others 
(PLD  1989  Supreme  Court  396),  Ghulam  Mustafa  Jatoi  v. 
Additional District & Sessions Judge/Returning Officer, N.A. 
158  Naushero  Feroze  and  others  (1994  SCMR  1299)  and 
W.P. No.168265/2018 
3 
Muhammd  Raza  Hayat  Hiraj  and  others  v.  The  Election 
Commission of Pakistan and others (2015 SCMR 233). 
4. 
We  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel 
for the parties and have perused the record.   
5. 
 
Before  touching  merits  of  the  case,  we  would  like  to 
dilate  upon  the  question  of  maintainability  of  this  petition  on  the 
touchstone of locus-standi.  At the outset when conformed with the 
fact  that  whether  the  Petitioner  has  filed  any  objection  to  the 
nomination  papers  of  the  Respondent  No.4  before  the  Returning 
Officer,  the  Petitioner  submitted  that  he  did  not  file  any  objection 
but  argued  that  the  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  was  required  under 
the law to consider Petitioner’s point of view and therefore, this writ 
petition is also maintainable.  
6.  We  have  considered  this  argument  in  the  context  of 
applicable law.  The bare reading of the Section 113 of the Election 
Act,  2017  (the  “Act”)  reveals  that  only  a  candidate  or  an  objector  
may file an Appeal against the decision of the Returning  Officer in 
rejecting or accepting the nomination papers of a candidate. For the 
sake  of  brevity  the  said  Section  113  is  reproduced  below  and  is  as 
follows: 
113.  Appeal  against  scrutiny  order.—  (1)  A 
candidate  or  an  objector  may,  within  the  time 
specified  by  the  Commission,  file  an  appeal 
against  the  decision  of  the  Returning  Officer 
rejecting  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  accepting  a 
nomination  paper  to  the  Tribunal  constituted  for 
the purpose consisting of a person who is a Judge 
of a  High  Court,  appointed by  the  Commission in 
W.P. No.168265/2018 
4 
consultation  with  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  High 
Court concerned. 
(2)  An  appeal  filed  under  sub-section  (1) 
shall  be  summarily  decided  within  such  time  as 
may be notified by the Commission and any order 
passed on the appeal shall be final. 
(3)  If,  on  the  basis  of  information  or 
material coming to its knowledge by any source, a 
Tribunal constituted under sub-section (1) is of the 
opinion  that  a  candidate  whose  nomination paper 
has  been  accepted  is  a  defaulter  of  loans,  taxes, 
government  dues  and  utility  expenses  or  has  had 
any loan written off or has willfully concealed such 
fact or suffers from any other disqualification from 
being  elected  as  a  Member  of  the  Senate,  it  may, 
on  its  own  motion,  call  upon  such  candidate  to 
show cause why his nomination papers may not be 
rejected,  and  if  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the 
candidate is actually a defaulter or has had a loan 
written  off  or  suffers  from  any  disqualification,  it 
may reject the nomination paper of the candidate. 
(4)  Announcement  of  the  day  and  time 
appointed  for  the hearing of an appeal under this 
section  over 
the  radio  or 
television  or  by 
publication in the newspaper shall be deemed to be 
sufficient notice of the day and time so appointed.”   
(emphasis supplied) 
7. 
A candidate is defined in Section 2-vii of the Act as under: 
(vii) “candidate” means a person proposed and 
seconded as a candidate for, or seeking, election 
as a Member.”  
8. 
Plain and holistic reading of Section 113 of the Act 
shows  that  candidate  can  file  Appeal  before  Appellate 
W.P. No.168265/2018 
5 
Tribunal  if  nomination  papers  are  rejected.    Whereas  an 
objector  can file Appeal before the Appellate Tribunal if 
nomination  papers  are  accepted.    The  candidate  cannot 
file  Appeal  against  rejection  of  nomination  paper  of 
another  candidate  unless  he  was  objector  to  those 
nomination papers. Although  the  objector  is  not  defined 
under  the  Act but  as  and  when  any  objection is  filed  by 
an  objector  the  same  is  dealt  with  under  Section  112  of 
the Act.  
9. 
This interpretation is also inconsonance with the scheme 
of the Act, where Section 112 of the Act clearly depicts that the 
Returning  Officer  shall  examine  the  nomination  papers  of  the 
candidates and decide any objection raised by any such person 
to  any  nomination.    Chapter  VII  of  the  Act  deals  with  the 
conduct  of  Election  to  the  Senate  in  which  under  Section  105 
the Returning Officer and Dealing Officers have been appointed 
with  the  functions  under  Section  106.  Section  110  deals  with 
the  nomination  of  the  Election  and  the  entire  scrutiny  of  the 
candidates  is  stated  in  Section  112  (1)  of the  Act in  which the 
Returning Officer shall give the candidates, their proposers and 
seconders,  and  an  agent  authorized  in  wiring  in  this  behalf, 
reasonable opportunity for examining all the nomination papers 
including  any  nomination  by  the objector.  Only  the  candidates 
or  the  objectors  were  permitted  to  file  an  Appeal  before  the 
Appellate  Tribunal  under  Section  113  of  the  Act  in  case  of 
rejection  or  acceptance  of  nomination  papers  as  the  case  may 
be, therefore, the locus standi to file an Appeal against rejection 
of  nomination  papers  only  lies  with  the  objector.  Subsection  3 
W.P. No.168265/2018 
6 
of Section 113 of the Act further clarifies that the Tribunal can 
also deal with the matters of the candidates. 
10. 
In  this  case  it  is  admitted  and  apparent  from  the  record 
that the Petitioner had not filed any objection as provided under 
Section  112  of  the  Act  against  the  nomination  papers  of 
Respondent No.4, therefore, he had no locus-standi to be heard 
before the  Appellate Tribunal. It is further noted that the only 
remedy  available  to  the  Petitioner  being  a  candidate  and  not 
objector  under  Section  156  of  the  Act  in  post-election 
proceedings where the Petitioner will have grounds for seeking 
declaration  of  any  election  of  returned  candidate  void  if  the 
nomination  of  the  returned  candidate  is  invalid  or  he  is  not 
qualified. 
11. 
 
In view of above, we fully agree with the findings 
of  the  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  who  in  paragraph  3  of  the 
impugned order observed that on the other hand, Mr. Nawazish 
Ali Pirzada tried to defend the Appeal on the ground that he is 
a  contesting  candidate  for  the  seat  of  Technocrat.  When 
confronted  that  whether  he  has  filed  objections  on  the 
nomination  papers  of  the  Appellant  before  the  Returning 
Officer; the answer is in the negative. In these circumstances, I 
am  of  the  view  that  the  candidate  who  has  not  filed  the 
objections  cannot  contest  the  Appeal,  if  he  has  any  material 
with him, he can inform the Tribunal through the representative 
of  Provincial  Election  Commission  who  is  being  representing 
by the Director (Legal). 
W.P. No.168265/2018 
7 
12.  As  the  Petitioner  had  no  locus-standi  to  be  heard  by  the 
Appellate  Tribunal  being  not  an  objector,  therefore  he  has  no 
locus-standi  to  file  even  this  petition  after  the  impugned  order 
of  the  Appellate  Tribunal.    Indeed,  the  situation  would  have 
been  different  if  Petitioner  was  an  objector  to  the  nomination 
papers of Respondent No.4 in scrutiny process. 
13. 
       In view of what has been discussed above, we see no 
illegality or legal perversity in the impugned order  to the locus 
standi  of  the  Petitioner,  which  has  been  passed  strictly  in 
consonance  with  the  spirit  of  law  and  does  not  call  for  any 
interference.  
14.  As a sequel, the instant petition, being not maintainable, 
is hereby dismissed.  
 
(ABID  AZIZ  SHEIKH) 
 
 
  JUDGE                                                    JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
  (JAWAD  HASSAN)                          
*M.NAVEED* 
