Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
W.P. No. 25073-2014 
 
Sh. Shahbaz Akhtar Vs. Factory Manager etc. 
 
Sr. No. of 
order/ 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Proceeding 
 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where 
necessary. 
13.03.2018,  Kh. Omer Masood, advocate for the petitioner. 
Mr. Rafey Altaf, advocate for the respondent. 
 
Through 
this  constitutional  petition, 
the  petitioner  has 
challenged  the  judgment  dated  30.06.2014  passed  by  respondent 
No.2/Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, Lahore whereby the appeal 
filed by the respondent No.1 was partly allowed and the order passed 
by  the  Punjab  Labour  Court  No.II,  Lahore  dated  04.06.2012 
reinstating  the  petitioner  was  modified  to  the  extent  that  for 
wrongful  dismissal  from  service,  the  petitioner  was  awarded 
maximum  compensation  under  section  46(5)  of  the  Industrial 
Relations  Ordinance,  2002  equivalent  to  30  months’  basic  pay  (last 
drawn) and house rent to be paid within one month, if admissible, in 
lieu of his reinstatement in service. 
 
2. 
Brief  facts  giving  rise  to  the  filing  of  this  constitutional 
petition  are  that  the  petitioner  had  joined  the  respondent  No.1’s 
factory  on  23.06.1999  as  a  contractual  employee,  confirmed  on 
29.08.2000 and continued to work there to the entire satisfaction  of 
his employer without giving any opportunity of complaint in respect 
of his conduct or performance of duties. However, on 23.04.2004 he 
was issued a show cause notice on the allegation that he extended an 
unauthorized stay to an employee, namely, Abdul Rauf in the factory 
beyond duty hours and had shown his presence as on overtimer. He 
replied while denying  the  said  allegation whereafter  an  inquiry  was 
conducted by one Nasir Bukhari  in which he  was found guilty  and, 
therefore,  was  dismissed  from  service  on  08.06.2004.  He  issued  a 
W.P.No.25073-2014 
2 
grievance  notice  on  05.07.2004  and  filed  grievance  petition  on 
17.08.2004 before the Labour Court No.2, Lahore which was replied 
by  the  respondent  No.1.  On  04.06.2012  the  grievance  petition  was 
accepted  on  the  basis  of  evidence  produced  by  the  parties  and  the 
wrongful  dismissal  from  service  of  the  petitioner  was  set-aside  and 
the  petitioner  was  reinstated  in  service  with  all  back  benefits.  The 
respondent  No.1  preferred  an  appeal  before  respondent  No.2  which 
was  partly  allowed  and  the  petitioner  was  granted  maximum 
compensation, under section 45(6) of Industrial Relations Ordinance, 
2002 instead of reinstatement, hence this petition. 
 
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submits  that  the  learned 
Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal/respondent No.2 has accepted all 
the contentions of the petitioner, therefore, it should have upheld the 
judgment  of  the  Labour  Court/respondent  No.3.  Adds  that  said 
Abdul  Rauf  was  reinstated  in  service  by  the  Supreme  Court  vide 
order  dated  07.03.2013,  therefore,  prays  for  setting-aside  the 
impugned order. 
 
4. 
Conversely, learned counsel for the respondent submits that it 
is the discretion of the Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal/respondent 
No.2 either to reinstate the petitioner in service as an employee after 
when  his  dismissal  was  found  wrong  or  to  grant  compensation  in 
order  to  ensure  a  smooth  factory  environment.  Adds  that  in  such 
facts  and  circumstances,  the  reinstatement  in  service  is  not  the 
natural consequence. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing 
the  file,  it  is  straightaway  observed  that  both  courts  below  have 
consistently  held  that  the  petitioner  was  wrongly  dismissed  by 
respondent  No.1.  It  is  also  not  denied  by  the  respondent  No.1  that 
the  allegation  of  giving  unauthorized  stay  to  another  employee 
namely,  Abdul  Rauf  was  also  taken  up  by  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan in the Civil Appeal No.1471-L/2012 and 1503-L/2012 filed 
by him in which the order of the Labour Court for his reinstatement 
W.P.No.25073-2014 
3 
was  upheld  by  withholding  promotion  for  one  year  and  50%  back 
benefits.  It  is  not  the  allegation  against  the  petitioner  that  he  and 
Abdul  Rauf  indulged  into  any  activity  which  was  prejudicial  to  the 
peace and harmony within the industry concern. Extracts from para 2 
of the order are reproduced as under:- 
“After  hearing  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  going 
through  the  record  with  their  assistance  we  have  observed  that  the 
allegation levelled against Abdul Rauf petitioner regarding his overstay 
in Packages Ltd. For a few hours after performance of his duties was not 
accompanied  by  any  further  allegation  that  during  those  few  hours  of 
overstay  he  had  indulged  in  any  activity  which  was  prejudicial  to  the 
interests of the industrial concern or its business. We have been informed 
that  Abdul  Rauf  petitioner  has  served  Packages  Ltd.  For  a  period 
stretching over many years and so far no formal proceedings against him 
have been initiated for any other misconduct.” 
 
7. 
In the present case the scope of section 46(5) of IRO, 2002 is 
to  be  seen  in  the  light  of  the  judgments  by  Superior  Court  of  our 
jurisdiction. Section 46(5) of IRO, 2002  therefore is reproduced for 
ready reference as under:- 
“(5) The Labour Court, in case the termination of services of a workman 
is  held  to  be  wrongful,  may  award  compensation  equivalent  to  not  less 
than twelve months and not more than thirty months basic pay last drawn 
and  house  rent,  if  admissible,  in  lieu  of  reinstatement  of  the  worker  in 
service.” 
 
 
The learned Labour Appellate Tribunal vide impugned judgment has 
held that a reinstatement should not be thrusted when the employee 
was litigating for three years or when such reinstatement would had 
to a law and order situation promoting a hostile atmosphere with the 
real prospect of conflict with the employer. 
 
8. 
In  “Balochistan  Engineering  Works  Ltd.  Vs.  Abdul 
Hameed  and  others”  reported  as  2007  SCMR  1160,  it  was  held 
that where an alternate prayer to the re-instatement, compensation is 
sought,  then  with  consent  compensation  can  be  awarded  without 
back  benefits.  In  “Messrs  Ashraf  Sugar  Mills  Ltd.  Through 
General Manager VS. Manzoor Ahmed” reported as 2006 SCMR 
1751, it was held that where reinstatement is not considered proper, 
compensation  can  be  awarded.  It  was  discussed  therein  that  in  case 
titled “Utility Stores Corporation of Pakistan Limited V. Punjab 
Labour Appellate Tribunal and others” reported as PLD 1987 SC 
447, the words “just” and “proper” under section 25(5) would mean 
W.P.No.25073-2014 
4 
right,  fair  or  suitable  and  according  to  law  and  that  the  word 
“proper”  means  accurate  i.e.  adequate  application  of  substantive 
provision of the Statute. Para 4 is reproduced as under:- 
“However,  subsection  (6)  of  the  Ordinance,  further  enables  a 
Labour Court to award compensation, “in lieu of reinstatement” of the 
worker in service where his termination is held to be wrongful. This is an 
alternate  power  which  can  be  invoked  in  a  particular  case  where  the 
reinstatement of a worker is not considered to be proper. The mere fact 
that  a  Labour  Court  is  also  vested  with  power  to  award  compensation 
does  not take  away  its authority  of reinstatement  of a  worker.  The  only 
restriction  placed  on  the  Labour  Court  is  that  it  cannot  award 
compensation in addition to the reinstatement of a worker.” 
 
The  possibility  of  enacting  a  law  and  order  situation  following 
reinstatement may be an easy excuse justifying compensation in lieu 
of  reinstatement.  However,  such  possible  strained  relationship  may 
provide a new cause of action to proceed against such an employee. 
Even  otherwise,  the  record  must  reflect  that  the  employee  has  been 
levelling  ridiculous,  outrageous,  arrogant  allegations  against  the 
employer  adding 
to  confrontment,  haughtiness  against 
the 
management,  therefore,  the  reinstatement  would  amount  to  kicking 
them  from  behind  and  humiliate,    disgrace  and  embarrassment, 
eventually enhancing the degree of disharmony and conflict against 
the object of law, as held in case titled “Ghulam Rasool Tahir VS. 
IVTH  Singh  Labour  Court,  Karachi  through  Presiding  Officer 
and  another”  reported  as  2007  PLC  83.    Such  situation  was 
discussed  in  case  titled  “Khayal  Muhammad  Vs.  Messrs  Lucky 
Textile  Mills  through  Managing  Director/Occupier”  reported  as 
2007  PLC  423  and  it  was  held  that  reinstatement  would  be 
undesireable. Para 7 is reproduced as under:- 
“7. The bare perusal of the contents of letter of termination reveals that 
it contained the allegation that performance of the appellant was not up 
to  the  mark  for  considerable  period  of  time.  It  was  further  alleged  that 
appellant  has  failed  to  discharge  his  duty  properly.  Contents  of 
termination letter sufficiently show that the appellant was terminated on 
account of unsatisfactory service and his inability to discharge his duty 
properly.  Besides  the  respondents  have  produced  in  evidence  an 
application  bearing  the  signatures  of  the  applicant  addressed  to  the 
Admin. Manager containing allegation of quarrel between the workers to 
which the reference has also been made in the cross-examination of the 
appellant worker. This reveals displeasure of respondent management.” 
 
9. 
However,  in  the  present  case  the  allegation  against  the 
petitioner is only that he allowed Abdul Rauf overtime stay. His case 
is that he was permitted/directed by Mian Hanif, the shift incharge to 
W.P.No.25073-2014 
5 
do so. This important witness was neither produced by the petitioner 
nor  by  the  respondent.  Keeping  in  view  all  the  circumstances,  the 
concurrent  findings  were  given  to  the  extent  that  termination  was 
found  unlawful.  There  is  no  iota  of  allegation  that  either  the 
petitioner  misbehaved  or  threatened  the  management  or  tried  to 
disturb 
the  working  environment  of 
the 
factory.  To 
the 
understanding  of  this  court,  under  the  scheme  of  Labour  Laws,  the 
employee has been granted certain rights which need to be protected 
and if such employee is dragged into litigation, he cannot be said to 
have  contributed  in  the  strained  relationship  between  the  employer 
and the employee. 
 
10. 
For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  this  writ  petition  is 
allowed and the impugned judgment is set-aside to the extent of the 
payment  of  compensation  which  is  converted  into  reinstatement  in 
lieu thereof as required in case titled  “Khalid Mehmood Vs. State 
Life Insurance Corporation of Pakistan and others” 2018 SCMR 
376  &  case  titled  “Inspector  General  of  Police,  Punjab  Vs.  Tariq 
Mahmood” reported as 2015 SCMR 77 with back benefits, with no 
order as to cost. 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
Judge. 
(ALI BAQAR NAJAFI) 
JUDGE 
 
A.Qadoos* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
