    Judgment Sheet 
    IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,LAHORE 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
 
    Intra Court Appeal No.689/2011 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
Asghar Bin Shahid Jafri 
Vs.  Defence 
 
Housing 
Authority   and another. 
 
Date of Decision: -    
 
Appellant by: - 
 
 
Respondents by:-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.01.2017 
Mr. Muhammad Ahmad Qayyum, Advocate 
Mian Sultan Tanvir Ahmad   
Advocate. 
Mr. Usman Ali Cheema, Advocate 
 
Mr.  Mehmood  A.  Sheikh,  Advocate 
Supreme Court (amicus curiae) 
 
 
 
 
 
JAWAD HASSAN, J:-   Through this appeal, the 
Appellant/Petitioner  has  called  in  question  the  judgment 
rendered in W.P. No.8300/2003 dated 11.10.2011 passed by the 
learned  Single  Judge  (the  “Impugned  Judgment”),  whereby 
the  Constitutional  Petition  of  the  Appellant/Petitioner  was 
dismissed  and  he  was  refused  permission  to  be  buried  in 
graveyard  of  Defence  Housing  Authority  (the  “DHA”) 
alongwith his spouse after their death. 
2.  
Brief  facts  for  the  disposal  of  instant  appeal  are 
that  the  Appellant/Petitioner  alleges  to  be  resident/tenant  of 
House  No.  240,  Block-B,  DHA  Lahore  for  more  than  twenty-
four  (24)  years.  The  grievance  voiced  in  the  Constitution 
petition was that in the year 2002, when the DHA did not allow 
the  dead  body  of  a  friend  of  the  Appellant/Petitioner  to  be 
buried  in  the  DHA  Graveyard  on  the  ground  that  a  tenant 
cannot  be  permitted  to  be  buried  in  the  DHA  Graveyard,  the 
Appellant/Petitioner wrote a letter to the Vice Chairman of  the 
DHA  on  28.12.2002,  voicing  his  grievance  on  the  said  issue 
ICA No.689 /2011 
2 
and  also  sought  permission  for  his  burial  along  with  his  wife. 
However,  the  said  request  of  the  Appellant/Petitioner  was 
turned  down  on  18.3.2003  by  the  DHA.  Subsequently,  the 
Appellant/Petitioner again addressed a letter to the Respondent 
Authority on 27.3.2003 showing displeasure on rejection of his 
application, and the Appellant/Petitioner was constrained to file 
Constitutional  Petition  for  redressal  of  his  grievance  but  the 
same  was  dismissed  through  the  Impugned  Judgment.    Hence, 
this Intra Court Appeal. 
3.   Before dilating on the arguments raised and urged by the 
counsels  for  the  parties  at  length,  following  moot  points  are 
essential  for  consideration  and  determination  of  this  Division 
Bench, arising out of instant Intra Court Appeal: 
 
a.  Whether  any  place  owned/bought  by  an 
authority/society and allocated for specific purpose 
for  its  use  be  declared  as  waqf  and/or  public 
property in constitutional jurisdiction by the High 
Court? 
 
b.  Whether 
the  Respondent  Authority/DHA 
is 
authorized to regulate, manage and control its own 
affairs/land,  assigned  for  specific  purpose  in  the 
master plan? 
 
Since  both  the  issues  are  interlinked  and  connected,  therefore,  we  will 
deal them together.   
APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS: 
 
4.  
It  is  reflected  from  perusal  of  record  that  in  the 
W.P  No.  8300/2003,  the  Appellant/Petitioner  has  challenged 
the purported policy of the DHA/Respondent Authority to deny 
the  Appellant/Petitioner  and  his  spouse  to  be  buried  in  its 
graveyard  unless they  own  property  in the  said  Authority. The 
counsel  for  the  Appellant/Petitioner  has  contended  that  the 
restrictions 
imposed  by 
the  Respondent  Authority  are 
ICA No.689 /2011 
3 
unreasonable and unlawful, and the Impugned Order is against 
fundamental rights of the Appellant/Petitioner and the Shariah. 
5.  
The 
stance  of 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
Appellant/Petitioner is that once anyone has allocated land for a 
graveyard  and  used  it  as  such, this  amounts  to  consecration  or 
Waqf  of  a  property,  which  is  irrevocable  in  character  and  it 
transfers property forever into ownership of Almighty Allah for 
the  benefit  of  His  human  beings  and  thereafter,  the  said 
property cannot be used or considered personal property and no 
person  seeking  burial  can  be  denied  by  the  owner  of  the 
property.  The  counsel  for  the  Appellant/Petitioner  stated  that 
the  right  to  burial  is  an  easement  that  is  available  to  all 
occupants  including  tenants  who  do  not  own  property  in 
Respondent Authority. 
6.  
The  learned  counsel  for  the  Appellant/Petitioner 
further  submitted  that  graveyard  is  Waqf  in  Islamic  Law  and 
there  can  be  no  distinction  between  public  and  private 
graveyard  and  consequently  burial  of  the  Appellant/Petitioner 
or for anyone else in the graveyard of the Respondent Authority 
cannot  be  denied.  In  support  of  his  contentions  he  has  placed 
reliance  upon  the  cases  titled  Syed  Mohd.  Salie  Labbai 
(Dead)  by  L.  Rs.  And  others  v.  Mohd.  Hanifa  (Dead)  by 
Lr.  Rs.  And  others  (AIR  1976  SC  1569)  and  Noor 
Mohammad and another v. Ballabh Das and others (AIR 
1931 Oudh 293), to establish that there is no distinction in law 
between  a  “public”  graveyard  and  a  “graveyard”  simpliciter.  
The use of a piece of land as a graveyard establishes dedication 
and  the land thereby  becomes  waqf property. He  further  relied 
on Umar Din and others v. Mst. Aishan and others (AIR 1921 
Lahore  303),  and  Haji  Ghulam  Rasool  and  others.  V.  The 
Chief  Administrator  of  Auqaf,  West  Pakistan  (PLD  1971  SC 
376). 
ICA No.689 /2011 
4 
 
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS: 
7.   While  on  the  other  hand  learned  counsel  for  the 
Respondents  has  argued  that  graveyard  of  the  Respondent 
Authority  is  a  private  property  of  the  DHA  and  the  corpse  of 
the  Registered  persons,  their  spouses,  parents,  and  dependent 
children  can  be  buried  in  the  graveyards  managed  and 
maintained by the  Respondent Authority. He further submitted 
that the  Respondent Authority  is under  obligation  to safeguard 
the  rights/interests of  its  members/owners  which  have  paid the 
development of the facilities, which have vested rights and for 
whom the Respondent Authority was established. In the master 
planning,  specific  areas  were  allocated/reserved  for  specific 
purposes to provide places to fulfil the requirements of only the 
members/owners 
in 
the  Respondent  Authority,  and  no 
stranger/tenant  can  claim  a  right  to  be  buried  in  the  DHA 
because  it  is  not  a  waqf  property.  He  further  stated  that  the 
Appellant/Petitioner has alternatives for burial in vicinity of the 
Respondent Authority and no particular reference under Islamic 
law  or  Shariah  has  been  quoted  by  the  Appellant/Petitioner. 
Lastly, the counsel  for the Respondent argued that the DHA is 
already  facing  problems  to  meet  the  requirements  of  owner’s 
members of the DHA who has the vested right to be buried in 
the DHA. 
 
AMICUS CURIA’S SUBMISSIONS: 
8.  
In  order  to  resolve  the  above  said  controversy, 
assistance  of  Mr.  Mahmood  A.  Sheikh,  Advocate  Supreme 
Court was sought who was appointed as Amicus Curia to assist 
this Court.  He has entered appearance and contended that there 
are  private  and  public  Graveyards.  In  order  to  determine 
whether  a  graveyard  is  a  public  or  a  private  one,  it  may  be 
stated as follows: 
ICA No.689 /2011 
5 
i.  
ii.  
iii.  
“A  public  graveyard  by  immemorial  use  i.e.  where  the 
corpses  of  the  members  of  the  Mahomedan  community 
have  been  buried  in  a  particular  graveyard  for  a  large 
number  of  years  without  any  objection  from  the  owner. 
The  fact  that  the  owner  permits  such  burials  will  not 
make any difference at all. 
If the graveyard is a private or a family graveyard, then 
it  should  contain  the  graves  of  only  the  founder,  the 
members of his family or his descendants and no others. 
Once even in family graveyard members of the public are 
allowed to bury their dead, the private graveyard shed its 
character and becomes a public graveyard. 
In order to prove that a graveyard is public by dedication 
it  must  be  shown  by  multiplying  instances  of  the 
character,  nature  and  extent  of  the  burials  from  time  to 
time.    In other  words,  there should  be  evidence  to  show 
that  a  large  number  of  members  of  the  Mahomedan 
community had buried their corpses from time to time in 
the  graveyard.  Once  this  is  proved,  the  Court  will 
presume  that  the  graveyard  is  a  public  one;  and  that 
where  a  burial  ground  is  mentioned  as  a  public 
graveyard  in  either  a  revenue  or  historical  papers  that 
would be a conclusive proof to show the public character 
of the graveyard.” 
 
9.  
He  has  placed  reliance  on 
the  case 
titled 
Mohammad  Kasam  Abdul  Rehman  and  another  v.  Abdul 
Gafoor  Ahmedji  and  others  (AIR  1964  Madhya  Pradesh 
227),  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  “a  Kabarstan  cannot  be  a 
private  Kabarstan  unless  it  is  used  for  the  family  members 
exclusively.  Once  the  public  are  allowed  to  bury  their  dead  it 
ceases to be a private property. The evidence of the defendants 
even disclosed that the property was being used as a Kabarstan 
for  a  pretty  long  time.  There  was  no  discrimination  about  the 
user. It was being used by the predecessors of the defendants as 
well as by the public.  This will indicate that it was not a private 
Kabarstan.” 
 
DETERMINATION: 
10.  
In  order  to  resolve  the  controversy  and  to  deal  with  the 
issues  raised  in  paragraph  3,  we  are  of  the  view  that  before 
ICA No.689 /2011 
6 
discussion the submissions of the parties on the first issue that 
whether  any  place  owned/bought  by  an  Authority/Society  and 
allocated for specific purpose be declared as waqf and/or public 
property in the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court, it is 
essential to discuss the statutory and/or non statutory powers in 
the  form  of  Standard  Operating  Procedure/  Instructions/ 
Regulations  of  the  Respondent  Authority  qua  burial  in  the 
DHA. 
11.   Admittedly, 
the  Respondent  Authority  has  been 
established  under  Order  3  of  the  Defence  Housing  Authority 
Lahore  Order,  2002  (the  “2002  Order”)  by  the  Federal 
Government  for  carrying  out  the  purposes  of  the  2002  Order. 
The 2002  Order  further established the  Governing  Body  under 
Order  4(1),  consisting  of  Chairman,  Vice  Chairman,  and  other 
three  members,  and  an  Executive  Board  under  Order  4(2)  “to 
exercise  all  the  administrative,  executive  and  financial  powers 
and do all acts and things, which may be exercised or done by 
the  Authority  but  under  the  guidance  and  directions  on 
questions  of  policy  by  the  Governing  Body”.  Moreover,  the 
Executive  Board  is  bound  to  carry  out  the  instructions  of  the 
Governing Body issued from time to time.  
12.   Under Order 4(3) of the 2002 Order, the Executive Board 
consists  of  Corps  Commander  Lahore  Corps  as  its  President 
and  the  Administrator  of  the  Authority,  two  co-opted  resident 
civilian  members  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Authority  as 
members, and the Executive Board, under Order 7(2)(k)  of the 
2002 Order, is authorized “to do all such acts, deeds and things 
that  may  be  necessary  or  expedient  for  the  purpose  of  proper 
planning and development of the specified area.” Similarly, the 
Governing  Body  is  authorized  under  Order  22  of  the  2002 
Order, by notification in the official Gazette, to make Rules for 
carrying out  the  purposes  of  2002  Order. Further, under  Order 
23  of  the  2002  Order,  the  Executive  Board  is  authorized  to 
ICA No.689 /2011 
7 
make  regulations  and  rules  as  it  may  consider  necessary  or 
expedient for the administration and management of the affairs 
of the Respondent Authority. 
13.  
It is essential to highlight that the Respondent Authority, 
under  Order  13  of  the  2002  Order,  “may do all  such  acts and 
things as may be necessary for the planning and development of 
and for  providing  and regulating housing facilities in the area 
notified  by  the  authority.”  Similarly,  under  Order  24  of  the 
2002  Order,  the  provisions  of  2002  Order  have  effect 
notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in 
force. 
14.  
It  is  evident  from 
the  above  discussion  that 
the 
Respondent  Authority  is  a  nationally  recognized  corporate 
Organization,  and  is  authorized  in  its  independent  capacity  to 
do  all  such  acts  for  its  planning,  development  and  regulating 
housing facilities, either through Executive Board or Governing 
Authority as specified in 2002 Order. Therefore, the decision on 
the request of the Appellant/Petitioner to be buried in the DHA 
Lahore alongwith his wife, squarely falls within the domain of 
the  Respondent  Authority  because  the  specified  area  is  under 
the management and control of the Respondent Authority.  
15.   Generally,  the  Respondent  Authority  allocates  specific 
area,  so  notified,  for  use  of  residential  and  commercial 
purposes,  and  also  earmarks/reserves  area  to  provide  essential 
needs  to  the  residents  of  the  DHA,  consisting  of  parks, 
graveyards,  parking  areas  etc.  Since  the  management  and 
control of the specified area is with the  Respondent Authority, 
it  may  make  Rules,  Regulations  and  Policies,  as  specified  in 
Order  22  and  23  of  the  2002  Order,  to  manage  the  area  for 
better  allocation  of  its  resources  to  create  structural  harmony, 
privacy,  security  and  tranquility  for  the  residents,  who  have 
developed  vested  rights  through  ownership  of  any  plot  or 
building.  The  vested  rights  of  the  owners  of  the  Respondent 
ICA No.689 /2011 
8 
Authority  may  be  harmed,  encroached  and  restricted  if  the 
facilities are not properly managed, controlled or provided. 
16.   For this purpose, the Executive Board of the Respondent 
Authority has made Construction and Development Regulations 
2009  under  the  Order  23  read  with  the  Order  4  and  all  other 
enabling  provisions  of  the  2002  Ordinance  (the  “DHA 
Regulations”),  which  have  been  placed  on  record  by  the 
Respondent  Authority.  Regulation  53  of  the  DHA  Regulations 
is re-produced as follows: 
 
“53. GRAVEYARD  
 
a.  
b.  
The  Authority  shall  have  the  exclusive 
to  develop,  maintain,  protect, 
powers 
upgrade 
proper 
maintenance  and  administration  of 
the 
graveyard,  for  the  welfare  ad  facility  of  the 
resident Registered Persons only. 
undertake 
and 
to 
 
The  corpse  of  the  Registered  person,  their 
spouses, parents and dependent children can 
be  buried  in  the  graveyards  managed  and 
maintained  by  the  Authority  whereas  in 
exceptional  circumstances  the  corpse  of 
another  person  may  be  allowed  to  buried 
with  the  permission  of  the  President  DHA 
only.” 
 
17.   Further, 
the  DHA  Construction  &  Development 
Regulations,  2014  are  also  available  on  the  website  of  the 
Respondent  Authority  and  Regulation  56  and  57  of  the  ibid 
Regulations are reproduced herein below: 
 
“56. GRAVEYARD 
 
a.  
The  Authority  shall  have  the  exclusive 
powers  to  develop,  maintain,  protect,  up 
grade and to undertake proper maintenance 
and administration of the graveyards. 
 
ICA No.689 /2011 
9 
b.  
The  corpse  of  the  members,  their  spouses 
and  dependent  children  living  in  the  same 
house as per burial policy  can be  buried  in 
the graveyards managed and maintained by 
the Authority. 
   
57.   BURIAL  POLICY  ELIGIBILITY  FOR 
 
BURIAL 
 
Following  categories  of  deceased  are 
eligible for burial in DHA graveyard:- 
 
a.   Owner  of  a  plot  /  building  (residential  / 
commercial) and his / her spouse (s). 
 
b.  
Parents, mother & father and mother-in-law 
&  father-in-law  of  the  owner  of  plot  / 
building. 
 
c. 
 Dependent  children  of 
plot/building as under:- 
the  owner  of 
 
(1)  Sons  unmarried  and  dependents  of 
any age, living in the same house. 
(2)  Daughters  of  any  age  who  are 
dependent  being  unmarried  /  divorced 
or widow and living in same house.” 
 
18.   We have examined that both ibid Regulations shall apply 
to  the  residents  for  the  purpose  of  burial,  but  generally  both 
Regulations 
appear 
similar 
in 
the 
case 
of 
the 
Appellant/Petitioner, who is not deceased yet and is the alleged 
occupant/tenant  in  the  Respondent  Authority.  It  is  manifest  to 
note that no such lease/rent agreement and/or any document has 
been placed on record by the Appellant/Petitioner, enlisting the 
rights and obligations of the Appellant/Petitioner and it remains 
unclear  that  whether  the  Appellant/Petitioner  is  still  residing 
over  the  said  property  from  twenty-four  (24)  years  under  the 
terms of the tenancy agreement, if any. Further, no proof of rent 
being paid  by  the  Appellant/Petitioner  since  the  alleged period 
has  been  annexed  with  the  Constitutional  petition  or  this  Intra 
Court Appeal. 
ICA No.689 /2011 
10 
 
19.  
It  is  also  essential  to  note  that  while  dismissing  the 
application 
for  burial  of 
the  Appellant/Petitioner, 
the 
Respondent  Authority  has  duly  stated  that  the  matter  was 
considered  and  selected  for  discussion/deliberation  at  the 
highest levels. It follows logically that the policy and facility of 
the Respondent Authority in respect of burial of the deceased is 
for  the  parents,  spouse,  dependent  children  of  the  Registered 
Persons/members/owners  of  plot  or  building.  Since 
the 
Appellant/Petitioner  has  failed  to  establish  that  he  is  a 
registered person, member or owner of any plot/building in the 
Respondent Authority, therefore, we are constrained to overrule 
the Policy of the Respondent Authority to manage, control and 
maintain  the  specified  area,  and  to  preserve  graveyard  for  its 
members and owners. Even otherwise, if a different perspective 
is  to  be  taken  that  in  absence  of  any  bye-laws  of  the  DHA 
whether  restrictions  can  be  imposed  by  the  Respondent 
Authority  qua  the  burial  of  non-members  of  the  authority,  the 
applicability of bye laws and/or regulations for burial should be 
restricted  to  the  Regulations  or  Rules  which  are  prevailing  at 
the time of death of a person.  
20.   As  regard  to  the  submission  of  the  Appellant/Petitioner 
about  the  waqf  property  is  concerned,  it  is  to  be  noted  that 
‘graveyard’  has  been  defined  in  Stockton  v. Weber  (ILR  98 
Cal. 433), as a place for the interment of dead bodies. Further, 
the case titled Mst. Ulfat Butt v. Muhammad Arif and others 
(2000 YLR 2753 [Lahore]) and Lt. Col. (Retd.) Muhammad 
Abbas Malik v. Malik Zafar Ali (1999 YLR 1863 [Lahore]) 
establishes the principle that “where any piece of land was used 
for  a  graveyard  for  considerable  length  of  time,  creation  of 
Waqf and dedication could be validly presumed.” 
 
ICA No.689 /2011 
11 
21.   The case titled Chief Administrator Auqaf and others v. 
Diwan  Sheikh  Taj-Ud-Din  and  others  (PLD  2012  Supreme 
Court  897)  has  taken  into  account  the  definition  of  ‘waqf 
property’ as defined in Section 7 of the Punjab Waqf Properties 
Ordinance, 1979, which states as under: 
  
"Waqaf  Property  means  property  of  any  kind 
permanently  dedicated  by  a  person  professing 
Islam  for  any  purpose  recognized  by  Islam  as 
religious,  pious  or 
charitable,  but  does 
not include property of any Waqf such as is descri
bed in section 3 of the Musalman Waqf Validating 
Act, 1913 (VI of 1913), under which any benefit is 
for  the  time  being  claimable  for  himself  by  the 
person  by  whom  the  Waqf  was  created  or  any 
member or his family or descendants.” 
 
22.   Further,  in  the  case  titled  Muhammad  Ramzan  v.  The 
State  and  others  (2013  SCMR  737),  it  was  recognized  as 
under: 
Allah. 
“What imparts significance to this trust theory, in 
the context  of waqf property, is the fact that as in 
the case of legal sovereignty, so in the case of waqf 
property,  the  entire  body  politic,  that  is  the  State, 
becomes  a  trustee  and  it  is  the  State,  through  its 
State  functionaries,  that  has  to  discharge  the 
functions in regard to waqf properties on behalf of 
Almighty 
The Kazi is one of the State 
functionaries 
one of 
the persons in authority within the  meaning of the 
Holy  Quran  V.4:60.  The  reason  why  it  was  the 
Kazi  who  was  entrusted  with  the  function  of 
dealing  with  waqf  properties  was  that  function  is 
judicial  function  and  the  kazi  was,  therefore,  the 
most appropriate State functionary to be entrusted 
with its performance. Thus the Islamic Law seems 
to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  it  is  the  kazi  as 
delegate of Almighty Allah who has to perform the 
function of its carrying the waqf into execution and 
to deal with the waqf property". 
 
23.   On  general  principle,  only  the  person  in  whom  the 
ownership  of  the  property  vests  can  lawfully  deal  with  it.  The 
ICA No.689 /2011 
12 
status  of  the  property  could  be  determined  on  the  basis  and 
regulations of the officer  or  authority  charged  with the duty  to 
determine  the  question  of  status  of  property.  From  the  above 
arguments and the cited case law as well as from the perusal of 
the record, we cannot negate that the land in question shown to 
be  owned  by  Respondent  Authority  and  in  fact  was  purchased 
with the intention to use the same for the purpose of graveyard 
of the inhabitants and owner of specific land or building of the 
Respondent Authority.  
24.   However,  it is  pertinent  to note  that  even  if  we  consider 
the allocated land for graveyard of the Respondent Authority as 
waqf, it should be kept in mind that it does not create any right 
in  favour of public at  large  who  can  claim  to  be  buried  on the 
said  property.  It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  the  good  of 
resident/owners  of  plot  or  building  and vested rights  conferred 
on all persons who own any land or building in the Respondent 
Authority,  which  are  absolute,  and  are  granted  to  maintain 
public  order  because  the  Respondent  Authority  is  obliged  to 
itself  develop,  maintain  and  make  policies  regarding  public 
parks,  playing  fields  and  graveyards. The  property  was 
allocated  in  the  master  plan  of  the  DHA  for  specific  purpose 
and  the  waqf,  if  considered,  was  for  specific  purpose  to 
accommodate  the  needs  of  the  members  and  owners.  As  the 
easement  right  had  been  created  in  favour  of  owner  of  any 
building  or  land  in  the  Respondent  Authority  to  use  facilities 
for  the  general  convenience  of  the  inhabitants/owners  of  the 
plot  or  building  and  no  one  had  authority  to  take  away  such 
right  of  enjoyment  and  to  deprive  general  public  permanently 
from  convenience  except 
in  accordance  with 
law.  The 
Respondent  Authority  is  expected  to  act  in  the  interest  of  its 
members  by  providing  amenities  and  facilities  and  not  to  take 
away such rights by allowing everyone or public at large to be 
buried in its specified area. The rights and facilities available to 
ICA No.689 /2011 
13 
the members of the Respondent Authority are available against 
the whole world and could be described as a right against land 
itself. Even though if it is established that the land is a waqf, the 
purpose  for  which  it  was  created  and  allocated  cannot  be 
denied.  
25.   Further,  as  highlighted  above,  even  though  the  said 
graveyard  of  the  DHA  is  declared  as  waqf,  there  must  be 
persons  or  authority  responsible  to  administer  such  trust/waqf 
property, and in this case, it is a statutory authority which could 
manage it and make Policies for its use. Such private trust was 
established  for  benefit  of  members  and  their  families,  as 
highlighted  above,  and  such  objectives  must  be  achieved 
through  permissible  means  and  not  at  the  cost  of  giving  the 
public-at-large  right  to  be  buried.  The  Respondent  Authority 
has made Rules and Regulations to foster the cause of justice to 
the  members  and  they  should  not  hamper  it  unless  any  party 
was prejudiced by any violation of the same. Since the rights of 
the  Appellant/Petitioner  are  arising  out  of 
the 
tenancy 
agreement,  if  any,  which  has  not  been  produced  on  record,  it 
cannot  be  established 
that 
the  Appellant/Petitioner  paid 
anything  against  which  the  authority  is  liable  to  provide  him 
such services. Therefore, allowing such petition in favor of the 
Appellant/Petitioner  would  encroach  upon  the  rights  of  the 
members  of  the  DHA/Respondent  Authority  to  be  buried  in 
such graveyard.  
26.  
Even  otherwise,  this  Court  is  of  the  view  that  the 
learned Single Judge while passing the Impugned Judgment has 
rightly held which is as follows: 
“Considering from another angle, if the outsiders, 
including  tenants  putting up  in  DHA,  are  allowed 
to be buried in DHA Graveyard, it will be filled up 
within months and no place would be available for 
the permanent members of DHA to bury their kith 
and  kin  in  the  event  of  their  death.  At  the  cost  of 
repetition,  it is  observed that the  DHA  earmarked 
ICA No.689 /2011 
14 
certain  patch  out  of  the  land  it  has  acquired  by 
way  of  purchase  or  in  lieu  of  allotment  of 
developed  plots  to  the  original  owner  and  by  no 
stretch  of  imagination  it  is  held  that  the  said 
graveyard falls within the definition of Waqf.” 
 
27.  
From the perusal of above, it clearly manifests that 
the  DHA  Graveyard  is  property  owned  by  the  Authority. 
Further, the Authority has earmarked the said area for the burial 
of  dead  bodies  of  the  members  of  the  DHA  and  their 
dependents  which  have  paid  price  for  it  while  purchasing  the 
plot/property.  Thus, it cannot be said that the DHA Graveyard 
falls  within  the  definition  of  Waqf  as  according  to  different 
Fatwas,  a  property  owned  by  a  private  entity  and  specified  to 
provide  facilities  to  the  members  cannot  be  used  for  burial  of 
dead  bodies  of  public  at  large.    Learned  Single  Judge  has 
rightly  held  that  the  decision  taken  by  the  Governing  Body 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Defence, 
Govt.  of  Pakistan  as  well  by  the  Executive  Board  under  the 
auspices  of  Commander  Lahore  Corps  would  have  the  similar 
force as a that of bye-law.  Since the decision was taken by the 
Authority  after  approval  by  the  competent  authority,  it  cannot 
be  said  that  the  same  is  not  executable  being  unconstitutional. 
The  Executive  Board  of  the  Authority,  with  approval  of  the 
General Body, is competent to take all the decisions towards the 
provision  of  better  residential  facilities  to  the  members  of  the 
Authority and the restriction put on non-burial of a non-member 
in the DHA Graveyard was competently imposed by the DHA. 
Since the Appellant is non-resident, therefore, he has no vested 
right to be buried in the DHA Graveyard after his death as the 
same  is  owned  by  the  DHA  and  nobody  can  avail  benefit 
therefrom  except  with  the  permission  of  the  Respondent 
Authority. 
 
It 
is  also  essential 
to  note 
that 
the 
ICA No.689 /2011 
15 
Appellant/Petitioner  has  many  other  places  and  graveyard  for 
his burial along with his spouse after their death.  
28. 
Furthermore,  during  pendency  of  the  writ  petition 
the  Respondents  have  also  amended 
their  Bye-Laws 
(Construction Bye-Laws 2009) with the term that The corpse of 
the  Registered  person,  their  spouses,  parents  and  dependent 
children  can  be  buried  in  the  graveyards  managed  and 
maintained  by 
the  Authority  where  as 
in  exceptional 
circumstances the corpse of another person may be allowed to 
buried with the permission of the President DHA only. 
 
29. 
Hence, learned counsel for the Appellant/Petitioner 
has  failed  to  point  out  any  illegality  or  perversity  in  the 
impugned  judgment  which  otherwise  is  apt  and  calls  for  no 
interference.    The  instant  Intra  Court  Appeal  being  devoid  of 
any force is hereby dismissed. 
JUDGE                                                JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
  (JAWAD  HASSAN)                          
 
 
 
(AYESHA  A.  MALIK) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
JUDGE                                                JUDGE 
*M.NAVEED* 
 
