Stereo H C J D A 38. 
           Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, 
MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
         Criminal Appeal No.797-ATA of 2016 
Asim Nawaz alias Kaleem Nawaz. 
     Vs. 
The State & another.  
   
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing: 
18.12.2018 
Appellant by: 
Mr. Muhammad Maalik Khan Langha, Advocate. 
State by: 
 
  
             
Mr.  Ashfaq  Ahmad  Malik,  Deputy  District  Public 
Prosecutor with Mian Yaqub, ASI, CTD. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sadiq  Mahmud  Khurram,  J.-      The  appellant,  namely  Asim 
Nawaz alias Kaleem Nawaz , was tried by the learned Judge, Anti-Terrorism 
Court-I, Multan,  in  case  FIR No.88  of 2015 dated  06.11.2015 registered  at 
Police  Station  CTD  Multan,  in  respect  of  offences  under  sections  11-W(2) 
and  9  of  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997.  The  learned  trial  court  vide  judgment 
dated  20.09.2016  convicted  Asim  Nawaz  alias  Kaleem  Nawaz,  appellant, 
and sentenced him as infra:- 
i) 
Rigorous Imprisonment of 5 years and fine of Rs.20,000/- 
and  in  default  of  payment  of  fine  to  further  undergo 
Simple  Imprisonment  of  one  month  under  section  9  of 
Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997.  
 ii)   Rigorous Imprisonment of 5 years and fine of Rs.20,000/- 
and  in  default  of  payment  of  fine  to  further  undergo 
Simple  Imprisonment  of  one  month  under  section  11-
W(2) of Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997. 
Both  the  sentences  were  ordered  to  run  concurrently.  The 
benefit  available  under  Section  382-B  Cr.P.C.  was  also 
extended to the appellant.” 
2.  
Feeling  aggrieved,  Asim  Nawaz  alias  Kaleem  Nawaz 
(convict)  lodged  this  Criminal  Appeal  No.797-ATA  of  2016 
against his conviction and sentences.    
Crl. Appeal No.797-ATA/2016 
 
2 
3. 
The  prosecution  story,  as  unfolded  through  the  complaint  (Exh.PA) 
drafted  by  Muhammad  Yaqub,  ASI,  posted  at  CTD  Circle,  Mailsi  (PW-1), 
the complainant of the case ,  is as under:- 
is  notified 
“Stated  that  on  06.11.2015,  I  was  posited  at  CTD  Circle, 
Mailsi.  On  the  same  date,  I  came  to  know  through  reliable 
source that accused Muhammad Asim Nawaz @ Kaleem Nawaz 
S/O Muhammad Nawaz, Caste Arain, R/O Mohallah Islampura 
Jallah-Jeem  Mailsi  who 
schedule 
share/disseminates hatred material against Ahle Tashi through 
his  Facebook  I.D.  and  post  hatred  material  at  his  Facebook 
account.  On  this  information  I  went  to  Office  CTD  where 
through  Sajjad  Ahmad  135/C  computer  operator,  Muhammad 
Siddique  25/HC,  Muhammad  Siddique  1587/C  checked  the 
Facebook  I.D.  www.facebook.com/kaleemnawaz0304-5102879 
and    on  checking  the  hatred  material  was  found  which  the 
accused on different dates had disseminated. The material is as 
under:- 
in 4th 
“Solli Pe Latka Do Phansi Par Charha Do Zabane 
Khichwa Do Lakin Har Dil Ki Hi Sada Hogi Kafir 
Kafir  Shia  Kafir…..  Siddqiue  Ka  Dushamn  Kafir 
Ha,  Umer  Ka  Dusham  Kafir  Ha,  Usman  Ka 
Dushman  Kafir  Ha,  Ali  Ka  Dushamn  Kafir  Ha, 
Kafir Kafir Shia Kafir, Shia Kaynat Ka Badtareen, 
Ghaleeztareen  Kafir  Ha,  Kafir  Kafair  Shia  Kafir, 
Jo Na Mane Wo Bhi Kafir.” 
Apart  from  this  the  accused  posted  the  flag  of  banned 
organization on his I.D. and he also disseminated on his list of 
shares  that  Ghulam  Rasool  Shah  is  Shaheed  of  Namoos-e-
Sihaba, Usama  Bin Ladan the prince of Arab, Afghanistan Ka 
Bayabano  Main  and  Malik  Ishaq  Ameer  Ul  Mujahidin  is 
commander. The computer operator took the prints of the above 
stated  material  and  I  drafted  the  complaint  Ex.PA  against  the 
accused as he disseminated and spread hatred material through 
his Facebook I.D. and sent the same through Muhammad Sadiq 
492/C  to  Police  Station  CTD,  Multan  for  registration  of  case. 
The file of this case was entrusted to  Muhammad Anwar Khan 
Inspector  for  investigation.  I  verified  the  version  of  my 
complaint  before him who recorded the statement of witnesses 
and prepared recovery memo.” 
 
On  the  basis  of  the  complaint  (Exh.PA),  the  formal  FIR  (Exh.PA/1) 
 
was registered at Police Station CTD, Multan by Arsalan Ibrahim 789/CPL 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.797-ATA/2016 
 
3 
(PW-8).  Muhammad  Anwar,  Inspector  (PW-7)  conducted  the  investigation 
of the case. 
4. 
After having completed the usual formalities and investigation of the 
case,  the  police  submitted  report  under  Section  173  Cr.P.C.  against  the 
accused  before  the  learned  Court  of  competent  jurisdiction.  The  charges 
against the accused were framed by the learned trial court on 28.01.2016, to 
which the appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. 
5. 
The  prosecution  in  order  to  prove  the  facts  in  issue  of  the  case 
examined  as  many  as  eight  witnesses  before  the  learned  trial  court. 
Muhammad  Yaqub,  ASI,  (PW-1)  stated  as  mentioned  supra  in  paragraph 
No.3  of  the  judgment.  Muhammad  Siddique  25/HC  (PW-2)  stated  that  on 
6.11.2015, in his presence and that of  Muhammad Yaqub, ASI, (PW-1) and 
Muhammad  Siddique  1587/C  (given  up  PW),  Sajjad  Ahmad  135/C, 
Computer  Operator  (PW-4)  opened  the  Facebook  profile  of  the  appellant 
and printed 21 pages of hate material (Exh.P1 to Exh.P21) which were taken 
into  possession  through  recovery  memo  (Exh.PB).  Zahoor  Ahmad  209/C 
(PW-3)  stated  that  on  09.11.2015  Muhammad  Anwar  Inspector  (PW-7) 
arrested  the  appellant  in  his  presence  and  on  the  personal  search  of  the 
appellant, articles (Exh.P22 to Exh.P29), were taken into possession through 
recovery memo (Exh.PC). Sajjad Ahmad 135/C, Computer Operator (PW-4) 
supported the statement of Muhammad Siddique 25/HC (PW-2) and further 
submitted  that  on  26.11.2015  he  handed  over  the  mobile  data  comprising 
15 pages (Exh.P30/1-15) to Muhammad Anwar Inspector (PW-7) who took 
the same into possession vide recovery memo (Exh.PD). Muhammad Akram 
ASI  (PW-5)  stated  that  on  10.11.2015  Ghulam  Yasin,  ASI  (PW-6)  handed 
over  to  him  a  sealed  parcel  said  to  contain  a  mobile  phone  which  he 
deposited in the Office of Punjab Forensic Science Agency. Ghulam Yasin 
ASI (PW-6) stated that on 09.11.2015 Muhammad Anwar Inspector (PW-7) 
handed  over  to  him  a  sealed  parcel  for  safe  custody  and  the  said  sealed 
parcel  was  handed  over  to  Muhammad  Akram  ASI  (PW-5)  for  its  onward 
transmission.  As  already  mentioned,  Muhammad  Anwar  Inspector  (PW-7), 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.797-ATA/2016 
 
4 
investigated  the  case  and  detailed  the  facts  of  the  same  before  the  learned 
trial court.  
6. 
On  20.06.2016  learned  DDPP  gave  up  PWs  namely  Muhammad 
Sadiq  492/C2,  Muhammad  Ikram  592/C  and  Muhammad  Siddique  1587/C 
as  being  unnecessary  and  closed  the  prosecution  case  on  26.07.2016  after 
tendering  the  report  of  Computer  Analysis  Forensic  Report  (Exh.PH/1-4) 
alongwith  glossary  of  terms  used  in  the  said  report  (Exh.PJ-1/8),  list  of 
banned  organization  (Exh.PK/1-2),  personal  bond  of  convict  (Exh.PM), 
surety bond (Exh.PN) and another surety bond (Exh.PN/1).  
7. 
The appellant was examined in terms of section 342 Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 and in reply to the question “why this case against you and 
why the PWs have deposed against you?”, the appellant claimed that he had 
been  falsely  involved  in  this  case  and  the  police  had  involved  him  in  the 
case just to show their efficiency though he did not belong to any proscribed 
organization.  
8. 
Neither  the  appellant  opted  to  get  himself  examined  under  section 
340(2) Cr.P.C. nor adduced any evidence in his defence. On the conclusion 
of the trial, the learned Judge Anti-Terrorism Court-I, Multan convicted and 
sentenced the appellant as referred to above.   
9. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submitted  that  the  prosecution  has 
failed  miserably  to  prove  the  case  against  the  appellant.  Learned  counsel 
further argued that there were glaring contradictions in the statements of the 
witnesses hitting at the very basis of the prosecution case. Learned counsel 
also  stated  that  nothing  was  recovered  from  the  appellant  however  after 
these  arguments  the  learned  counsel  has  conceded  to  the  fact  that  the 
conviction  is  correct,  and  he  pleads  for  the  reduction  in  sentence  of  the 
appellant.  
10.  On  the  other  hand  learned  Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor 
appearing  on  behalf  of  the  State  submitted  that  the  prosecution  has  proved 
the  charge  by  producing  admissible  and  relevant  evidence.  He  further 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.797-ATA/2016 
 
5 
submitted that all the witnesses have corroborated each other. With respect 
to  the  submission  of  the  learned  counsel  of  the  appellant  regarding  the 
reduction  of  sentence,  learned  Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor  has  not 
seriously challenged the same.  Lastly, he prayed for the rejection of appeal.  
11.  We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  and  learned 
Deputy District Public Prosecutor and with their assistance carefully perused 
the record and evidence recorded during the trial.  
12. 
In  order  to  prove  the  facts  in  issue  the  prosecution  produced  eight 
witnesses,  however,  the  statements  of  Muhammad  Yaqub,  ASI  (PW-1), 
Muhammad Siddique, 25/HC (PW-2) and Sajjad Hussain 135/C (PW-4) are 
of importance as they established the charges  leveled against the appellant. 
The perusal of the said statements reveals that the appellant had posted hate 
material 
inciting 
sectarian  hatred.  We  have  also  perused 
the 
cross-examination  conducted  upon  the  said  witnesses  and  have  found  that 
during  the  said  cross-examination  the  actual  existence  of  the  Facebook 
profile,  in  the  name  of  the  appellant,  was  not  challenged,  however,  it  was 
suggested that he had not posted any hate material inciting sectarian hatred. 
Furthermore, when the appellant was arrested on 09.11.2015 by Muhammad 
Anwar  Inspector  (PW-7)  a  mobile  phone  (Exh.P22)  as  well  as  two  SIMs 
(Exh.P23/1-2),  memory  card  (Exh.P24)  and  an  USB  (Exh.P26)  were 
recovered  alongwith  other  articles,  which  were  taken  into  possession 
through  recovery  memo  (Exh.PC)  and  the  same  were  sent  to  the  Punjab 
Forensic Science Agency, Lahore for forensic analysis. Upon the perusal of 
the  report  of  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency,  Lahore,  (Exh.PH/1),  it  is 
revealed  that  audio  files,  graphic  files,  multimedia  files,  video  recording, 
text  messages  and  details  of  250  contacts  were  identified  following  the 
forensic analysis  of  the  articles  recovered  from  the  appellant  at  the time  of 
his arrest. The detail of the audio file, graphic files and multimedia files was 
provided in the accompanying DVD-I, DVD-II and DVD-III by the Punjab 
Forensic  Science  Agency,  Lahore.  During  cross-examination,  Muhammad 
Anwar  Inspector  (PW-7)  revealed  that  he  had  also  received  the  Verisys 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.797-ATA/2016 
 
6 
verification  regarding  the  ownership  of  the  SIM  card,  recovered  from  the 
mobile  phone  (Exh.P22),  as  being  in  the  name  of  the  appellant.  The 
prosecution  witnesses  have  given  each  and  every  detail  of  the  prosecution 
case and were cross examined at length. Nothing fruitful cropped up during 
the said cross examination. The tenor of cross-examination also reveals that 
the facts in issue were not being challenged seriously. Learned trial court has 
rightly appreciated the evidence and has rightly found the appellant guilty of 
the charge leveled against him.  
13. 
In  view  of  the  material  available  on  the  record  we  are  of  the 
considered  view  that  the  prosecution  has  successfully  proved  this  case 
beyond shadow of doubt by producing relevant and admissible evidence. We 
are,  however,  of  the  considered  view  that  in  this  particular  case  there  are 
some special features relevant to  determining the quantum of sentence. We 
have observed that the appellant is a middle aged man and that this was his 
first conviction. We have also noticed that the appellant suffered the rigours 
of trial. We have also observed that it seems likely that the appellant would 
have mended his conduct in these years. Learned counsel for the appellant, 
on  appellant’s  instructions,  has  earnestly  and  humbly  prayed  that  the 
appellant  may  be  given a   chance to  rehabilitate himself. The said requests 
seems  genuine  as  it  is  a  fact  that  while  being  on  bail,  during  the  trial,  the 
appellant did not repeat any such offences. There are the five philosophies of 
sentencing  .The  first  one  is  retribution  and  the  purpose  is  to  emphasize 
taking revenge on a criminal, perpetrator or offenders. The next philosophy 
is  incapacitation  which  means  a  way  to  reduce  the  chances  of  an  offender 
committing  another  crime.  Then  is  the  deterrence  in  which  a  criminal  is 
made  to  fear  going  back  to  jail  or  prison.  Rehabilitation  is  also  another 
philosophy  of  sentencing  by  which  an  effort  is  made  to  reform  and 
rehabilitate  a  criminal,  such  as  trying  to  give  him  a  second  chance. 
Reparation is the last of the five philosophies of sentencing in which effort is 
made  to  repay  victim(s).    Indeterminate  sentencing  means  that  criminal 
punishment  that  promotes  rehabilitation  through  the  use  of  unspecific 
sentences.  Both 
the  offences  under  sections  11  W(2)  and  9  of 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.797-ATA/2016 
 
7 
Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997  are  punishable  with  imprisonment  which  may 
extend  to  five  years.  The  very  intention  of  the  Legislature  for  providing 
indeterminate sentencing, by using the words “may extend to” in both of the 
sections  11  W(2)  and  9  of  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997,  was  that  it  would 
provide for rehabilitation of a convict. Such provision of law providing for 
the  unspecific  sentences  is  indicative  that  the  Courts  have  to  appreciate 
circumstances indicative of reformation of a convict before deciding about the 
quantum of sentence. A reformed convict will not only be a better person for 
society but may also be helpful for his dependents. The plea of reduction in 
sentence,  however,  shall  not  be  available  to  hardened  and  desperate 
criminals.  The  enormous  increase  in  prison  populations  has  led  to  severe 
prison  overcrowding  .Rehabilitation  addresses  the  problem  of  prison 
overcrowding.  The  Islamic  theory  of  punishment  derives  from  the  Holy 
Quran and the Hadith. On the whole, the Holy Quran has about 200 verses 
dealing with the legal issues. The main goal of Islamic Penology is to secure 
human welfare, maintain peace and to establish a righteous society. It is very 
clearly enunciated in the Holy Quran that Allah has sent His messengers and 
the  Holy  Quran,  so  that  men  can  establish  justice.  It  is  categorically 
expressed as: “God commands justice, righteousness, and spending on ones 
relatives,  and  prohibits  licentiousness,  wrongdoing,  and  injustice…”  The 
discretionary punishments are flexible enough to take into account the needs 
of individual and society and also to realize the maximum general benefit to 
society  and  the  reformation  possibilities  of  the  criminal.  Starting  from 
exhortations  and  reprimands  to  flogging,  to  fines,  and  to  imprisonment, 
Islamic Law has defined different types of discretionary punishments some 
of which are: 
a) Admonition (Al-Waz) 
b) Reprimand ( Al-Tawbikh) 
c) Threat (Al-Tahdid) 
d) Boycott (Al-Hajr) 
e) Public Disclosure (AlTashhir) 
f) Fines and seizure (AlGharamah walMusadarah) 
g) Imprisonment (Al-Habs) 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.797-ATA/2016 
 
8 
h) Banishment (Al-Nafy)  
The Criminal Justice Act, 2003 (2003 c.44)  is an Act of the Parliament of 
the United Kingdom which received Royal assent on 20th  November 2003. 
Section  142  of  the  Criminal  Justice  Act  2003  sets  out  five  purposes  of 
sentencing,  to  which  any  court  dealing  with  an  offender  must  have  regard. 
Section 142 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 reads as under: 
“ Purposes of sentencing 
(1)  Any court dealing with an offender in respect of his offence must 
have regard to the following purposes of sentencing— 
(a) 
the punishment of offenders, 
(b) 
the reduction of crime (including its reduction by deterrence), 
(c) 
the reform and rehabilitation of offenders, 
(d) 
the protection of the public, and 
(e) 
the  making  of  reparation  by  offenders  to  persons  affected  by  their 
offences.” 
This is  not intended to  be  a  hierarchical  order.  The  Sentencing  Council for  
England  and  Wales,  created  by  Coroners  and  Justice  Act  2009,  has  stated 
that “the Criminal Justice Act 2003 does not indicate that any one purpose 
should be treated as more or less important than another. In an individual 
case, any or all of the purposes may be relevant to a certain degree and it 
will  be  for  the  judge  or  magistrate  to  decide  how  they  apply.”  Hence  the 
ultimate  goal  of  rehabilitation  is  to  restore  a  convicted  offender  to  a 
constructive  place  in  society  through  some  combination  of  treatment, 
education, and training. The terminus a quo of these ideas in the WEST are 
the  influential  writings  of  H.L.A.  Hart  (1959)  in  England  and  John  Rawls 
(1955) in the United States. The August Supreme Court of Pakistan has also 
observed    in  the  case  of  Niaz-ud-Din  v.  The  State  (2007  SCMR  206)  at 
page 209 as under:- 
“However,  coming  to  the  question  of  sentence  we  note  that  it 
has  been  conceded  by  learned  A.A.G.  that  petitioner  is  a 
previous  non-convict  and  there  is  no  other  instance  of 
petitioner’s  involvement  in drug   trafficking.  It has also been 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.797-ATA/2016 
 
9 
 brought  in  evidence  that  at  the  time  of  this  arrest  he  met 
custodial  violence  and  on  that  account  he  received  injuries. 
Perhaps  those  who  arrested  him  wanted  to  extract  confession 
for his alleged involvement with some other narcotic dealer. In 
these circumstances petitioner needs to be given a chance in his 
life to rehabilitate himself.” 
 
Hence,  being  guided  by  the  case  of  Niaz-ud-Din  v.  The  State  (supra),  we, 
while  maintaining  the  conviction  of  the  appellant  but  taking 
into 
consideration  the  above  mentioned  mitigating  circumstances,  reduce  the  
sentence  of  rigorous  imprisonment  of  5  years,  passed  under  section  9  of 
Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997,  to  that  of  already  undergone.  However,  the 
sentence of fine of Rs.20,000/- shall remain intact but we reduce the period 
the appellant has to undergo in case of default of payment of fine from  one 
month to ten days simple imprisonment. We are also reducing the sentence 
of  rigorous  imprisonment  of  5  years,  passed  under  section  11-W(2)  of 
Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997,  to  that  of  already  undergone.  However,  the 
sentence of fine of Rs.20,000/- shall remain intact but we reduce the period 
the appellant has to undergo in case of default of payment of fine from one 
month to ten days simple imprisonment. Therefore we while maintaining the 
conviction  of  the  appellant  recorded  by  the  learned  Judge  Anti-Terrorism 
Court-I, Multan vide judgment dated 20.09.2016, dismiss the instant appeal 
with the above modification of the sentence. 
Saleem  
 
 
 
     
   Judge 
                        Judge 
(Mujahid Mustaqeem Ahmed)       (Sadiq Mahmud Khurram) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
(Sadiq Mahmud Khurram) 
 
      Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
