     Form No. HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
                                                             LAHORE 
 
 
 
Sr. No. of 
Orders/ 
Proceeding 
 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Case No.   Crl. Misc. No.133760-B/2018 
Muhammad Sajjad Qamar. Versus    The State etc.  
     
 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties of counsel, where necessary. 
Date of 
order/ 
Proceeding 
 
28.02.2018.  
Mr. Asghar Ali Gill, Advocate for the Petitioner. 
 
 
Mr.  Humayoun  Aslam  D.P.G    and  Naeem  ASI  with 
record. 
Mr. Zafar Zulqarnain Sahi, Advocate for complainant.   
 
Muhammad Sajjad Qamar petitioner seeks post 
arrest  bail  in  a  case  registered  against  him  vide  FIR 
No.100/2013  dated  25.03.2013  offences  under 
sections  302,  148  &  149,  PPC  at  police  station 
Balochni District Faisalabad.  
2. 
Precise  allegation  against  the  petitioner  as 
narrated  by  the  complainant  in  the  FIR  was  that  
Sajjad  Qamar  petitioner    who  was  allegedly  armed 
with Kalashnikov inflicted  burst of Kalashnikov    on 
the  person  of  Muhammad  Naveed  which  landed  on  
the back side of his head, left forearm and on his right 
hand who succumbed to the injures at the spot.  
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contended 
that petitioner  left  Pakistan on 10.03.2013    and  came 
back  to  Pakistan  on  01.07.2014  whereas  alleged 
occurrence  took  place  on  25.03.2013,  therefore,  the 
petitioner  was  abroad  when    the  alleged  occurrence 
took place; that  during investigation  police accepted 
the  plea  of  alibi  of  the  petitioner  therefore    he  was 
declared  innocent  by  the  police;  that  Kalashnikov 
allegedly  used  by  the  petitioner  at  the  time  of 
                           Crl. Misc. No.133760-B/2018   
 
2 
occurrence  was  not  recovered  from  his  possession; 
that petitioner is not connected with the motive part of 
the  prosecution  story.    Thus,  it  is  submitted  that  by 
accepting  instant  petition,  petitioner  is  entitled  to  be 
released on bail.  
4. 
Learned  counsel  for 
the  complainant  and 
learned  DPG  have  vehemently  opposed  this  petition 
on the grounds that petitioner is nominated in the FIR; 
that  there  was  specific  allegation  against  him  that  he 
was  armed  with  Kalashnikov    and  inflicted  firearm 
injuries  on 
the  person  of  Muhammad  Naveed 
deceased  which  landed  on  the  back  side  of  his  head, 
left forearm and on his right hand who succumbed to 
the  injuries  at  the  spot;  that  the  ocular  account 
furnished by the prosecution finds corroboration  from 
the  postmortem  examination  of  Muhammad  Naveed 
deceased;  that  petitioner  has  been  declared  innocent 
by the police simply on the basis of plea of alibi taken 
by him before the police ; that petitioner is not entitled 
to  be  released  on  bail  on  the  basis  of  plea  of  alibi 
accepted  by  the  police  during  investigation,  rather, 
learned  trial  court  is  competent  to  decide  the  same 
after recording the prosecution’s evidence. Thus,   it is 
submitted 
that 
instant  petition 
is 
liable 
to  be 
dismissed.  
5. 
I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  learned  counsel 
for  the  parties,  learned  DPG  and  perused  the  record 
with care.  
6. 
It has been noticed that petitioner is nominated 
in  the  FIR.  There  was  specific  allegation  against  the 
petitioner  that  he  was  armed  with  Kalashnikov  and 
inflicted    burst  of  Kalashnikov  on  the  person  of 
Muhammad Naveed which landed on  the back side of 
                           Crl. Misc. No.133760-B/2018   
 
3 
his  head, 
left  forearm  and  on  his  right  hand 
Postmortem  examination  on 
the  dead  body  of 
Muhammad  Naveed  deceased  was  conducted  by    the 
doctor who observed firearm injuries  on his head, left 
shoulder  and  on  his  right  hand,  therefore,  ocular 
account  furnished  by 
the  prosecution  qua 
the 
allegation  against  the  petitioner  finds  corroboration 
from 
the  postmortem 
examination 
report  of 
Muhammad  Naveed  deceased.  During  investigation, 
petitioner was  declared innocent by the police simply 
on the basis of Travelling History of the petitioner and 
according  to  the  findings  of  I.O  the  petitioner  was 
abroad  when  the  alleged  occurrence  took  place.  
While  forming  aforesaid  opinion,  police  did  not 
record the statement of the concerned officials  of the 
Emigration  Department  from  where  the  petitioner 
made  departure  from  Pakistan  and  thereafter  came 
back to Pakistan. During investigation the I.O neither 
took into possession the passport of the petitioner  nor 
boarding  Pass  of  the  concerned  Airports    in  order  to 
confirm  the  Travelling  History  of  the  petitioner.    No 
evidence is available on record    that I.O verified the 
travelling tickets of the  petitioner  from the concerned 
officials.  No  material  was  collected  from  CCTV 
Cameras  by  the  I.O  in  order  to  establish  that  on 
10.03.2013    the  petitioner  made  departure  from 
Pakistan  and  came  back  to  Pakistan  on  01.07.2014. 
Mere  opinion  of  the  police  without  collecting    any 
cogent evidence  cannot be taken into consideration at 
the  time  of  disposal  of  bail  petition,  therefore,  the 
petitioner  is  not  entitled  to  the  concession  of  bail  on 
the basis of plea of alibi accepted by the police during 
investigation,  rather,  only  learned  trial  court  is 
competent  to  decide  the  same  after  recording  the 
                           Crl. Misc. No.133760-B/2018   
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       *Shafique* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evidence of the parties. The petitioner was arrested in 
this  case  on  19.09.2017  and  he  remained  absconder 
for  a  period  of  more  than  four  years.    The  offence 
alleged  against  the  petitioner  comes  within  the 
purview  of  prohibitory  clause  of  section  497  Cr.P.C.  
Prima  facie  sufficient 
incriminating  material 
is 
available on record connecting the petitioner with the 
commission of instant occurrence. 
7. 
For  what  has  been  discussed,  above  instant 
petition having no force stands dismissed.  
 (Sardar Muhammad Shamim Khan) 
         Judge 
   
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           Crl. Misc. No.133760-B/2018   
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
                           Crl. Misc. No.133760-B/2018   
 
6 
Perusal  of  record  reveals  that  petitioner  had  applied 
his pre-arrest bail before the learned trial Court but he 
failed  to  appear  before  the  said  Court  and  his  pre-
arrest  bail  was  dismissed.  After  that  he  applied  his 
pre-arrest bail for the second time but again he did not 
appear before the learned trial Court and his pre-arrest 
bail was dismissed.  
3. 
In  view  of  aforementioned  situation 
this 
petition  is  not  maintainable  before  this  Court  and 
stands dismissed in limine.  
 
 (Sardar Muhammad Shamim Khan) 
         Judge 
 
                       *Shafiq* 
 
 
