	
Form No.HCJD/C-121 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURTLAHORE 
ORDER SHEET 
1	
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
Crl.Misc.No.190071-B/2018 
MUHAMMAD KHALID, ETC. 
THE STATE, ETC. 
VS 
 
 
Sr. No. of order/ 
proceedings 
Date of order/ 
proceedings 
04.07.2018 
 
 
 
 
Order with Signature of Judge, and that of  
parties of counsel, where necessary. 
Ch. Muhammad Ali, Advocate with petitioners. 
Ch.  Anwaar  ul  Haq  Pannu  and  Nosheen  Ambar, 
Advocates for the complainant. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Amjad  Rafiq,  Additional  Advocate 
General and Usman Iqbal, Deputy Prosecutor General. 
Mr. Muhammad Hammad Khan Rai, Assistant Advocate 
General,  Barrister  Haaris  Ramzan,  LegalAdvisor 
, 
Primary  &  Secondary  Health  Care  Department  and 
Muhammad Hussain Sub-Inspector. 
Petitioners(Muhammad  Khalid,  Shafaqat  Hussain  and 
Muhammad Iftikhar) seek pre-arrest bail in case FIR No.138/2018 dated 
20.02.2018under sections 337-A(i), 337-(iii), 337-L(ii) PPC registered at 
police station Saddar Gujranwala. 
This petition to the extent of Shafaqat Hussain (petitioner No.2) 
2. 
has already been dismissed due to non-prosecution vide order dated 
21.05.2018.It  has  been  observed  that  Shafqat  Hussain  (petitioner  No.2) 
had also filed a separate pre-arrest bail application (Crl.Misc.No.220756-
B/2018) in the same case, and the same has also been dismissed vide a 
separate order of even date on the ground of misuse of concession. 
3. 
As regards, Muhammad Khalid, he has been assigned a joint role 
along with Iftikhar Ahmad, Shafaqat Hussain, Ahmad and three unknown 
assailants that they entered the house of the complainant while carrying 
DANDAs,  hurled  abuses,  extended  threats,  maltreated  Mst.  Samina  Bibi 
and Fatima Bibi, all the accused inflicted fist, kick and Danda blows to 
Mst. Samina and dragged her outside the house. As shall be seen from the 
allegations  leveled  in  the  FIR  the  petitioner  along  with  co-accused  has 
been attributed general role without any specific injury by the petitioner to 
the victim. Previous family and civil litigation between the parties exists. 
	
2	
Shafaqat Hussain co-accused of the petitioner is stated to be 50% owner 
of the disputed house and his wife is living therein, whereas, applicability 
of offence under section 452 PPC will be seen at the trial after recording 
of evidence. As cumulative effect of above, considering the background 
of hostility between the parties, in the light of case“MEERAN	BUX	versus	
THE	 STATE	 and	 another”	 (PLD	 1989	 SC	 347),possibility  of  petitioner’s 
false  implication  in  this  case  as  a  result  of  widening  the  net  cannot  be 
ruled  out.  Consequently,this  application  to  the  extent  of  Muhammad 
Khalid  (petitioners  No.1)  is  allowed,  interim  pre-arrest  bail  granted 
to  him  is  hereby  confirmed  subject  to furnishing  fresh  bail  bond  in 
the  sum  of  Rs.100,000/-  with  one  surety  in  the  like  amount  to  the 
satisfaction of learned trial court. 
Coming to the case of Muhammad Iftikhar (petitioner No.3), he is 
5. 
nominated in the FIR with a specific and distinguishable role of inflicting 
fist  blow  on  the  nose  of  Mst.  Samina  Bibi,  injured  daughter  of  the 
complainant.  The  role  ascribed  to  Muhammad  Iftikhar  (petitioner  No.3) 
attracts  Section  337-A(iii)  PPC,  the  same  is  supported  by  the  ocular 
account  and  corroborated  by  medical  evidence.  Therefore,  I  see  no 
justifiable  reason  to  the  grant  of  extra  ordinary  concession  of  pre-arrest 
to  him.  Consequently,  bail  application  to  the  extent  of 
bail 
Muhammad Iftikhar (petitioner No.3) is dismissed. 
4. 
During  the  course  of  hearing,  one  of  the  ground  agitated  for 
confirmation of pre-arrest bail was that on a move by the petitioners, the 
Ilaqa  Magistrate  had  order  constitution  of  District  Standing  Medical 
Board,  where  the  complainant/injured  did  not  appear,  therefore,  an 
inference against the injured had to be drawn and benefit thereof must be 
extended  to  the  petitioners.  It  has  been  observed  that  even  prior  to  this 
case, in so many petitions grievances were raised by the respective parties 
that  although  on  their  move  District  Standing  Medical  Board  was 
constituted but the injured were not informed about it and in some cases 
even the police officials admitted that they had not informed the injures 
about formation of the District Standing Medical Board or about the date 
fixed by the said board for reexamination. In order to settle this situation 
	
3	
the AIG (Legal) was summoned, who submitted his detailed report with 
reference to SOP, a copy whereof is tagged below:- 
 
As  in  the  process  of  reexamination  of  the  injured  two  departments  i.e. 
police and the health wing are involved and from the above reproduced 
 
	
4	
SOP it appeared that some more clarification was also required, therefore, 
this  court  directed  the  Secretary  Health  and  AIG  (Legal)  to  collectively 
arrange  a  meeting  with  law  officers  of  this  court,  who  had  firsthand 
knowledge of the difficulties faced to this court in such like matters and 
then draw a uniform and comprehensive strategy to remove such practical 
problems.  Consequent  upon  court  orders,  a  meeting  was  held  and 
ultimately  a  notification  (SOPs  for  medicolegal  cases)  has  been  drafted 
and presented to this court, as tagged below:- 
 
 
	
5	
5.  MLC is an evidence which is collected by the I.O during course of 
investigation as under section 156 Cr.P.C the Ilaqa Magistrate can direct 
for investigation in a case, as investigation includes collection of evidence 
for the purposes of digging out truthfulness or falsehood of the allegations 
for commission of an offence, he can exercise this power for passing an 
order for reexamination of an injured through District Standing Medical 
Board  (hereinafter  shall  be  read  as  DSMB)  or  the  Appellate  Board 
(hereinafter  shall  be  read  as  Board).  However,  the  Magistrate  shall  not 
pass  an  order  blindfolded,  rather  shall  apply  his  judicious  mind  to  the 
facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case.  It  appears  that  for  the  same  reason 
vide  three  tire  policy  notifications,  the  Government  Punjab,  Health 
Department, desired the Magistrate to pass an order on the application of 
an aggrieved person. 
6. 
On perusal of the above referred notification, it has been observed 
by this court that different clauses thereof may not have binding impact on 
the  other  relevant  department/forum,  as  such,  in  order  to  tackle  this 
situation, it is suggested that following comprehensive measures shall be 
included in the notification so as public it in a compact form:- 
ILAQA MAGISTRATE: 
i) 
Application  for  the  purposes  of  reexamination  by 
DSMB  or  examination  through  Board  against  the 
decision  of  the  DSMB  shall  be  filed  before  the 
Magistrate by the aggrieved party; 
ii)  After  receiving  the  application  the  Magistrate  will 
issue  notice  to  the  injured/complainant  (as  the  case 
may  be)  and  the  Investigating  Officer  for  their 
appearance; 
iii)  The Magistrate shall not ordinarily adjourn the matter 
for more than one day; 
iv)  The Magistrate shall pass the order after securing the 
attendance  of 
the 
Investigating Officer. If after service the injured or the 
complainant  do  not  appear  he  may  proceed  in  their 
absence; 
injured/complainant  and 
the 
v) 
If  the  Magistrate  passes  an  order  for  reexamination 
through DSMB or the appellate board, he will provide 
three  days’  time  to  the  applicant  for  depositing  the 
relevant 
this  purpose  as  notified  by 
fee 
for 
	
6	
Government  of  Punjab,  Health  Department  and  he 
shall  further  clarify  in  the  order  that  if  the  fee  is  not 
deposited  within  stipulated  period,  the  order  shall  be 
deemed to have been recalled; 
vi)  The Magistrate through the Investigating Officer shall 
get information about future dates when DSMB or the 
appellate  Board  is  to  assemble  and  shall  direct  the 
injured/IO or any other concerned to appear before the 
DSMN/Board  on  the  said  date.  (According  to  the 
prevailing  practice  the  DSMB  assemble  on  first  and 
last Wednesday of every month); 
vii)  Copy of the order for reexamination through DSMB or 
the Board be sent to the DSMB and the Board as the 
case may be ; 
viii)  Copy  of  the  order  be  also  sent  to  DPO  and  S.P 
(Investigation) concerned for compliance. 
 
DISTRICT STANDING MEDICAL BOARD/ 
APPELLATE BOARD. 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
the  Magistrate  for 
After  receiving  order  of 
reexamination of the injured, DSMB or the Board 
shall  examine  the  injured  on  the  date  so  fixed  by 
the Magistrate; 
If  for  any  justifiable  reason  beyond  the  control  of 
DSMB/Board the injured could not be examined on 
the date fixed, DSMB or the Board shall inform all 
concerned  about  the  next  date  to  be  fixed  and 
intimation shall be communicated to the Magistrate 
as well as DPO well in time; 
If  on  the  date  fixed,  without  any  justifiable 
explanation, the injured does not appear despite his 
service, the DSMB/Board may proceed against him 
and may close the proceedings; 
If any justifiable reason is put-forth by the injured 
the one more opportunity may be provided to him; 
If  service  on  the  injured  is  not  effected  by  the 
I.O/SHO then DSMB/Board shall bring this aspect 
to  the  notice  of  the  Magistrate/DPO  who  shall 
inquire  into  the  matter,  fix  responsibility  and 
proceed  against  the  delinquent  on  departmental 
side,  as  well  as  if  the  act  is  covered  under  any 
cognizable offence then may direct for registration 
of  criminal  case  and  report  in  this  respect  by  the 
DPO shall be sent to the DSMN/Board/Magistrate 
concerned; 
	
vi) 
vii) 
7	
If  the  relevant  doctor  who  had  conducted  first 
examination  of  the  injured  does  not  appear  before 
the  DSMB/Board  along  with  record  without  any 
justification then his matter shall be referred to the 
Secretary Health for inquiry and if found negligent 
he  will  be  proceeded  against  under  the  relevant 
laws; 
If  proceedings  before 
the  DSMB/Board  are 
completed  they  shall  inform  the  Ilaqa  Magistrate 
and  DPO  in  writing  and  copy  of  the  report  be 
issued  to  the  Investigation  Officer,  attested  copy 
whereof  shall  also  be  sent  to  the  Ilaqa  Magistrate 
concerned. 
POLICE. 
i)  When  an  order  for  reexamination  of  the  injured 
through  DSMB/Board  is  received  in  the  office  of 
DPO,  he  shall  immediately  direct  the  concerned 
officials for its compliance; 
ii) 
The DPO shall depute one focal person for keeping 
the  computerized  record  about  the  orders  received 
for reexamination of the injured through DSMB or 
the Board; 
iii)  The  focal  person  shall  ensure  compliance  of  the 
orders and complete record in this respect shall be 
maintained and report of service shall be conveyed 
to  the  Magistrate/DSMB/Board  before  or  on  the 
date fixed for reexamination; 
iv)  The  DPO  shall  ensure  that  the  orders  of  the 
Magistrate  shall  not  only  be  communicated  to  the 
injured, rather the same shall also be complied with 
by presence of the injured before the Board, as well 
as production of the record of police; 
v) 
In case the injured is not served by the SHO/IO, the 
SHO/IO,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall  convey  the 
report to the DPO, who shall verify the genuineness 
of the reasons advanced therein and if not satisfied 
with  it  he  shall  adopt  legal  measures  against  the 
delinquent  officials  and  shall  further  adopt  legal 
measures to ensure service on the injured; 
7. 
The  Registrar  of  this  Court  shall  send  copies  of  this  order  to  the 
Inspector  General  of  Police  Punjab  and  to  the  Secretary  Health,  so  that 
they  shall  issue  fresh  SOPs  by  including  the  above  observations  and 
directions of this court. The I.G Punjab shall further circulate this order 
	
8	
amongst the RPOs, CPOs, DPOs, SHOs. The Registrar of this Court shall 
send  copies  of  this  order  to  all  the  District  &  Sessions  Judges  in  the 
province,  for  onwards  circulation  to  the  Senior  Civil  Judges  and  the 
Magistrates for implementation.  
At this stage I would like to offer my thanks to the learned counsel 
8. 
for the parties for rendering valuable assistance to this court. The effort 
put in by Ch. Anwaar ul Haq Pannu, Advocate and the learned officer has 
been commendable. 
 
 (MUHAMMAD QASIM KHAN) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE. 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
Javed* 
