Form No:HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Case No. 
  Crl.Misc.No.3556-B of 2017. 
Syed Haq Nawaz Shah and another.  
Versus 
The State and another. 
S. No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
Parties of Counsel, where necessary. 
 
 
 
01.02.2018  Ms.  Khalida  Rafique,  Advocate  vice  counsel  for 
 
the petitioner alongwith petitioner. 
Mr. Khalid Pervez Opal, D.P.G. with Irfan, A.S.I. 
Muhammad Rafique, Field Inspector. 
By  filing  the  instant  petition,  the  petitioners  seek 
their  pre-arrest  bail 
in  case  F.I.R.No.216  dated 
21.09.2017,  under  Sections  379/411  PPC  read  with  Rule 
218  of  the  Punjab  Mining  Concession  Rules,  2002, 
registered  at  Police  Station  Iqbal  Abad,  District  Rahim 
Yar Khan.  
2. 
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  on  21.09.2017 
petitioners  were  found  excavating  sand  (minor  mineral) 
from  their  owned  land,  without  any  permission  or  lease 
from the Mines and Minerals Department, Bahawalpur.  
3. 
The  petitioners  and  departmental  representative  in 
attendance  have  undertaken  to  settle  the  matter  amicably 
through  A.D.R.  and  regulate  it  under  the  law.  The 
complainant  of  the  case  will  approach  the  “competent 
authority”  under  the  Regulation  of  Mines  and  Oil  Fields 
and  Mineral  Development  (Government  Control)  Act, 
1948,  The  Mines  Concession  Act,  2002  and  the  Punjab 
Crl.Misc.No.3556-B of 2017 
2 
 
Mining  Concession  Rules,  2002  for  leasing  out  rights  of 
excavation  of  minor mineral  from  the  land  owned  by  the 
petitioners. 
4. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
5. 
There is no denial that the petitioners are owner of 
land  from  which  the  sand  (minor  mineral)  was  being 
excavated by them, whereas under Section 49 of the West 
Pakistan  Land  Revenue  Act,  1967,  all  the  mines  and 
minerals shall be deemed to have been the property of  the 
Government.  As  conceded  at  Bar  under  the  rules,  the 
petitioners being owner of land have first right of getting 
lease  of  minor  mineral  or  in  case  of  lease  to  some  other 
person right of royalty. From the facts and circumstances 
of the case, it is gathered that there is bonafide dispute in 
between  the  petitioners  and  the  Mines  and  Mineral 
Department,  Government  of  Punjab  regarding 
their 
interest/s  in  landed  property  and  the  minor  mineral 
respectively, which they have undertaken to resolve as per 
law.  The  offence  for  which  the  petitioners  have  been 
charged  i.e  Rule  218  of  the  Punjab  Mining  Concession 
Rules, 2012 is punishable upto three years or with fine not 
exceeding  Rs.50,000/-  or  with  both.  Under  schedule  II 
Tabular  “statement  of  offences,  offences  against  other 
laws”  appended  with  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898, 
it is bailable. In this respect safely reliance can be placed 
Crl.Misc.No.3556-B of 2017 
3 
 
on  case  „Anjum  Sheraz  Versus  The  State‟[NLR  1999 
(Criminal)  Lahore  1].  It  will  be  determined  by  the 
learned trial Court, on conclusion of trial that any offence 
punishable under Section 379/411 of Pakistan Penal Code, 
1860  is  made  out  or  not,  particularly  when  the  offence 
charged has been adequately taken care of by special law 
i.e  Rule  218  of  the  Punjab  Mining  Concession  Rules, 
2002. Person of the petitioners is not needed to police for 
any  valid  purpose.  Refusal  of  bail  in  mechanical  manner 
followed  by  grant  of  post  arrest  bail  is  not  the  intent  of 
law. Reliance is placed on case „Tariq Bashir and 5 others 
Versus  The  State‟  (PLD  1995  Supreme  Court  34), 
wherein following salutary dictum has been laid down:- 
“It is crystal clear that in bailable offences the 
grant of bail is a right and not favour, whereas 
in non-bailable offences the grant of bail is not 
a  right  but  concession/grace.  Section  497, 
Cr.P.C. divided non-bailable offences into two 
categories  i.e.  (i)  offences  punishable  with 
death,  imprisonment  of  life  or  imprisonment 
for ten years; and (ii) offences punishable with 
imprisonment  for  less  than  ten  years.  The 
principle to be deduced from this provision of 
law  is  that  in  non-bailable  offences  falling  in 
the 
(punishable  with 
imprisonment for less than ten years) the grant 
of  bail  is  a  rule  and  refusal  an  exception.  So 
the bail will be declined only in extraordinary 
and exceptional cases.” 
category 
second 
 
In  case  „Khalil  Ahmed  Soomro  and  others  Versus  The 
State‟  (PLD  2017  Supreme  Court  730),  following 
dictum has been laid down:- 
Crl.Misc.No.3556-B of 2017 
4 
 
“When  the  accused  persons  were  entitled  to 
post arrest bail, their prayer for pre-arrest bail, 
if  declined,  would  be  a  matter  of  technicality 
alone---Accused  persons  were  likely  to  be 
humiliated and disgraced due to their arrest at 
the hands of the local police.” 
 
Following the above case law, to my view in case relief of 
pre-arrest  bail  is  refused  to  the  petitioners,  they  will  be 
disgraced, humiliated in the eyes of public at large.  
6. 
In view of above discussion, this petition is allowed 
and  the  ad-interim  pre-arrest  bail  already  granted  to  the 
petitioners  is  confirmed  subject  to  their  furnishing  fresh 
bail bonds in the sum of Rs.50,000/- each with one surety 
each in the like amount to the satisfaction of learned trial 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (Mujahid Mustaqeem Ahmed) 
 
         Judge 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
     Judge  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shahzad Ahmad Nasir* 
 
