     JUDGMENT SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Writ Petition No.2682 of 2017 
Mehmood ul Hassan. 
  Vs.   
     Addl. District Judge, etc. 
 
   JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing: -    
22.11.2018 
Petitioner by: - 
          Muhammad Shafiq Anjum, Advocate.  
Respondents by: - 
 
 
 Mr. Shamim Ahmad, Advocate.  
 
………. 
 
 
SHAHID WAHEED,  J:-    This  constitutional  petition  is  of 
 
 
 
the  defendant  and  arises  from  a  suit  instituted  by  respondent  No.3 
seeking  a  decree  for  dissolution  of  marriage,  recovery  of  dowry  article 
and  maintenance  allowance.  The  allegations  made  in  the  plaint  were 
traversed by the present petitioner. On pleadings, issues were framed and 
evidence was led. On consideration of the matter, the Trial Court through 
judgment  dated 26.11.2015 issued a decree in favour of respondent No.3 
and held her entitled of maintenance allowance @ Rs.10,000/- per month 
for  Iddat  period  only.  Respondent  No.3  was  further  held  entitled  to 
recover  dowry  articles  as  per  list  Ex-P3  except  gold  ornaments.  The 
petitioner thereupon preferred an appeal under Section 14 of the Family 
Courts  Act,  1964  before  the  Addl.  District  Judge,  Lahore.  This  appeal 
was  dismissed 
through 
judgment  and  decree  dated  01.12.2016. 
Penultimate  paragraph  of  the  appellate  judgment  dated  01.12.2016  is  to 
the following effect:- 
 
“6.It  is  evident  from  the  perusal  of  the  record  of 
learned  Family  Court/Trial  Court  has  not  passed  the 
impugned judgment and decree  against the  financial status 
of the appellant and the same has been passed after keeping 
in  view  the  expenses/life  necessities  of  minor  in  terms  of 
food, cloth etc. In this scenario, the undersigned court is of 
the  view  that  the  learned  Family  Court/Trial  Court  has 
passed  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  which  is  well 
reasoned,  justified  and  do  not  warrants interference  by  the 
undersigned  court.  So  undersigned  court  is  reluctant  to 
disagree with the findings of learned Trial Court.”  
 
2 
W.P. No.2682 of 2017 
 
2. 
Grouse of  the petitioner is that the findings  returned by  the 
first appellate Court in the above cited paragraph are not only contrary to 
record but also bereft of any reason. Elaborating the above complaint, the 
petitioner’s  counsel  submits  that  in  the  case  on  hands  neither  there  was 
any  minor  nor  question  of  maintenance  allowance  of  the  minor  was 
involved  but  the  first  appellate  Court  upheld  the  findings  of  the  Trial 
Court  with  the  observation  that  the  same  were  in  consonance  with  the 
expenses /life necessities of minor in terms of food, cloth etc.; and, that 
this  fact  alone  is  sufficient  to  draw  a  conclusion  that  the  first  appellate 
Court  neither  appraised  the  evidence  available  on  record  nor  applied  its 
independent mind to the findings returned by the Trial Court. 
3., 
After  hearing  the  above  noted  arguments,  I  asked  learned 
counsel  for  respondent  No.3,  as  to  how  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the 
first  appellate  Court  can  be  approved.  Responding  to  this  question,  he 
submitted that though the first appellate  Court had not returned findings 
in  accordance  with  law  yet  this  Court  by  ignoring  the  judgment  of  first 
appellate Court could examine the validity of decree issued by the  Trial 
Court so as to save the parties from further litigation.  
4. 
Arguments canvassed at the Bar give rise to a question as to 
whether  the  first  appellate  Court  has  decided  the  petitioner’s  appeal 
questioning the decree dated 26.11.2015 of the Family Court in a lawful 
manner.  The  law  governing  the  said  question  is  well  settled  that  appeal 
under  Section  14  of  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  is  a  substantive  right 
conferred by the statute and it is continuation of the proceedings, which 
comes entirely upon the first Appellate Court, carrying with it a right of 
rehearing  of  law  and  facts  as  well  as  reviewing  the  pleadings  and 
evidences afresh. It is the duty of the Court of first appeal to deal with all 
the issues, as first appeal  is a valuable right in which both the questions 
of law and facts are to be considered and the judgment in the first appeal 
is to address itself to all the issues of law and fact and decide it by giving 
discrete  reasoning.  In  the  present  case  the  Addl.  District  Judge,  Lahore 
has  not  validly  decided  the  legality  or  otherwise  of  the  findings  and 
judgment of the Family Court. The judgment of the first appellate  Court 
3 
W.P. No.2682 of 2017 
 
consists  of  seven  paragraphs.  First  paragraph  is  introductory.  In  the 
second paragraph the arguments of the petitioner/appellant were recorded 
whereas  third  paragraph  contained  arguments  canvassed  on  behalf  of 
respondent No.3. Fourth paragraph is one liner wherein it was stated that 
“arguments  heard  and  record  perused”.  In  the  fifth  paragraph  the  first 
appellate Court narrated the facts of the  case culminating up to findings 
of  the  Trial  Court.  Sixth  paragraph,  reproduced  hereinabove,  is  that 
paragraph in which the first appellate Court returned its findings whereas 
the seventh paragraph contains the order of the first appellate Court. That 
is  all. It  is  unfortunate  that  the  Addl. District  Judge  neither:  (i)    made  a 
bid  for  proper  appraisement  of  merits  of  the  case  put  forwarded  by  the 
parties  nor  examined  the  evidence  available  on  record;  (ii)  returned 
findings on any issue framed by the Trial Court nor recorded any cogent 
reason  for  maintaining  the  decree  of  the  Trial  Court.  Even  the 
observations,  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  the  petitioner’s  counsel,  for 
maintaining the decree of the Trial Court were extraneous to the record. 
This  is  nothing  but  dereliction  of  duty  and  complete  failure  to  exercise 
jurisdiction.  
5. 
It  is  essential  that  a  judge  should  accord  fair  and  proper 
hearing  to  the  person  sought  to  be  affected  by  his/her  order  and  give 
sufficiently  clear  and  explicit  reasons  in  support  of  order  made  by 
him/her. The rule requiring independent reasons to be given in support of 
an order is, like the principle of audi alteram partem,  a basic principle of 
natural justice and this rule must be observed in its proper spirit and mere 
pretense  of compliance with it would not satisfy the requirement of law. 
In  the  case  on  hands  the  first  appellate  Court  passed  the  impugned 
judgment  without  recording  any  reason  in  support 
thereof.  The 
contribution  made  by  the  Addl.  District  Judge  to  ascertainment  of  facts 
upon  appreciation  of  the  evidence  is  zilch.  A  judgment  of  this  kind 
delivered by the first appellate Court cannot be regarded as proper and is 
of doubtful validity. It does not represent an honest discharge of its duty 
by the appellate Court. 
4 
W.P. No.2682 of 2017 
 
6. 
In  view  of  above, I  cannot  accede  to  the  request  of learned 
counsel  for  respondent  No.3  that  I  should  re-appraise  the  evidence  and 
come  to  my  own  conclusion  in  exercise  of  constitutional  jurisdiction 
under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973. It is for the first Appellate Court to give its findings after a proper 
appreciation  of  the  evidence.  Thus,  without  going  into  other  questions 
raised by the parties, this constitutional petition is hereby allowed on the 
basis  of  above  stated  question  of  law.  The  impugned  judgment  and 
decree  dated  01.12.2016  of  the  Addl.  District  Judge,  Lahore  are  hereby 
set aside and declared to have been  passed without lawful authority and 
of  no  legal  effect  and  consequently  the  matter  is  remanded  to  the  Addl. 
District Judge, Lahore for a fresh decision in accordance with law within 
a  period  of  two  months.  Parties  are  directed  to  appear  before  the  Addl. 
District Judge, Lahore on 06.12.2018 
7. 
Before  parting  with  this  judgment  I  also  direct  the  Addl. 
Registrar  (Judicial)  of  this  Court  to  transmit  copy  of  this  file  alongwith 
this  judgment  to  the  Director  General,  Directorate  of  District  Judiciary, 
Lahore  High  Court,  Lahore  for  its  placement  before  the  concerned 
Hon’ble Inspection Judge for his kind perusal and appropriate action.   
 (SHAHID WAHEED) 
 
 JUDGE 
 
Approved for reporting. 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.R.Shad* 
 
