 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Stereo HCJDA 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR. 
   JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Civil Revision No.     101-D      of 2018.  
Sheikh Muhammad Ahmed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Versus 
Province of Punjab and others 
 
…..Petitioner 
…..Respondents 
 
 
 
Date of hearing:    
 
 
    JUDGMENT 
    21.3.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Petitioner by:  Mr. Mahmood Ahmed Bhatti, Advocate.   
Respondents by:  Mr. Saeed Ahmed Chaudhry, Assistant Advocate  
 
General with Muhammad Aslam, S.D.O.   
 
 
 
  
MUJAHID  MUSTAQEEM  AHMED,  J.-  This  common 
judgment  shall  dispose  of  following  revision  petitions  involving 
common questions of law and fact:  
i) 
ii) 
Civil Revision No. 101 of 2018. 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of  Punjab 
and others) 
 
Civil Revision No. 102 of 2018. 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of  Punjab 
and others) 
 
iii)  Civil Revision No. 103 of 2018. 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
 
iv)  Civil Revision No. 104 of 2018.  
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
 
Civil Revision No. 105 of 2018. 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
v) 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   2 
 
vi)  Civil Revision No. 106 of 2018. 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
 
vii)  Civil Revision No. 107 of 2018. 
(Rana Muhammad Younis Imran v. Province of 
Punjab and others) 
 
viii)  Civil Revision No. 108 of 2018. 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
 
ix)  Civil Revision No. 109 of 2018. 
x) 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
 
Civil Revision No. 110 of 2018. 
(Rana Muhammad Younis Imran v. Province of 
Punjab and others) 
 
xi)  Civil Revision No. 111 of 2018. 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
 
xii)  Civil Revision No. 112 of 2018. 
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
 
xiii)  Civil Revision No. 113 of 2018.  
(Sheikh  Muhammad  Ahmed  v.  Province  of 
Punjab and others) 
 
2. 
These  petitions  filed  in  terms  of  Section  115  C.P.C.  have 
called in question judgments and decrees dated 27.9.2017  passed 
by learned Addl. Distt. Judge, Bahawalpur whereby appeals filed 
by  the  respondents  were  partly  accepted  to  the  extent  that 
petitioners/plaintiffs    are  entitled  to  recover  principal  adjudged 
amount  alongwith  10%  interest  from  the  date  of  decree  till 
realization  of  claim.  Whereas  the  petitioners  had  filed  suits  for 
recovery  of  money  in  the  Court  of  learned  Senior  Civil  Judge, 
Bahawalpur which were finally decreed by learned Civil Judge 1st 
Class, Bahawalpur vide judgments and decrees dated 18.1.2017 in 
favour  of 
the  petitioners/plaintiffs  with  direction 
to 
the 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   3 
 
respondents/defendants  to  make  payment  of  decretal  amounts 
alongwith  compound  interest  at  the  rate of  10%  per  annum  from 
the  date  of  institution  of  suits  till  the  date  of  payment.  Special 
amount of damages was also awarded in petitioners’ favour.  
 
3. 
Background for filing of money suits is that the petitioners 
were approved Contractors of Provincial Building Department and 
were  awarded  various  contracts  of  petty  nature  for  repair  of 
government  residences  etc.  The  petitioners  carried  out  the  work 
and  accomplished  their  task.  The  bills  submitted  for  payment  of 
this work, however, could not be encashed (allegedly) due to non-
availability  of  funds  constraining  the  petitioners  to  approach  the 
learned civil court by way of filing of money suits. 
4. 
The  suits  were  contested  by  the  respondents/defendants  by 
filing separate written statements. Issues were framed on divergent 
pleadings  of  the  parties  who  were  directed  to  lead  their  evidence 
in support of their respective claim. However, during proceedings, 
on  the  application  of  the  defendants  under  Section  21  of  the 
Arbitration Act, 1940, Arbitrators were appointed by learned trial 
Court  exercising  powers  under  Section  22  of  Act  ibid.  After 
conducting  arbitration  proceedings  the  sole  Arbitrator  submitted 
the consolidated award before learned trial Court. The learned trial 
Court  made  the  award  rule  of  the  Court  and  decreed  the  suits  of 
the  plaintiffs/petitioners.  It  so  happened  that  for  more  than  once 
the matter was remanded in appeal/revision and finally the learned 
trial  Court  vide  judgments  and  decrees  dated  18.1.2017  decreed 
the  suits  by  directing  the  respondents  to  make  payment  of 
principal amount with interest at the rate of 10% per annum from 
the  date  of  institution  of  suits  till  its  payment.  However,  these 
judgments and decrees were assailed by the respondents by filing 
appeals  before  learned  Ist.  Appellate  Court  which  were  partly 
allowed by holding the petitioners entitled to get original amount 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   4 
 
alongwith 10% interest from the date of decrees till realization of 
claim, vide judgments and decrees dated 27.9.2017, subject matter 
of these petitions.  
 
5. 
Learned  counsel  for 
the  petitioners  submit 
that 
the 
petitioners had completed the allocated work in the year 1996 and 
till  date  they  are  running  from  pillar  to  post  for  payment  of  the 
work done and in such eventuality the learned trial Court not only 
rightly decreed the suits on the basis of award of the Arbitrator but 
was  justified  under  Section  34  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure, 
1908  to  order  the  respondents/defendants  to  pay  compound 
interest on the principal amount from the date of filing of suits and 
as  such  the  learned  Ist.  Appellate  Court  erred  in  law  while 
ordering  interest  to  be  paid  from  the  date  of  decree  and  that  too 
simple.  Learned  counsel  submits  that  the  petitioners  have 
beseeched  for payment of  work done  by  them  for  more  than two 
decades  and  as  such  learned  trial  Court  was  fully  justified  to 
award  compound  interest  on  the  principal  amount  due  to  the 
petitioners.   
6. 
On  the  other  hand,  although  learned  counsel  for  the 
respondents  did  not  dispute  the  discretionary  power/authority  of 
Court  to  award  interest  on  the  decreed  amount  from  the  date  of 
decree  but  vigorously  contended  that  according  to  arbitration 
clause  in  work  agreement  in  case  of  dispute  between  the 
contractor and the Provincial Building Department, the matter was 
to be referred to the arbitrator, whereas it were the petitioners who 
in violation of arbitration clause have approached the civil court to 
settle  their  dispute  and  ultimately  it  was  resolved  in  the  light  of 
award. Learned counsel argues that in absence of any clause in the 
contract  between  the  Contractor  and  the  department  the  learned 
trial  court  was  not  justified  to  grant  compound  interest  and  that 
under  Section 29 of  the  Arbitration  Act, 1940  learned trial  Court 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   5 
 
was  not  competent  to  direct  payment  of  compound  interest  from 
the date of institution of suit rather simple interest could have been 
ordered from the date of decree and as such learned trial Court had 
traversed its jurisdiction, therefore, learned lower appellate Court 
has  rightly  ordered  simple  interest  on  the  principal  amount  from 
the date of decree.  
7. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  parties  have  been  heard  at  length. 
Sole point for determination in these petitions is as to whether the 
petitioners  are  entitled  to  interest  on  principal  amount  from  the 
date  when  the  suits  were  instituted  as per  mandate  of  Section  34 
of  the  C.P.C.  or  whether  they  were  entitled  to  get  interest  on 
principal amount from the date of decree passed in their favour as 
stipulated  in  Section  29  of  the  Arbitration  Act,  1940.  It  appears 
that  this  question  has  remained  debatable  and  open  to  discussion 
in the courts of country for quite considerable time.  
8. 
Before  entering  into  conclusive  discussion,  it  would  be 
appropriate to reproduce both the provisions of law.  
Section 34 C.P.C. reads as under: 
 
 
“Interest.—(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for 
the  payment  of  money,  the  Court  may,  in  the  decree, 
order  interest  at  such  rate  as  the  Court  deems 
reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged, 
from the date  of the suit  to  the  date of  the  decree, in 
addition  to  any  interest  adjudged  on  such  principal 
sum for any period prior to the institution of the suit, 
with  further  interest at  such  rate  as  the  Court  deems 
reasonable  on  the  aggregate  sum  so  adjudged,  from 
the  date  of  the  decree  to  the  date  of  payment,  or  to 
such earlier date as the Court thinks fit.”  
Section 29 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 is as under:  
“29.  Interest  on  award.  Where and  in  so  far  as  an 
award is for the payment of money the Court may in 
the  decree,  order  interest,  from  the  date  of  the 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   6 
 
decree  at  such  rate  as  the  Court  deems  reasonable 
to be paid on the principal sum as adjudged by the 
award and confirmed by the decree.” 
 
9. 
In  order  to  better  appreciate  the  above  provisions  of  law  I 
consider it appropriate to refer the judgments on the subject.  
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  a  case  Ghulam  Abbas  v. 
Trustees of the Port of Karachi (PLD 1987 SC 393) dealt with the 
principle of interest on award as under:  
“16.  As  far  as  the  other  ground  that  prevailed  with 
the  learned  Judges  of  the  Division  Bench  it  may  be 
stated  that  in  holding  that  the  matter  of  interest 
should  have  been  left  for  the  Court  the  learned 
Judges overlooked and misconceived the real import 
of  section  29  of  the  Arbitration  Act  which  is  a 
provision  whereby  power  has  been  conferred  on  the 
court to order payment of interest, while making the 
award  the  rule  of  the  Court,  if  the  same  is  for 
payment  of  money  and  this  interest  covers  the  post-
decree  period  on  the  principal  sum  in  the  award. 
(emphasis  supplied  by  me).  By  its  own  terms, 
therefore, this section does not contemplate or create 
any embargo on the power of the Arbitrator to award 
interest  in  adjudicating  upon  the  reference  before 
him.  This  was,  therefore,  not  a  sound  basis  for  the 
court  to  disallow  interest  on  the  ground  that  the 
Arbitrator should not have decided this question.  
 
 
 
 
17….. 
18.  In  order  to  further  examine  this  question  it  is 
necessary to analyse the nature of right to interest on 
a money claim before a court of law and on the same 
analogy before the  domestic  forum of an Arbitrator. 
The right to interest, for the period prior to the date 
of  suit  or  prior  to  the  reference  to  arbitration  is  a 
matter  of  substantive  law,  as  contrasted  with  the 
power given to a court of law under section 34 CPC 
or  section  29  of  the  Arbitration  Act,  which  is  a 
statutory power within the domain of procedural law. 
(emphasis 
the  present 
controversy  firstly  we  are  concerned  with  the  right 
claimed  substantively  by  the  contractor  for  a  period 
before the matter reached the forum, for adjudication 
supplied  by  me). 
In 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   7 
 
as  a  liquidated  claim  based  on  a  legal  right.  The 
right  to  interest,  for  the  period  prior  to  the  suit, 
arises in one of the four following ways:  
  
i) 
Agreement, express or implied between the parties,  
ii)  Mercantile usage, 
iii) 
Statutory provisions, 
Interest  may  be  also  allowed  on  equitable 
grounds in proper cases. 
iv) 
 
Thus  in  Bengal  Nagpur  Railway  Co.  Ruttanji  Ramji 
and others AIR 1938 PC 67, it was observed:   
 
The  question  however,  is  whether  the  Court 
has  authority  to  allow  interest  for  the  period 
prior  to  the  institution  of  the  suit;  and  the 
solution of this question depends, not upon the 
Civil  Procedure  Code,  but  upon  substantive 
law.  Now,  interest  for  the  period  prior  to  the 
date of the suit may be awarded, if there is an 
agreement  for  the  payment  of  interest  at  a  fix 
rate,  or  it  is  payable  by  the  usage  of  trade 
having the force of law, or under the provision 
of any substantive law entitling the plaintiff to 
recover interest, as for instance, under section 
80,  Negotiable  Instruments  Act,  1881,  the 
Court  may  award interest at  the rate  of  6  per 
cent  per  annum,  when    no  rate  of  interest  is 
specified  in  the  promissory  note  or  bill  of 
exchange.”    
In  the  case  titled  The  Federation  of  Pakistan,  Chambers  of 
Commerce  and  Industry,  Karachi  v.  Messrs  Al-Farooq  Builders 
(2001 MLD 99) a learned Division Bench of  Karachi High Court 
observed as under:  
“..…Arbitrator  was  in  fact  and  law  justified  in 
equity in awarding interest on the amount found due 
and outstanding against the appellants at the rate of 
6%  per  annum only from the  date of award  and not 
from the date of legal notice 
It was further held: 
“…..since the Arbitrator does not enjoy the powers of 
a Court, his authority can be operative only from the 
date  of  award  till  payment  whereas  the  period 
subsequent  to  the  passing  of  the  decree  would  be 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   8 
 
governed by S.29 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, under 
which  the  Court  was  empowered  to  grant  interest 
from the date of decree  till payment….”  (underlying 
is mine).   
In  case  titled  Pakistan  Steel  Mills  Corporation  Ltd.  v. Syed  Altaf 
Hussain (PLD 1991 Karachi 386) the Court held as under:  
the  respondent 
“It may also be stated here that it is not a case where 
arbitration  has  taken  place  in  a  suit  which  gives 
implied power to the arbitrator to award interest, as 
a Court will do under section 34, C.P.C. nor it is the 
case  of 
the  parties  had 
specifically  agreed  to  refer  this  question  to  the 
arbitrator.  Learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  has 
failed to pinpoint any express provision of law under 
which  an  arbitrator  is  empowered  to  award  interest 
from  the  date  of  award  such  as  is  available  to  a 
Court under section 29 of the Arbitration Act…… 
that 
We  accordingly,  hold  that  the  arbitrator  had  no 
jurisdiction  to  grant  interest  from  the  date  of  award 
till  the  date  of  decree  but  in  view  of  the  facts  and 
circumstances  of  the  case,  we  maintain  grant  of 
interest by the  learned Single  Judge from the  date of 
the decree till the date of payment.” 
In  case  titled  Messrs Gerry’s International (PVT.) Ltd. v. Messrs 
Aero  Flot  A  Russian  International  Airlines  [(2017  CLC  291 
(Sindh)] it was observed as under:  
“The Arbitrator does not enjoy the power of the Court 
and as such cannot award future interest because it is 
only  a  Court,  which  can  award  such  interest  vide 
Section  29  of  the  Act  read  with  Section  34  of  the 
C.P.C.”    
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  titled  WAPDA  and 
another  v.  Messrs  Khanzada  Muhammad  Abdul  Haque  Khan 
Khattak  and  company  (PLD  1990  SC  359)  proceeded  to  hold 
even to the following extent:  
“…..if  the  trial  Court  had  not  awarded  interest  as 
provided in S. 29 of the Arbitration Act, the Appellate 
Court  has  had  ample  powers  under  O.XLI,  R.33 
C.P.C. to pass any decree and make any order which 
ought  to  have  been  passed  or  made  and  to  pass  or 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   9 
 
make  such  further  or  other  decree  or  order  as  the 
case  may  require,  and  this  power  could  be  exercised 
by the Court in favour of all or any of the respondents 
or  parties  although  such  respondents  or  parties  may 
not have filed any appeal or objection.”  
In  the  case  titled  Ascon  Engineers  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  v.  Province  of 
Punjab 
through  Secretary,  Housing  and  Physical  Planing 
Department (2002 SCMR 1662) it has been held as under:  
“As  far  as  the  judgment  relied  upon  by  the  learned 
counsel  in  the  case  of  Ghulam  Abbas  (ibid)  is 
concerned  the  same  is  not  applicable  to  the  facts  of 
the  instant  case  because  it  was observed therein that 
under  section  29  of  the  Act  interest  for  the  period 
prior to the date of the suit may be awarded if there is 
an  agreement  or  it  is  payable  by  the  usage  of  trade 
having  the  force  of  law  or  entitle  the  plaintiff  to 
recover interest etc. whereas in the instant case there 
is  no  such  clause  in  the  agreement,  therefore,  the 
High  Court  ratified    these  errors  by  awarding  the 
interest  from  the  date  of  decree  onwards  with  effect 
from 22nd October, 1998. The findings so recorded by 
the High Court in this context are in consonance with 
the  provisions  of  section  29  of  the  Act.  Thus,  no 
interference is called for in this behalf as well.” 
  
10.  What I have gathered from a visit of the above provisions of 
law in the light of authoritative pronouncements of superior courts 
of the country is that there are three stages of awarding interest on 
the principal amount adjudged:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
From  the  date  when  the  principal  amount 
became due but not paid. 
(Stage prior to filing of suit) 
(As  laid  down  by  the  Apex  Court  in  Ghulam 
Abbas’ case PLD 1987 SC 393 supra. 
 
From the date when the suit was filed. (Section 
34 of the C.P.C. Though from language of this 
provision it is not clear that such interest would 
be  simple  or  compound  but  as  per  its  liberal 
interpretation 
it  covers  both  simple  and 
compound interest) 
  
From the date when the decree was passed. 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   10 
 
(As capsulated in S. 29 of the Arbitration Act).   
It may also be clarified that Section 34 of the C.P.C. and  Section 
29 of the Arbitration Act are not in contrast or derogatory to each 
other,  rather  the  same  are  complementary/supplementary  to  each 
other and are not to be read in isolation. These enabling provisions 
empower  the  Court  of  law  to  exercise  the  discretion  of  awarding 
interest  i.e.  simple,  compound  from  the  date  of  suit  or  from  the 
date  of  decree  to  compensate  an  aggrieved  party  but  such 
discretion  is  to  be  exercised  judicially  and  not  in  mechanical  or 
arbitrary manner.    
11. 
In  the  present  case,  none  of  the  parties  has  brought  on 
record  any  written  agreement/contract  between them  to  carry  out 
work,  as  such  I  find  that  there  was  no  condition  in  the 
agreement/contract  that  in  case  of  non-payment  of  work  amount 
in  time,  the  party  in  default  shall  pay  interest  with  the  principal 
sum from the date of default or any period prior to filing of suit. 
During pendency of suits the parties agreed to make reference to 
the Arbitrator, who in due course submitted Award. However, the 
Arbitrator  did  not  award  any  interest  on  the  principal  amount 
meaning thereby that the petitioners were found not entitled by the 
Arbitrator  to  be  awarded  interest.  Now  remains  the  fourth  pre-
requisite  (as  discussed  in  Ghulam  Abbas’  case  supra)  that  if  the 
court  decrees  the  suit  it  may  also  award  interest  on  the  principal 
sum  from  the  date  of  decreeing  the  suit  till  realization  of  the 
payment.  
12. 
It is matter of the record that the petitioners completed their 
work  (petty  in  nature)  but  they  submitted  their  bills  after  more 
than  one  year.  The  claims  of  the  petitioners  were  undetermined 
and  from  the  award  it  is  fully  established  that  in  some  cases  of 
repair  work,  the  amount  claimed  by  the  Sh. Muhammad  Ahmad, 
petitioner  has  been  reduced  by  the  Arbitrator  while  in  others 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   11 
 
totally denied, meaning thereby that till date of filing of award the 
claim of the petitioner was not settled. Even the Arbitrator in his 
award  did  not  award  interest  to  the  petitioners.  Moreover  the 
petitioner  himself  in  violation  of  work  agreement,  instead  of 
invoking arbitration clause, filed suit before Court and ultimately 
the dispute was settled by arbitrator and thus the petitioner himself 
contributed  towards  delay  in  settlement  of  his  claim,  disentitling 
him  to  claim  any  damages  or  interest  from  the  date  of  suit. 
Therefore,  the  learned  trial  Court  was  unjustified  to  award 
compound  interest  on  the  principal  amount  and  the  learned  Ist. 
Appellate  Court  had rightly  modified the judgment  to  that  extent 
only.    
13.  The resume of above discussions is the learned Addl. Distt. 
Judge has properly exercised the jurisdiction vested  with him and 
the orders passed by him are in conformity with the law to which 
no  exception  can  be  taken.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners 
could  not  point  out  any  illegality,  material  irregularity  or 
jurisdictional defect in the judgment impugned herein.  
The  superior  Courts  of  the  country  have  handed  down  in 
Farid  Bakhsh  v.  Jind  Wadda  and  others  (2015  SCMR  1044), 
Muhammad Nawaz through L.Rs. v. Haji Muhammad Baran Khan 
through  L.Rs.  and  others  (2013  SCMR  1300),  Ghulam 
Muhammad  and  another  v.  Muhammad  Waris  (2017  CLC  Note 
56 Lahore), Kaniz Bibi v. Muhammad Ashraf and another (2008 
YLR 
159  Lahore),  Muhammad  Din 
through  Legal 
Representatives v. Mst. Fatima Bibi and another (2008 YLR 881 
Lahore)    Mir  Muhammad  alias  Miral  v.  Ghulam  Muhammad 
(PLD  1996  Karachi  202)  and  Ilamuddin  through  legal  heirs  v. 
Syed  Sarfraz  Hussain  through  legal  heirs  and  5  others  (1999 
C.L.C. 312 Karachi) that where there is conflict of judgments of 
trial  Court  and    First  appellate    Court,  view  expressed    by  First 
Appellate  Court  should  ordinarily  be  preferred  which  was  
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   12 
 
the  final  court  of  fact  unless  same  was  contrary  to  evidence  on 
record or in violation of principles of administration of justice. Of 
course  High  Court  in  exercise  of  its  revisional  jurisdiction  under 
Section  115  C.P.C.  could  interfere  with  findings  of  Lower 
Appellate  Court  only  when  the  court  had  handed  down  the 
findings without considering material available on the record and 
relevant law on such subject.  
 
14.  For  the  foregoing  reasons,  finding  no  force  in  these 
petitions, the same are accordingly dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Mujahid Mustaqeem Ahmed) 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
*Riaz.            
 
 
 
 
Judge 
                                            C. R. No. 101 of 2018                                                                                                   13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
