 
  
 
 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
        Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. ITR No. 118 of 2015. 
 
Commissioner Inland 
Revenue. 
Versus  M/s. Haier Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd. 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Hearing: 
08.02.2018. 
Applicant/ 
Department by: 
Mr. Liaquat Ali Chaudhry, Advocate.  
Respondent/ 
Taxpayer  by: 
M/s.  Akhtar  Ali  and  Sumair  Saeed  Ahmed, 
Advocates.  
 
Shahid Jamil Khan, J:-    This judgment shall also decide ITR 
No. 119 of 2015 as common legal proposition is addressed to answer 
the proposed question of law.  
2. 
Facts  of  the  instant  case  are  that  the  taxpayer  drove  income 
from wholesale of household goods and filed return for tax year 2012, 
which  was  taken  to  be  assessment  order  under  Section  120  of  the 
Income  Tax  Ordinance,  2001  (“the  Ordinance”).  Notice  under 
Section 122(5A) was served; confronting short payment of turnover / 
minimum tax under Section 113 and construing the assessment order 
as  erroneous  and  prejudicial  to  the  interest  of  revenue.  Reply  to  the 
notice  was  found  unsatisfactory;  therefore,  claim  of  reduced  rate,  at 
80%  of  normal  rate,  under  Clause  (8)  of  Part  III  of  The  Second 
Schedule,  was  declined  through  amended  assessment  order.  Appeal 
against the amended assessment order was allowed by first Appellate 
Authority.  Second  appeal  filed  by  department  was  rejected  by 
Appellate  Tribunal  Inland  Revenue  (“Appellate  Tribunal”)  by 
holding  the  claim  of  80%  reduced  rate  as  correct,  which  is  assailed 
through  this  tax  reference.  Following  question  is  proposed  and 
pressed:- 
ITR No. 118 of 2015.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
“Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case, the household 
electronic goods can be termed as consumer goods for the purpose 
of  clause  (8)  of  Part  III  of  Second  Schedule  while  actual  nature  of 
the goods is consumer durables?” 
 
3. 
Learned counsel for applicant argued that the Clause (8) was to 
be  interpreted  by  employing  principle  of  “ejusdem  generis”.  He 
explained 
that  ‘electric  appliances’  could  not  be  read  with 
‘pharmaceutical  products’,  ‘fertilizer’  or  as  ‘fast  moving  consumer 
goods’.  He  placed  reliance  on  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  as  well  as 
definition  of  ‘fast  moving  consumer  goods’  under  Section  2(22A)  of 
the Ordinance, which was inserted through Finance Act, 2015. 
4. 
Learned  counsel 
for 
respondent-taxpayer  opposed 
the 
arguments,  submitting  that  principle  of  “ejusdem  generis”  is  not 
applicable; because the phrase “fast moving consumer goods”, as used 
in the Clause (8), is to be read in the words, “consumer goods”, which 
is  inclusive  in nature. It  was  argued that  the  consumer  goods  are  the 
goods which are used directly by the consumers.  
5. 
6. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
It  is  was  not  disputed  before  the  Appellate  Tribunal  that 
respondent-taxpayer  was  driving 
income 
from  wholesale  of 
households  and  distribution  of  electric  appliances  was  part  of  this 
business.  Applicant  department’s  contention,  remained  throughout, 
that  electric  appliances  were  not  fast  moving  consumers  good, 
therefore,  benefit  of  the  Clause  could  not  be  extended  to  the 
respondent taxpayer. 
7. 
The Clause (8) needs to be interpreted, therefore, is reproduced 
for ease of reference:- 
“PART III 
Reduction in Tax Liability 
Income,  or  classes  of  income,  or  classes  of  person,  enumerated 
below,  shall  be  allowed  reduction  in  tax  liability  to  the  extent  and 
subject to such conditions as are specified hereunder:- 
(8) 
For  the  distributors  of  pharmaceutical  products, 
fertilizers,  consumers  goods  including  fast  moving 
consumers  goods,  the  rate  of  minimum  tax  on  the 
ITR No. 118 of 2015.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
amount  representing  their  annual  turnover  under 
section 113 shall be reduced by eighty percent. 
 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
The  Clause  (8)  was  inserted  in  Part-III  of  Second  Schedule  in 
November  2010  (through  SRO  1086(I)/2010)  and  was  omitted  by  Finance 
Act 2014. It’s applicability for tax year 2012 is not in dispute.  Being 
inserted  in  Part-III  (Reduction  in  Tax  Liability)  of  Second  Schedule 
(Exemptions  and  Tax  Concessions  under  Section  53),  this  clause  was  an 
exempting provision. Key words used in this Clause are “distributor” 
and  “consumers  goods”,  which,  being  specified  conditions,  were 
required to be fulfilled, for allowing reduction in tax liability to a class 
of income derived from ‘distribution of consumers goods’.  
As the fact that respond taxpayer was distributor/wholesaler of 
electric  appliances  was  not  disputed  before  the  Appellate  Tribunal, 
hence  first  condition  stands  fulfilled. Whether  electric  appliances  are 
‘consumers good’ is the question, required to be interpreted. The term 
‘consumers  good’  is  not  defined  in  the  Ordinance,  therefore,  its 
dictionary  means  would  be  relevant.  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  (Eighth 
Edition) defines; “consumer goods. Goods bought or used primarily for 
personal,  family,  or  household  purpose,  and  not  for  resale  or  for 
producing other  goods.”  It  is  not  a  plea  of  applicant  department  that 
use  of  the  electric  appliances  was  other  than  personal,  family  or 
household purpose. It does not matter whether electric appliances are 
fast  moving  consumers  goods  or  not  because;  word  including  is  use 
right  after  the  term  ‘consumers  goods’  and  before  the  phrase  ‘fast 
moving consumers goods’. The syntax of this Clause shows that term 
‘consumers goods’ is inclusive and the phrase ‘fast moving consumers 
goods’ is to be read in it. 
8. 
Definition,  under  Section  2(22A),  of  ‘fast  moving  consumer 
goods’ is not relevant for interpretation of the Clause (8).  
This  definition  was  inserted  through  Finance  Act,  2015  when 
the  Clause  (8)  had  been  omitted  by  Finance  Act,  2014.  Division  IX 
was  inserted  in  First  Schedule  through  Finance  Act,  2014  to  set  out 
ITR No. 118 of 2015.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
rates of Minimum Tax under section 113. At Sr. No.2 of the Division 
IX,  0.2%  tax  is  mentioned  as  rate  of  tax  for  “Distributors  of 
pharmaceutical  products,  fast  moving  consumer  goods  and 
cigarettes;”.  After  placing  this  phrase  in  a  provision  under  First 
Schedule,  its  character  has  fundamentally  been  changed.  Earlier  this 
phrase  was  used  in  an  exempting  provision,  syntax  of  which  was 
different  from  the  use  of  words  in  existing  provision,  which 
essentially  is  charging  in  character.  Definition  of  the  phrase  “fast 
moving  consumer  good”  given  in  Section  2(22A)  is  for  an  existing 
charging  provision,  therefore,  cannot  be  attributed  to  an  erstwhile 
exempting provision. 
9.  We are in agreement with the submission by learned counsel for 
the  respondent-taxpayer  that  the  canon  of  “ejusdem  generis”  is  not 
applicable for interpretation of this Clause.  
Meanings  of  these  Latin  words  are,  ‘of  the  same  kind  or  class’. 
Black’s  Law  Dictionary  defines  it  as,  “A  canon  of  construction  that 
when a general word or phrase follows a list of specifics, the general 
word or phrase  will be interpreted to include only items of the same 
type as those listed.” 
This  tool  applies  to  resolve  the  problem  of  giving  meaning  to 
ambiguous  or  unclear  ‘words  of  phrase  of  general  nature’,  which  is 
preceded or following by a group of words showing a list of person or 
things  of  same  or  similar  nature  and  kind.  Conversely;  where  some 
persons  or  things  are  expressly  mention,  without  general  word  or 
phrase,  it  implies  exclusion  of  other  persons  or  things  within  same 
class.  This  canon  of  construction  is  called,  ‘Expressio  unius  est 
exclusio alterius’ (the express mention of one thing excludes all others). Recourse 
to these principles of interpretation is based on presumptions adopted 
by courts. 
Language of the Clause (8) used ‘pharmaceutical products’ and 
‘fertilizers’  as  specific  words,  which  are  not  of  same  nature  or  kind. 
These words are followed by the phrase, ‘consumers goods including 
ITR No. 118 of 2015.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
fast  moving  consumers  goods’,  which  also  has  no  nexus  with  the 
preceded  specific  words,  therefore,  has  to  be  interpreted  separately. 
The word ‘including’ used in this phrase enlarges the scope of words 
‘consumers goods’. Had the words ‘consumers goods’ been qualified 
by  a  phrase  like;  ‘relating  to  agriculture’  etc.,  then  its  construction 
would  have  been  restricted  only  to  those  consumers  goods,  which 
might be used for agriculture activities. 
10 
For what has been discussed above, our answer to the proposed 
question is in affirmative. 
This  reference  application,  along  with  connected  reference 
application, is decided against the applicant department. 
11.  Office  shall  send  a  copy  of  this  judgment  under  seal  of  the 
Court to the Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue as per Section 133(5) 
of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001. 
 
             
 
 
(Muhammad Sajid Mehmood Sethi)     
                            Judge        
 
        (Shahid Jamil Khan) 
                               Judge 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
 
 
(Muhammad Sajid Mehmood Sethi)  
 
Judge   
 
(Shahid Jamil Khan) 
 
    Judge 
* Mian Farrukh* 
 
 
 
 
