I
Porm No: HCJD/C-121
ORDER  SHEET
IN THE LAHORB  HIGH COURT,
BA\YALPUR BEI\CH,  BT\HAWALPUR.
JTJDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Cq.seiVo. C.R. 562-D of 2OLI
Mst. Faiz Elahi through  Legal heirs
Versus
Imam Bakhsh and others
Ord.er  with signature  of Judge, and that of
parties or counsel,  where necessqry
1 1.0 L2O77 Mr.  Muhammad  Mushtaq
Advocate  for
petluoners.
Mr. Fida Hussain  Rahat, Advocate for respondent
No.1 whiie respondents  No.2&3  have been proceeded
against  ex parte.
Through the  instant  civil  revision
petitioners-pledntiffs  (petitioners)  have assailed
the  concurrent judgments/decrees  dated
30.09.2010  and OZ.Oi.ZOtt passed. by learned
Civil Judge,  Elahawalpur  and learned Additional
Dj.strict  Judge Bahawalpur  respectively  by which
,, suit of present petitioners  for declaration stood
dismissed.
2.  The factual matrix culminating into instant
civil revision  a.nd necessary  for its decision is that
Mst. Faiz Elahi deceased  (real mother of present
petitioners) keam Bakhsh, Mst. Atta Elahi and
Mst.  Shamarr Maie alias  Shamim  Maie
respond.ents-c.efendants  (respondents) are inter
se real sistersi  and brother.  Their mother Janan
Bibi  and fa.ther Muhammad Bakhsh both
deceased  owrred. BB kanal 11 marla and 135
kanal 18 marla land respectively situated in
Mouza Qutabpur, Tehsil Hasilpur, District
C.I{. No. 562-D of 2011
Bahawalpur, who purportedly  gifted away the
same vide impugned mutations of Tamleek  Nos.
II94 Exh.Pl and 1195 Exh.P2 both attested on
18.09.1984 in favour of their son Imam Bakhsh
(Respondent  No.l). After their death, Mst. Faiz
Blahi, mother of petitiorrlrc on 12.05 .2007 filed a
suit for declar:ation  to the effect that after divorce
to her by her husband,  she was given possession
of  45  kanal land (her expected  share in
inheritance) by her parents  and she was
enjoying  possession  of the same, the impugned
mutations of Tamleek were against facts, law and
based on frau.d. and rnisrepresentation and at the
time of purported Tamleek, they were weak and
on death bed so she prayed for a decree for
declaration  that she was owner-in-possession  of
suit iand measuring 45 kanal and the impugned
mutations  were invalid and ineffective upon her
rights.
3.  Responclent  No.1 vehemently contested  the
suit,  denied all  the  contentions  of  the
predecessor-in-interest  of  present petitioners,
whereas  respr>ndents No.2 and 3 filed conceding
written  statement  and also got recorded their
better statement in this regard. Vide judgment
and decree dated 30.09.2010  passed by learned
Civil Judge, Flersilpur District Bahawalpur,  while
answering  crucial issues Nos. 1 and 2 against the
present petitioners, their suit was  dismissed.
The petitione:rs  filed an appeal before learned
Additional  District Judge, Hasilpur who vide
impugned  judgment dated O2.O7.2OLI concurred
with the impugned judgment and dismissed the
il
C.lt. No. 562-D of 201i
3
I have heard submission  of learned  counsel
appeal. As such tbe petitioners  ,have filed the
instant civil revision mainly on the grounds that
impugned judgments  are against facts, law and
suffer from misreading and non-reading of
evidence, there{bre,  not sustainable.
4. 
for the parties and perused the record.
5.  To subs;tantiate  their claim, petitioners
have produced three witnesses.  PW- 1  Hafiz
Khairat Hussain  one of the petitioners  has
deposed that his maternal grandmother  (Nani)
Janan Bibi  had given the  suit  property
measuring  45 kanal to his mother Mst. Fanz
Elahi deceaseC  and presently petitioners are in
possession  of that property. It was settled that at
the time of attestation  of mutation  of inheritance
any claim regarding increase or decrease in
share/s will be settled/adjusted. The impugned
mutations  of 1'amleek  have been concealed  from
them and the alleged donors  had not gifted away
i their landed property to respondent  No.1 . pW-2
Muhammad  Nawab has deposed  that petitioners
are in possession of suit-property which was
given to them by their maternal grandparents.
PW-3 Mukhtar Ahmad deposed that  the
petitioners are in  possession of  the  suit-
property, and the impugned  mutations were not
validly got attested  by both donors, as they were
suffering from ailment.  As such the petitioners
by producing  these witnesses  discharged the
initial onus of p::oving the fact that the impugned
mutations were not validly attested. In view of
case 1aw 2OL6 SCMR L4L7 'Peer Bakhsh
C.R. No. 562-D of
4
t, 
versus Mst. Khanzadi
a {. others' ,  L99':. SCMR L832 Hakim Khan
versus Nazeer._Ahmad Lughr*ani  and 1O others
and 2OO8 SCMR 855 Muhammad  Iqbal and
another versus M{u}rhtar Ahmad through L.Rs.,
it was obligatt>ry for respondent  No. 1/beneficiary
of impugned mutations of Tamleek to establish
that the sam(3 were validly entered and got
attested  by his parents. As per settled Law heavy
onus would lie on beneficiary  to  prove by
convincing and cogent evidence, satisfying the
judicial cons;cience  of  the  Court that  gift
transaction w'a.s executed in favour of donee by
the donor.  Mr-rtation  was not a proof of title and a
beneficiary  of the same must prove the original
transaction. Respondent No.l as DW-l in his
examination-in-chief deposed that about 251.26
years back at. 09110 a.m. his father  summoned
his sisters ELnd ,r:. presence of DW-3 Abdul
Ghaffar, his brother Ghuiam Qadir (father-in-law
of DW-l) infcrrmeC his sisters that he was
transferring his prcperty in favour of his son
(respond.ent No.1) and at that time his sisters
accepted  the factum of Tamleek. The mutation of
gift was attested in l'[,ouza Alipur and at that
time possess.ion  of land was also delivered  to
him. During oross-examination  he conceded that
Chiragh Shah and Khadam  Hussain (attesting
witnesses of :::,utations)  were present before the
Revenue Officr:r at the time of attestation of
impugned m'-ltations of Tamleek but none of
them had appeared in  the witness box. He
conceded that Khadam Hussain Shah was not
\
4=-
.-)
C.R. No. 562-D of 2011
5
Lumberdar of Mouza Qutabpur (as has been
shown in the impugned  mutation of Tamleek
Exh.P1). DW-2 Hajan Shamim  Maie/respondent
No.3 corroborated  version of her brother DW-
1/respondent  No. 1.  She is  unmarried  and
dependent on respondent  No.1 and residing  with
him. As such she cannot be treated as an
independent r,vitness. Similar is the version of
DW-3 Abdul Ghaffar (real brother of father-in-
1ann, of respondent No.1) and during cross-
examination he frankly  conced.ed. that when
mr-rtations of Tamleek  were entered, he was not
present. DW-s Qasim A1i Ex Patwari deposed
that he has entered mutations of Tamleek No.
1194 and  1 1.95 at the instance/direction  of
I{ajan Janan llibi and Muhammad Bakhsh, both
attested on  18.09.1.984 by the C.O. During
cross-examin.a.tion  he  conceded that  no
Lumberdar  was witness of impugned  mutations
of Tamleek and that Khadam Hussain Shah
r  attesting witness  of mutations has been recorded
by the C.O. as Lumberdar. He further admitted
that as pel' entries in  Column "Kaifiat" of
mutation Nr:. 1 194 Exh.Pl, it  was not got
recorded by  Hajan Janan Maie  donor
accompanied by her husband. So this fact alone
establishes that she never intended to transfer
her 1and. in lavour of respondent No.l/her son.
Moreover, treing parda-nasheen  simple old
viLLager, she was not  aware of  nature of
tra.nsaction,  not so explained  to her and its legal
ccnsequences.  and she had no independent
advice from a trustworthv  and reliable source.
-  r)  \i^  <X1 n  ^{:
JwL-u 
.l\. 
vL
\ 
^\\,. 
o
trxh.D7 copy of Khasra Gardawri for the
6. 
per.iod from 2(1.03.1989 to 15.03.L994 indicates
thai respond,ent  No.1 is co-sharpr of the suit
nrnr-rert\/  anrl he was not delivered  possession of
Pr u irvr  uJ
lanC at the time of attestation of mutations of
Tainleek, in the Year 1'984.
7.  The caretul perusal of evidence  of DWs
establishes  that Janan Maie deceased has
neither mad.e any offer of Tamleek in favour of
respond.ent  lrTo.1 nor  respondent  No' 1  has
accepted, any such offer. The possession  was also
not delivered  on the date of entry or attestation of
rnutations of Tamleek. As per monogram  (para)
138 of Principl':s of Mahomedan  Law by Dr' M' A'
Mannan, HibeL is "transfer of property' made
immed.iateiy,  a-nd' without any exchange" by one
person to another and accepted' by or on behalf of
the latter. D\V-1/respondent  in his examination-
in-chiefhasrrotstated'thatwhenhisfathermade
offer of gift, he accepted the offer' As per
"  monogram (para) I4g  of  Principles of
Mahomedan l,aw Ibid', the three essentials of a
gift are (i) a cleclaration of gift by donor' (2) an
acceptance  of gift, express or implied' by or on
behalf of the clonee and (3) delivery  of possession
of the subject of the gift by d'onor to the donee' In
Preced.ents 2OL2 SCMR L6O2 Mst' Shafqat
rlerveenvel:sllsMuhammadlftikharAmiad'
2O1O SCMR. 342 Muhammad  Eiaz versus Mst'
I'Liealida  Awan and' another and 2OO9 SCMR
6izg and ![st.  Naeina  Begum versus Mst'
'fahzim ----lLbtrtar ana  otfrer  these three
ingred.ients of a valid gift under Mohammaden
AS
C.R. No. 562-D of
7
Law have been" reiterated. None of the attesting
witnesses  of rnutations of Tamleek  has appeared
in the witness  box to prove the validity of these
mutations ana factum of delivery of possession.
Their non-production  in witness box is fatal to
the case of contesting  respondents.  Reliance  is
place on  2076  SCll4R 986  Islam-ud-Din
thrcugh ^L.Rs. and others uersus Mst. Noor
Jahtsn through L.Rs. and others. In  this
reported case, out of the two attesting  witnesses
of mutation, only one was produced  and thus the
vaiidity of mutation  was discarded.
B.  The  plea  of  respondent No.1 that
immediately after attestation of  impugned
mutations of 'lamleek,  possession was delivered
to him is nega.ted from copy of Khasra Gardawri
Exh.D7 indicating that donee was delivered
possession  in the year 1989. As such requisite
ing;:edients  of gift could not be proved by
respondent  No. 1. Reliance is placed on 2OO2
,,SClr{R 1938 tsarkat Ali  versus Muhammad
Isrnail, wherein it  has been laid down that
necessary  ingredients of gift are offer by donor,
acceptance  by donee and delivery of possession.
9.  No date, time or place has been mentioned
in written  stertement  or in evidence regarding
Tar'iieek by the donors. PWs and DWs have
stated that dr>tr.ors were true Muslims and as
such it is not believable that they would have
taken un-Islamic decision to deprive of their
three daughters including one divorcee having 6
minor issues, of their inheritance  and would
transfer their entire land in favour of their sole
C.l{. No. 562-D of 201  1
t
8
son, particularly when it is not pleaded or proved
by respondent No.1 that he has served  his
parents and they out of love and affection entered
into such transaction.  Reliance is placed  on
2AA2 SCMR 1938 supra, wherein it was held
that no reason had been furnished by the donor
for the gift and as such, grant of gift, in the
circr.rmstances,  seemed  to be mala fide. The facts
of instant case are quite identical to the facts of
Preced.ent 2016 SCMR L477 referred  supra in
which mutation  of gift of property in favour of
son to the exchrsion of daughters  was disbelieved
as essential  ingredients of gift were not proved
and neither  particulars  of gift i.e. time, date,
place and witnesses  of declaration  were pleaded
in plaint nor any evidence was produced  to prove
the same. Thus it is established that factum of
Tamleek coul<l not be established  and the donors
have no intention  to transfer their holdings in
favour of  respondent No.1, &s such these
mutations are based on fraud. and void and
limitation  did not run against void transactions.
10. As a seq-urei  of above discussion, to my view,
the concurrent findings of the courts beiow that
both the donors have validly gifted away their
entire land in favour of respondent  No' 1 to the
exclusion of  three daughters  including one
divorcee mother of six issues/petitioners,  are
erroneous, res'tllt of misreading  and non-reading
of evid.ence and they have failed to properly
exercise  the jurisdiction vested with them, as
such impugned  judgments/d'ecrees are not
sustainable.  ln  Precedent 2OL6 SCMR 986
6w, 
\_j i)
C.R. No. tr62-D of 201 I
9
supra, it has been laid down that the High Court
is competent to set aside concurrent findings of
courts below and decree the suit in exercise of its
revisional jurisdiction. Consequently, the instant
civil revision is allowed, both the impugned
judgments and decrees are set aside and the suit
fiIed by the petitioners  is decreed in their favour
and against the respondents, the impugned
mutations of Tamleek are also set aside and all
the legal heirs of Janan Bibi and Muhammad
Bakhsh  d.eceased.  will inherit their revenue  estate
according to  their  Sharie shares und
Mohammaden  Law of inheritance. "^ #
(Mujahid Mustaqeem  Ahmedl
Judge
Approved  for reporting
lWanzoor
