JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
           
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
M/s DH Travels  
Versus   
 
 
Commissioner Enforcement & others 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of Hearing. 
 
30-01-2018 
 
Mr. Hamza H. Rashid, Advocate. 
PETITIONERS BY: 
RESPONDENTS BY:  Mr. Asfand Yar Khan Tareen, Advocate. 
 
Shahid  Karim,  J:-  This  petition  challenges  the 
order  dated  21.03.2017  (“the  second  order”)  passed 
under Section 52(1) read with section 60 of the Punjab 
Sales  Tax  on  Services  Act,  2012  (“the  Act,  2012”).  
One  of  the  defences  set  up  by  the  petitioner  to  the 
adjudication  undertaken  by  the  respondent  No.2  vide 
the impugned adjudication order was that the contents 
of the show cause notice were  caught by the principle 
of res judicata as the show cause notice envisaged the 
allegations  which  had  already  been  determined  on  a 
previous occasion and had culminated in the favour of 
the  petitioner.    It  is  pertinent  to  mention  that  an  order 
in  original  was  passed  on  15.09.2016  (“the  first 
order”) by the same officer i.e. respondent No.2.  An 
appeal  was  filed  which  was  dealt  with  by  the 
Commissioner  Appeals 
through  an  order  dated 
21.12.2016  and  the  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner  was 
allowed on the following basis:- 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
2 
 
 
“12.  Without  going  into  the  details  of  the  facts 
and  merits  of  the  case  and  other  legal  grounds 
raised,  the  appeal  is  decided  only  on  point  of 
violation  of  prescribed  limitation.    In  view  of  the 
above discussion and the case-laws cited supra the 
time limit of 120 days as envisaged in section 52(4) 
has patently lapsed therefore the appeal is accepted 
and  the  impugned  order  is  declared  to  have  been 
made  without  lawful  authority,  of  no  legal  effect 
and is hereby annulled.” 
  
2. 
Thus  it  was  held  that  the  period  of  120  days 
mentioned 
in  section  52(4)  was  a  mandatory 
requirement and since the said period had lapsed when 
the  adjudication  order  dated  15.09.2016  was  passed, 
that order had no legal effect and was thereby annulled 
in appeal by the Commissioner (Appeals).  No further 
appeal  was  filed  by  the  department  against  the  said 
order  passed  in  appeal  and  this  is  admitted  on  all 
hands.    The  learned  counsel  for  the  Punjab  Revenue 
Authority (PRA) contends that it was not necessary to 
have  filed  an  appeal  against  the  order  passed  by  the 
Commissioner  (Appeals)  as  PRA  was  well  within  its 
right  to  have  issued  a  fresh  show  cause  notice  and  to 
pass  an  assessment  order  on  the  same  facts  and  with 
regard  to  the  same  allegations.    This  contention  has 
been  put  forth  on  the  ground  that  the  appellate  order 
dated  21.12.2016  was  not  passed  on  merits  and  was 
decided  on  a 
threshold  question  regarding 
the 
mandatory  nature  of  the  period  prescribed  by  section 
52(4) of the Act, 2012.   
3. 
To  reiterate,  it  is  common  ground  between  the 
parties  that  the  second  order  passed  under  Section  52 
and  impugned  herein  has  been  passed  on  the  same 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
3 
 
 
allegations as were contained in the earlier show cause 
notice  which  culminated  in  the  first  order  dated 
15.09.2016.    The  question  that  engages  this  Court  is 
whether  the  subsequent  show  cause  notice  and  the 
ensuing  second  order  could  have  been  issued  on  the 
same allegations. 
4. 
For the purpose of determination of the present 
controversy, section 52 will have to be referred to and 
for facility it is reproduced as under:- 
“52.  Recovery  of  tax  not  levied  or  short-levied.– 
(1)  Where  by  reason  of 
inadvertence,  error, 
misconstruction or for any other reason, any tax or 
charge has not been levied or has been short levied, 
the  person  liable  to  pay  such  amount  of  the  tax  or 
charge  shall  be  served  with  a  notice,  within  five 
years  of  the  relevant  tax  period  requiring  him  to 
show  cause  for  payment  of  the  amount  specified  in 
the notice. 
 
(2)  Where  by  reason  of  some  collusion,  abetment, 
deliberate  attempt,  misstatement,  fraud,  forgery, 
false or fake documents– 
 
(a) any tax or charge has not been paid or is, short 
paid,  the  person  liable  to  pay  such  tax  shall  be 
served with a notice within five years of relevant tax 
period,  requiring  him  to  show  cause  for  non-
payment of such tax; and 
 
(b)  any  amount  of  the  tax  is  refunded  which  is  not 
due,  the  person  obtaining  such  refund  shall  be 
served with a notice within five years of the receipt 
of  such  refund  to  show  cause  for  recovery  of  such 
refund. 
 
(3)  The  officer  shall,  after  considering 
the 
objections of the person served with a notice under 
sub-sections  (1)  or  (2)  or  if  the  objections  are  not 
received within the stipulated period, determine the 
amount  of  the  tax  or  charge  payable  by  him  and 
such person shall pay the amount so determined. 
 
(4)  Any  order  under  sub-section  (3)  shall  be  made 
within  one  hundred  and twenty  days  of  issuance  of 
the  notice  to  show  cause  or  within  such  extended 
period  as  the  officer  may,  for  reasons  to  be 
recorded in writing, fix provided that such extended 
period shall not ordinarily exceed sixty days. 
 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
4 
 
 
(5) In computing the period specified in sub-section 
(4),  any  period  during  which  the  proceedings  are 
adjourned  on  account  of  a  stay  order  or 
proceedings  under  section  69  or  the  time  taken 
through  adjournments  by 
the  petitioner  not 
exceeding thirty days shall be excluded.” 
 
5. 
The  statutory  structure  of  section  52  provides 
for  issuance  of  a  show  cause  notice  where  a  tax  or 
charge has not been levied or has been short levied on 
the  person  liable  to  pay  such  amount  of  tax.    Sub-
section  (4)  will  have  a  gravitational  pull  on  the 
resolution of the controversy.  It provides for a certain 
time  frame  within  which  an  order  under  sub-section 
(3)  shall  be  passed  by  the  officer  issuing  the  show 
cause  notice.    It  provides  that  an  order  shall  be  made 
within  120  days  of  the  issuance  of  the  notice  to  show 
cause  or  within  such  extended  period  as  the  officer 
may for reasons to be recorded in writing fix provided 
that such extended period shall not exceed sixty  days.  
This  provision  was  interpreted  by  the  Commissioner 
(Appeals)  while  deciding  the  appeal  on  21.12.2016  to 
have  a  mandatory  effect  and  according 
to 
the 
Commissioner  (Appeals)  the  order  of  the  officer 
passed  under  Section  52  was  outwith  his  authority 
since  it  had  been  passed  beyond  the  period  specified 
under sub-section (4).  By the order dated 21.12.2016, 
the  adjudication  made  by  the  officer  was  held  to  be 
without lawful authority and of no legal effect and was 
thereby  annulled.    Plainly,  the  purpose  of  the  order 
passed  by  the  Commissioner  (Appeals)  was  that  it 
erased the first order and thereby annulled it.  It would 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
5 
 
 
be a travesty of justice according to the petitioner and 
a  contradiction  in  terms  if  the  respondent  department 
was permitted to issue a fresh show cause notice on the 
same  facts  and  to  require  the  petitioner  to  go  through 
the  rigours  of  adjudication  although  in  a  previous 
round of litigation the  issues in the show cause notice 
already  stand  decided  in  favour  of  the  petitioner  and 
the decision of the officer passed under Section 52 has 
been annulled. 
6. 
At the heart of the petitioner’s arguments is the 
doctrine  of  res  judicata.    It  has  been  argued  that  the 
impugned show cause notice is caught by the mischief 
of  res  judicata  as  the  matter  has  finally  been 
determined  by  the  appellate  tribunal  and  the  claim 
against  the  petitioner  cannot  be  re-opened  which 
would  impinge  upon  the  rights  of  the  petitioner  as  in 
the estimation of the petitioner the matter has attained 
finality and cannot be determined afresh. 
7. 
PRA  seriously  disputes  the  proposition  that  the 
doctrine can be invoked to aid by the petitioner in the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case.    The  principles  of 
res judicata are enshrined in section 11 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908.   However, by  virtue of section 
141, CPC the procedure provided for the civil court in 
regard  to  suits  shall  be  followed  in  all  proceedings  in 
any  court  of  civil  jurisdiction.    This  provision  in  my 
opinion  extends  the  principles  of  res  judicata  to  all 
proceedings  of  civil  jurisdiction.    Doubtless,  the 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
6 
 
 
proceedings  in  the  order  in  original  and  the  appeal 
before 
the  Commissioner  Appeals  were  before 
tribunals  exercising  civil  jurisdiction.    However,  even 
if section 11 is not applicable in the strict sense to the 
proceedings under the Act, 2012, the general principles 
of  res  judicata  will  be  applicable  as  the  rule  is  based 
on the doctrine of public policy.  That doctrine simply 
is  that  where  there  is  a  judgment  inter  parties,  it  will 
prevent  a  fresh  suit  between  them  regarding  the  same 
matter  (PLD  1987  SC  145).    It  has  been  settled  by 
respectable  authority  that  the  doctrine  is  of  universal 
application  and  in  fact  a  fundamental  concept  in  the 
organization  of  every  civilized  society  and  requires 
that every case should be fairly tried and public policy 
demands  that  having  been  tried  once  all  litigation 
about  that  cause  should  be  concluded  between  those 
parties.  For, if it were not for the conclusive effect of 
such  determinations,  there  will  be  no  end  of  litigation 
and  the  rights  of  persons  will  be  embroiled  in  endless 
litigation. 
  The  doctrine 
is  also  based  on 
the 
considerations  that  it  would  result  in  utmost  hardship 
to  an  individual  if  he  were  to  be  vexed  twice  for  the 
same  cause.    It  is  also  in  the  interest  of  the  state  as  a 
provider  of  justice  and  the  protector  of  the  people’s 
right  that  there  should  be  an  end  to  litigation.  
However,  for  the  rule  to  be  made  applicable,  certain 
pre-conditions  must  be  urged  to  exist  and  for  the 
doctrine  of  res  judicata  to  be  invoked.    These  rules 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
7 
 
 
have  once  again  been  settled  by  the  courts  over  the 
years and can be summarized as follows:- 
“(1)  The  matter  directly  and  substantially  in 
issue  in  the  subsequent  suit  or  issue  must  be  the 
same matter which was directly and substantially in 
issue  either  actually,  or  constructively,  in  the 
former suit. 
(2) 
The  former  suit  must  have  been  a  suit 
between the same parties or between parties under 
whom they or any one of them claim. 
(3) 
under the same title in the former suit. 
(4) 
The  court  which  decided  the  former  suit 
must  have  been  a  court  competent  to  try  the 
subsequent suit in which such issue is subsequently 
raised. 
(5) 
The  matter  directly  and  substantially  in 
issue  in  the  subsequent  suit  must  have  been  heard 
and finally decided by the court in the first suit.” 
The parties as afore-said must have litigated 
The enumerations made in section 11 CPC, also 
embody the above principles. 
It  is  a  fallacy  to  argue  that  the  doctrine  of  res 
 
 
 
 
8. 
judicata  does  not  apply  to  these  proceedings.    It  must 
be  borne  in  mind  that  that  doctrine  is  based  on  public 
policy  and  it  is  indeed  a  matter  of  public  policy  that 
dispute and controversies should have finality attached 
to them.  Litigants should have the assurance that their 
rights  and  liabilities,  one  determined,  will  not  be 
relitigated  and  will  bind  the  parties  in  a  future  claim.  
The rendering of a final judgment on the merits of the 
claim in a previous action involving the same litigants 
will act as a preclusion of a subsequent action.  At the 
heart  of  the  doctrine  is  the  twin  goal:  stability  and 
certainty.  In The Law of Judicial Precedent by Bryan 
A.  Garner  et  al.  the  idea  underlying  the  doctrine  has 
been captured in the following words:- 
“Despite  these  differences,  both  stare  decisis  and 
res judicata promote a similar goal: stability in the 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
8 
 
 
law.    Res  judicata  stands  for  the  idea  that  once  an 
issue  has  been  decided  for  particular  litigants,  it 
should  not  be  undone  by  a  later  lawsuit.    This 
doctrine lets parties rest assured that they need not 
relitigate issues in the future: they can live without 
a  cloud  of  uncertain  future  litigation  perpetually 
hovering.    Similarly,  stare  decisis  promotes  the 
fundamental  notion  emphasized  throughout  this 
book: that like cases will be decided alike.” 
 
9. 
The  generality  of  the  doctrine  and  its  various 
nuances  referred  to  in  the  above  treaties  are  being 
reproduced  hereunder  in  order  to  understand  the 
concept more fully: 
“A  judgment  is  binding  and  conclusive  as  res 
judicata only on the parties to the particular lawsuit 
and  those  in  privity  with  them:  it  creates  estopple 
for  disputed  matters  of  fact  and  law.    By  contrast, 
state  decisis  is  conclusive  on  questions  of  law,  not 
of  fact,  and  a  judicial  precedent  is  applied  to  a 
similar  state  of  facts  later  arising,  no  matter  who 
the parties are.” 
 
“At  its  highest  level  of  generalization,  res  judicata 
takes in two concepts that modern courts call claim 
preclusion  and  issue  preclusion.  Claim  preclusion 
prevents a litigant from bringing a claim if a court 
that  had  jurisdiction  has  already  rendered  a  final 
judgment  on  the  merits  of  that  claim  in  a  previous 
action  involving  the  same  litigants  or  their  privies.  
Issue  preclusion  prevents  the  same  parties  from 
relitigating  issues  of  ultimate  fact  that  they  had 
already litigated in earlier suits.  A nonparty to the 
first  action  can  use  issue  preclusion  offensively 
against  the  party  who  lost  the  issue  decided  in  the 
first  case,  within  certain  limits.    Stare  decisis  may 
determine  which  of  these  two  concepts  of  res 
judicata applies in a particular jurisdiction.” 
 
“The  doctrine  of  res  judicata  applies  to  disputed 
facts as well as to  disputed mixed questions of  fact 
and  law,  such  as  whether  the  defendant  drove  the 
car  negligently  or  whether  the  plaintiff  received 
adequate notice of the rejection of a claim so as to 
start the running of the statute of limitations.” 
 
10. 
It  has  been  said  by  Lord  Mansfield  (father  of 
English Commercial Law) that:- 
“The  successful  conduct  of  trade,  investment  and 
business  generally  is  promoted  by  a  body  of 
accessible  legal  rules  governing  commercial  rights 
and obligations.  In all mercantile transactions, the 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
9 
 
 
great object should be certainty; and therefore it is 
of more consequence that a rule should be certain.” 
 
11. 
The  argument  of  PRA  in  alleging  that  the 
doctrine does not apply to these proceedings cuts both 
ways  and  is  counter-productive.    In  a  converse  case, 
the PRA might face the same set of argumentation in a 
claim which has been decided in its favour previously.  
Moreover,  no  one  can  really  harbour  any  doubt 
regarding  proceedings  under  section  52  of  the  Act, 
2012  (and  appeals  arising  therefrom)  and  their  true 
nature. 
  These  may  be  termed  as  quasi-judicial 
proceedings  while  being  dealt  with  by 
the 
departmental  adjudicators  but  the  fact  remains  that 
these  officers  are  obliged  to  act  judicially  and  so  the 
doctrine  of  res  judicata  remains  applicable  to  these 
proceedings.    But  the  question  which  engages  this 
Court  is  whether  the  doctrine  can  be  invoked  by  the 
petitioner in the present case or not. 
12. 
The  primary  facts  in  the  instant  matter  have 
been narrated above.  To reiterate, an appeal was filed 
before 
the  Commissioner 
(Appeals)  which  was 
decided  on  21.12.2016  and  was  allowed.    The  basic 
ground  on  which  the  appeal  was  allowed  was  that  the 
time  limit  of  120  days  mentioned  in  section  52(4)  of 
the  Act,  2012  was  a  mandatory  time  limit  and  any 
order  passed  beyond  the  said  time  limit  was  void  ab 
initio.    Therefore,  admittedly  there  was  no  finding  on 
the merits of the claim.  The rule that such a time limit 
provided  in  a  provision  of  law  is  a  mandatory 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
10 
 
 
connotation  has  been  accepted  by  the  Supreme  Court 
of  Pakistan  in  Collector  of  Sales  Tax  v.  Super  Asia 
Muhammad  Din  and  Sons  (2017  SCMR  1427)  in  the 
following words:- 
“7. 
From  the  plain  language  of  the  first  proviso,  it  is 
clear  that  the  officer  was  bound  to  pass  an  order  within  the 
stipulated time period of forty-five days, and any extension of 
time by the Collector could not in any case exceed ninety days. 
The Collector could not extend the time according to his own 
choice  and  whim,  as  a  matter  of  course,  routine  or  right, 
without  any  limit  or  constraint;  he  could  only  do  so  by 
applying  his  mind  and  after  recording  reasons  for  such 
extension  in  writing.  Thus  the  language  of  the  first  proviso 
was meant to restrict the officer from passing an order under 
section 36(3) supra whenever he wanted. It also restricted the 
Collector from granting unlimited extension. The curtailing of 
the  powers  of  the  officer  and  the  Collector  and  the  negative 
character  of  the  language  employed  in  the  first  proviso  point 
towards its mandatory nature. This is further supported by the 
fact that the first proviso was inserted into section 36(3) supra 
through  an  amendment  (note:-  the  current  section  11  of  the 
Act, on the other hand, was enacted with the proviso from its 
very  inception  in  2012).  Prior  to  such  insertion,  undoubtedly 
there was no time limit within which the officer was required 
to pass orders under the said section. The insertion of the first 
proviso  reflects  the  clear  intention  of  the  legislature  to  curb 
this  earlier  latitude  conferred  on  the  officer  for  passing  an 
order under the section supra. When the legislature makes an 
amendment  in  an  existing  law  by  providing  a  specific 
procedure  or  time  frame  for  performing  a  certain  act,  such 
provision cannot be interpreted in a way which would render 
it redundant or nugatory. Thus, we hold that the first proviso 
to  section  36(3)  of  the  Act  [and  the  first  proviso  to  the 
erstwhile  section  11(4)  and  the  current  section  11(5)  of  the 
Act] is/was mandatory in nature.” 
 
13. 
There is no question that such a mandate in the 
law is a compulsory mandate and ought to be complied 
with  by  the  officer  making  the  adjudication.    The 
holding by the Supreme Court of Pakistan leaves it in 
no manner of doubt that the time limit provided is not 
directory.    However,  the  consequences  of  rendering  a 
decision beyond that time limit have not been spelt out 
in Super Asia Muhammad Din and Sons.  This remains 
a  vexed  question  of  law  and  according  to  the  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioner  the  order  having  been  set 
aside  on  this  basis  operates  as  res  judicata  and  the 
claim cannot be reopened. 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
11 
 
 
14. 
The  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner,  if  accepted,  would  lead  to  anomalous 
results.   The entire gemut of arguments on this basis is 
in  contravention  of  public  policy  as  also  the  rule  that 
public  interest  must  outweigh  private  interest.    This 
means  that  if  an  officer  has  not  complied  with  the 
mandatory  requirements  of  the  law  in  determining  an 
adjudication  within  a  certain  period  of  time,  then  the 
taxpayer  is  relieved  of  all  obligations  under  the  law 
from payment with regard to the evaded amount of tax 
in  question.    This  also  means  that  public  exchequer 
shall suffer grievously on this ground and the ultimate 
sufferer would be the general public for whom the tax 
is  collected  which  get  accumulated  in  the  provincial 
consolidated fund to be expended on the welfare of the 
people and citizens of the Province of Punjab.  Such a 
course of action cannot be countenanced. 
15.  Regard for public good is always implicit in the 
retention  of 
rights  by 
individuals. 
  They  are 
circumscribed  by  political  authority  to  pursue  the 
general  welfare.    The  right  of  the  petitioner  to  the 
determination of disputes is also subject to restrictions 
under laws that promote public good.  It has been said 
that:- 
 
“The principal end of every legislature is the public 
good”. 
(Thomas Hayter, An essay on the liberty of the press 
chiefly as it respect personal stander 18 (London, J. 
Raymond). 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
12 
 
 
16. 
It  is  necessary  and  expedient  for  the  general 
advantage  of  the  public  and  for  its  collective  interest 
that 
loss 
to 
the  public  revenue  should  not  be 
occasioned  on  account  of  failure  of  an  officer  of  the 
department  to  understand  the  mandatory  nature  of  the 
determinate limits provided by law. 
17.  As  explicated,  the  entire  proceedings  in  the 
earlier  show  cause  were  a  nullity,  as  if  they  did  not 
take  place  at  all.    And  therefore,  the  question  of  res 
judicata  does  not  present  itself.    The  petitioner  might 
have  a  case  if  the  first  order  in  original  was  a 
subsisting  order  capable  of  being  acted  upon.    On  the 
contrary,  that  order  in  original  will  be  deemed  to  be 
non-existent as an action extra jus. 
18.  As  Crawford  said,  “an  enactment  designed  to 
prevent  fraud  upon  the  Revenue,  is  more  properly  a 
statute against fraud rather than a  taxing statute, and 
it  should  receive  a 
liberal  construction 
in 
the 
Government’s favour”. 
(Crawford Statutory Constitution, p.508) 
19. 
It  is  also  a  rule  of  interpretation  that  any 
construction  leading  to  a  large-scale  evasion  of  tax  is 
to  be  avoided.  (SP  Jain  v  Director  of  Enforcement), 
AIR 1962 SC 1764. 
20.  Cases from the courts  of England have gone  to 
the  extent  of  holding  that  a  mandatory  provision  may 
simply  be  vitiated  by  the  dictates  of  public  policy.  
(See  Nagle  v  Fielden  [1966]  2  Q.  B  633;  Edwards  v 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
13 
 
 
SOGAT  [1971]  Ch.  354.    Such  a  result  is  founded 
upon  the  interpretation  of  statutory  purpose,  rather 
than  upon  any  strained  distinction  between  statutory 
provisions. 
21. 
In  De  Smith’s  Judicial  Review 
(seventh 
edition), the following passage will illustrate the point 
in issue:- 
to 
related  question 
that  of  administrative 
“A 
inconvenience is the extent to which public policy might 
be  employed  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  a  statutory 
provision is mandatory.  Public policy is employed here 
as  the  public  law  equivalent  of  private  law  equitable 
principles, such as that which states that no person may 
benefit  from  his  own  wrong.    Thus  the  courts  will 
presume  that  Parliament  did  not  intend  to  imperil  the 
welfare of the state or its inhabitants.” 
 
22. 
From  the  ingredients  of  the  doctrine  of  res 
judicata  referred  to  above,  it  can  plainly  be  seen  that 
the  doctrine  of  res  judicata  is  not  applicable  to  the 
present  facts.    Clearly  and  admittedly  no  adjudication 
on  merits  was  made  by  the  Commissioner  (Appeals) 
and,  therefore,  the  matter  was  not  heard  and  finally 
decided  by  the  Commissioner  in  the  first  round  of 
litigation.    However,  the  matter  was  directly  and 
substantially 
in 
issue  before 
the  officer  who 
adjudicated  it  in  the  first  instance  but  by  the  order 
passed  by  the  Commissioner  (Appeals)  that  order  and 
the  findings  rendered  therein  was  erased  and  became 
non  est.    The  effect  of  the  order  passed  by  the 
Commissioner  was  that  the  order  in  original  dated 
15.09.2016 was an invalid order and would be deemed 
to  have  been  erased  as  if  it  did  not  exist  at  any  time.  
Doubtless this is the effect of the order of the appellate 
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
14 
 
 
forum and the learned counsel for the petitioner is not 
in a position to deny the consequence referred to above 
which  was  the  only  consequence  which  flowed  from 
declaring the order in original as a nullity.  Therefore, 
it  cannot  be  argued  that  there  was  anything  in  law  to 
lay a claim in respect of the tax or surcharge which has 
not been levied or short levied by the petitioner as the 
petitioner  remained  liable  to  pay  such  amount  or 
charge.    The  only  prohibition  is  with  regard  to  the 
period  of  limitation  of  five  years  within  which  the 
show  cause  notice  can  be  issued  and  no  one  disputes 
the fact that the period of five years has not run out in 
the  present  case.    Also  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner has not referred to any prohibition in the law 
which  restrains  the  department  from  issuing  a  fresh 
show cause notice in such an eventuality.  There is an 
old  legal  proverb  that  what  is  not  prohibited  shall  be 
deemed permitted in law. 
23.  A reference may also be made to the provisions 
of Order VII, Rule 11 CPC which relate to rejection of 
plaint.    However,  Rule  13  of  Order  VII  provides  that 
the 
rejection  of  plaint  does  not  preclude 
the 
presentation  of  a  fresh  plaint.    Once  again,  while 
reading this provision  with  section  141  CPC  it  cannot 
be  doubted  that  rejection  of  the  earlier  show  cause 
notice  would  preclude  in  any  manner  the  department 
from filing a fresh show cause notice.   
W.P No.33566 of 2017 
15 
 
 
24.  Above all, this case will have to be analysed on 
the  touchstone  of  public  interest  and  the  rule  that 
private interest must give way to public interest and it 
is  certainly  in  the  public  interest  that  the  prosecution 
be held against the petitioner in respect of a charge or 
tax for which the petitioner is liable and on the basis of 
a  mere  technicality  the  petitioner  should  not  be 
allowed  to  circumvent  that  liability  and  that  too  on 
account  of  indolence  shown  by  an  officer  of  the 
department. 
  Moreover,  the  law  relating  to  the 
mandatory  nature  of  such  a  time  limit  had  not  been 
crystallized  until  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court 
of  Pakistan  referred  to  above  and  thus  the  officer  was 
not  aware  of  the  implication  of  passing  an  order 
beyond the time limit. 
25. 
In  view  of  the  above,  this  petition  is  without 
merit  and  is,  therefore,  dismissed.    The  Chairman  of 
PRA  is  directed  to  issue  instructions  to  all  officers 
adjudicating claims under Section 52 of the Act, 2012 
to comply with the time limit and its mandatory nature.  
They  should  also  be  made  aware  of  serious 
consequences which will visit those officers in case the 
time limit is not adhered to. 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID KARIM) 
 
JUDGE 
Announced in open Court on 21.02.2018. 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
  * 
Rafaqat Ali 
 
 
