Form No: HCJD/C-121 
 
 
ORDER SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
Civil Revision No.2108 of 2009 
Muhammad Ashraf, etc.   Versus   Muhammad Boota, etc. 
S. No. of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties 
or counsel, where necessary 
 
02.02.2018  Malik  Muhammad  Arshad  Awan  and  Ms.  Saima 
Hanif Mughal, Advocates for the petitioners 
Mr.  Abdul  Rehman  Miyo,  Advocate  for 
respondent No.1 
the 
 
Tersely,  the  facts  relevant  are  as  such  that 
 
 
 
respondent/plaintiff  Muhammad  Boota  instituted  a  suit  for 
declaration  alongwith  permanent  injunction  as  a  consequential 
relief  maintaining  therein  that  one  Bashir  Ahmad  son  of  Noor 
Muhammad,  who  died  some  1  ½  years  ago,  was  the  uterine 
brother  of  the  respondent/plaintiff.  Hashim  Bibi,  the  real 
mother  of  said  Bashir  Ahmad  got  divorce  from  her  previous 
husband  Noor  Muhammad  and  was  married  to  Lal  Din,  father 
of the respondent/plaintiff and he (plaintiff) was born out of the 
wedlock  of  Hashim  Bibi  and  Lal  Din.  The  respondent 
No.4/defendant  No.3  (Sabran  Bibi)  was  the  widow  of  said 
Bashir  Ahmad  and  the  defendants  No.4  to  7/the  present 
petitioners  were  the  step  brothers  and  sisters  of  said  Bashir 
Ahmad  and  they  had  the  same  father  Noor  Muhammad  by 
name, while their mothers were different. 
 
Lal Din, father of Muhammad Boota sold away 10 kanals 
07  marlas  land  to  the  respondent  No.1/plaintiff  and  the  said 
Bashir Ahmad vide registered sale deed dated 06.09.1962 out of 
the  land  measuring  90  kanals  11  marlas  bearing  Khata  No.23, 
Khatuni  No.51,  Khasra  Nos.  1,  2,  3,  8,  9,  11  to  16,  112,  113 
min,  127-13  min  situated  in  Mauza  Sanial,  Tehsil  Pasrur 
according 
to 
record  of 
rights 
for 
the  year  1990-91. 
C.R.No.2108 of 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
               -2- 
Subsequently,  the  mutation  was  sanctioned  on  03.08.1966 
regarding  the  sold  land  measuring  10  kanals  06  marlas  vide 
mutation No.234. About one month ago the respondent/plaintiff 
came to know that the said Bashir Ahmad, in the absence of the 
plaintiff,  got  90  kanals  11  marlas  land  mutated  in  the  revenue 
record in equal shares between the plaintiff and himself instead 
of the real land sold measuring 10 kanals 06 marlas; hence, the 
revenue  entries  subsequent  to  the  sale  deed  dated  06.09.1962 
were illegal, void and against the facts. The said Bashir Ahmad 
was  only  owner  of  land  measuring  5  kanals  3  marlas  vide 
registered  sale  deed  and  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  rest  of 
the  land  measuring  85  kanlas  8  marlas.  Lal  Din,  the  father  of 
the  plaintiff  died  in  1965  and  the  respondent/plaintiff  was  the 
only  heir  of  his  father,  hence,  the  respondent/plaintiff  was  the 
owner of land measuring 85 kanals 8 marlas. After the death of 
the  said  Bashir  Ahmad,  the  respondent/plaintiff  got  the 
inheritance  of  the  deceased  to  the  extent  of  1/6,  so  the 
respondent/plaintiff  got  17  marlas  of  land  out  of  the  legacy  of 
the  said  Bashir  Ahmad  as  his  uterine  brother.  Therefore,  the 
plaintiff was now owner in possession of the land measuring 86 
kanals  05  marlas  while  the  defendants  No.3  to  7/petitioners 
were  entitled  to  the  land  only  to  the  extent  of  4  kanals  and  6 
marlas.  They  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  rest  of  the  land.  In 
view of his submission, the plaintiff prayed that he be declared 
to  be  owner  in  possession  of  the  land  measuring  86  kanals  05 
marlas  and  further  to  declare  that  the  mutation  No.234  dated 
03.08.1966  and  entries  of  record  of  rights  1975-76  as  well  as 
the  entries  of  record  of  rights  till  date  were  illegal  and  against 
the facts; as a consequential relief the defendants/petitioners be 
restrained  from  interfering  in  the  land  belonging  to  the 
respondent  No.1/plaintiff  measuring  86  kanals  05  marlas, 
perpetually. 
C.R.No.2108 of 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
               -3- 
2. 
 
The  defendants  No.1,  2  &  3  were  proceeded 
against  ex  parte  while  the  defendants  No.4  to  7  raised  legal 
objections  upon  the  suit.  The  learned  trial  Court,  out  of  the 
divergent  pleadings  of  the  parties,  framed  issues.  Both  the 
parties  led  their  evidence  in  support  of  their  respective 
contentions.  
The  suit  was  decreed  on  16.05.1996  and  an  appeal  was 
preferred  against  the  said  judgment  and  decree  by  the  present 
petitioners,  which  was  accepted  and  case  was  ordered  to  be 
remanded  by  the  learned  Appellate  Court  vide  judgment  dated 
19.09.1998  after  framing  an  additional  issue.  However,  the 
remand  order  was  assailed  by  the  decree  holder/plaintiff  vide 
C.R.No.1744/1998 before  this  Court,  which  was  accepted vide 
order  dated  07.10.2008  and  the  learned  appellate  Court  was 
directed  to  dispose  of  the  appeal.  Therefore,  the  learned 
appellate  Court  vide  impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated 
17.07.2009  while  deciding  the  appeal  dismissed  the  same; 
which has culminated in filing of the civil revision in hand. 
3. 
 
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that 
the  impugned  judgments and decrees  are against  law  and  facts 
of  the  case;  that  the  respondent  No.1  challenged  mutation 
No.234  dated  03.08.1966  on  the ground that it  was  illegal  and 
inoperative, while Ex.P1, the registered sale deed was admitted 
by  him  and  if  the  mutation  and  registered  sale  deed  are  put  in 
juxtaposition, it appears that mutation is in consonance with the 
entries of the registered sale deed, but the learned Courts below 
have  misread  the  contents  of  both  the  documents,  thus,  have 
erred  in  law  while  passing  the  impugned  judgments  and 
decrees.  Submits  that  according  to  the  averments  of  the  sale 
deed  whatever  the  property  was  owned  by  Lal  Din  or  any 
property which was declared or added later on in his name was 
transferred  to  the  petitioners  and  the  respondent  No.1/plaintiff 
in equal shares, but both the learned Courts misread this aspect. 
C.R.No.2108 of 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
               -4- 
Adds that the Jamabandi had presumption of truth attached to it 
and  same  were  continuously  showing  the  ownership  of  the 
petitioners and the respondent No.1 in equal share. Further adds 
that  the suit  was badly  barred by  limitation because the  matter 
in  hand  does  not  pertain  to  inheritance,  therefore,  the  learned 
Courts  below  while  passing  the  impugned  judgments  and 
decrees have misconstrued law on the subject as Article 120 of 
the Limitation Act, 1908 provides six years period for assailing 
vires of such transaction, thus, have wrongly decided issue with 
regard  to  limitation,  which  has  resulted  in  miscarriage  of 
justice.  Contends  that  material  illegalities  and  irregularities 
have  been  committed  while  passing  the  impugned  judgments 
and  decrees  and  both  the  learned  Courts  below  have  travelled 
beyond vested jurisdiction. Thus, by allowing the civil revision 
in hand, the impugned judgments and decrees may be set aside, 
consequent  whereof  the  suit  instituted  by  the  respondent 
No.1/plaintiff may be dismissed throughout with costs. 
4. 
 
Naysaying 
the  submissions  made  above, 
the 
learned  counsel  representing  the  respondent  No.1/plaintiff 
while  supporting  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees,  which 
have  been  rendered  concurrently,  has  argued  that  at  this  stage 
findings  recorded  by  the  learned  Courts  below on  facts  cannot 
be  interfered  with  because  the  learned  Courts  below  have 
minutely gone through evidence and have rightly reached to the 
conclusion. He has prayed for dismissal of the civil revision in 
hand. 
5. 
6. 
 
 
Heard. 
It  is  a  settled  principle  that  concurrent  findings 
cannot be considered as inviolable and High Court is competent 
to interfere if such findings are based on insufficient evidence, 
misreading of evidence, non-consideration of material evidence, 
erroneous  presumption  of 
facts  and  consideration  of 
inadmissible  evidence;  thus,  the  argument  advanced  by  the 
C.R.No.2108 of 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
               -5- 
learned counsel for the respondent No.1/plaintiff that this Court 
cannot  make  interference  at  this  stage  have  no  force  and  the 
same  are  discarded. Reliance  is  placed  on  Muhammad Sami v. 
Additional District Judge, Sargodha and 2 others (2007 SCMR 
621), Muhammad Aslam v. Mst. Ferozi and others (PLD 2001 
Supreme  Court  213),  Barkat  Ali  v.  Muhammad  Nawaz  (PLD 
2004  Supreme  Court  489)  and  Dilawar  Jan  v.  Gul  Rehman 
and 5 others (PLD 2001 Supreme Court 149). 
7. 
 
Now this Court adverts to the second question that 
whether  the  suit  was  barred  by  limitation?  The  present  case 
does  not  pertain  to  inheritance,  because  vide  registered  sale 
deed  (Ex.P1)  dated  08.08.1964  the  property  was  purchased  by 
the  petitioners  and  the  respondent  No.1/plaintiff,  which  was 
subsequently  entered  into  mutation  No.234  (Ex.P2)  dated 
03.08.1966,  while  the  suit  was  instituted  on  06.01.1993, 
meaning  thereby  after  about  26  years,  while  article  120  of  the 
Limitation Act, 1908 provides six years limitation period as no 
specific explanation in respect of keeping mum for such a long 
period  has  been  submitted,  rather  a  vague  plea  that  cause  of 
action  accrued  about  one  month  earlier  has  been  taken  by  the 
respondent  No.1/plaintiff.  Moreover,  the  respondent  No.1/ 
plaintiff  has admitted  the  contents  of sale deed  (Ex.P1),  which 
is  to  be  read  harmoniously  as  a  whole  with  attending 
circumstances  giving  effect  to  all  the  clauses  contained  in  it 
which manifest the intention of the person who executed it, and 
has  assailed  the  vires  of  mutation  (Ex.P1),  but  when  both  the 
documents  are  read  together  and  are  put  in  juxtaposition,  it 
appears  that  the  same  are  in  line  with  each  other,  because  in 
sale deed (Ex.P1), Lal Din sold out his entire land present in the 
Khata as well as subsequently added land on equal share basis 
to  Bashir  Ahmad,  the  predecessor  in  interest  of  the  present 
petitioners  and  the  respondent  No.1/plaintiff.  Thus,  when  the 
position  was  as  such,  the  same  fact  was  in  the  knowledge  and 
C.R.No.2108 of 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
               -6- 
notice  of the  petitioners/plaintiffs, they  would  have  challenged 
the entries, if not satisfied with the same, well within time, but 
they kept tightlipped for such a long period and all of a sudden 
after  about  26  years  they  woke  up  from  deep  slumber  and 
instituted  suit.  In  this  respect,  guideline  has  been  sought  from 
Lal  Khan  (Decd.)  through  His  LRs.  v.  Muhammad  Yousaf 
(Decd.)  through  His  LRs.  and  another  (NLR  2011  Revenue 
65),  wherein  it  has  invariably  been  held  by  Apex  Court  of  the 
Country:- 
‘27. 
In the case in hand, a bare look at the plaint 
of respondent’s suit would indicate that he neither 
specified  the  date  when  he  came  about  the 
impugned  mutation  nor  gave  any  explanation 
tenable  in  law  to  justify  condonation.  In  these 
circumstances,  the  findings  on  issue  No.4  are 
violative  of  the  law  declared  and  therefore  not 
sustainable.’ 
Thus, the plea that the respondent No.1/plaintiff was not aware 
of  the  facts  and  all  of  a  sudden  came  to  know  about  the  same 
about  one  month  prior  to  institution  of  the  suit  is  also  not 
believable  in  view  of  the  facts  narrated  above.  In  a  reported 
case  titled  Muhammad  Amir  and  others  v.  Mst.  Beevi  and 
others  (2007  SCMR  614)  the  August  Court  of  the  Country 
held:- 
’14.  We  will  like  to  add  that  the  contention  that 
the donor perhaps did not know the mutation is, in 
the  circumstances,  not  believable  for  the  reason 
that  a  landowner  is  required  to  pay  a  number  of 
Government  dues  on  each  crop  and  it  is  not 
possible  that  till  his  death  which  occurred  after 
almost 24 years of the gift Lala remained unaware 
of  attestation  of  the  mutation.  D.W.3  had  stated 
that after one year after the gift Muhammad Amir 
C.R.No.2108 of 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
               -7- 
had  taken  back  the  land  from  him  but  after  two 
years it was again given to him for cultivation and 
at that time consolidation had already taken place. 
Thus, according to his evidence, consolidation had 
taken  place  somewhere  in  1969-70.  Since  the 
consolidation,  wands  are  made  afresh  it  is  not 
possible for a land owner not to come to know of a 
transaction in which his property stands alienated 
in favour of somebody else.’ 
8. 
 
In addition to the above, a specific plea was taken 
by  the  present  petitioners  that  land  increased  because  of 
consolidation  but  this  aspect  has  not  been  categorically  denied 
by the respondent No.1/plaintiff, either by submitting rejoinder 
or leading evidence against it; meaning thereby the stance taken 
up  by  the  petitioners  has  been  admitted  by  the  respondent 
No.1/plaintiff.  Moreover,  the  respondent  No.1/plaintiff  has  not 
led  any  evidence  with  regard  to  his  minority  at  the  time  of 
attestation of mutation. 
9. 
 
The crux of the above discussion is that the learned 
Courts  below  have  failed  to  appreciate  evidence  on  record 
rather  misread  the  same  and  have  failed  to  exercise  vested 
jurisdiction  in  accordance  with  law  while  committing  material 
illegality  and  irregularity.  Thus,  by  placing  reliance  on  the 
judgments ibid the civil revision in hand is allowed, impugned 
judgments and decrees are set aside, consequent thereof the suit 
instituted by the respondent No.1/plaintiff stands dismissed. No 
order as to the costs. 
 
M.A.Hassan 
 
(Shahid Bilal Hassan) 
Judge 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
