 
                                  Form No:HCJD/C-121 
                              ORDER SHEET 
                               IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN. 
                          JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
                                                           Case No. 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Original No.877-W/2018 
 
           Ch. Shabbir Ahmad  Versus                   Riaz Bangash Head HR. 
 
S. No. of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of 
order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
Parties or Counsel, where necessary. 
Proceeding 
 
 
                           03.07.2018 
 
 
 
 
Mr.  Muhammad  Irfan  Wyne,  Advocate  for 
the petitioner.  
Mr.  Muhammad  Tariq  Nadeem,  Assistant 
Advocate General. 
 
This  application  filed  under  Sections  3  &  4  of  the 
Contempt  of  Court  Ordinance,  2003,  arises  out  of 
constitutional  jurisdiction  exercised  by  this  Court  in  Writ 
Petition  No.6536/2018,  which  was  disposed  of  vide  order 
dated  02.05.2018  in  manner  and  mode  as  suggested  by  the 
learned  counsel  representing  the  petitioner,  in  the  following 
manner: 
“The  request  of  learned  counsel  for  petitioner  is 
reasonable.  Respondent  No.4,  Head  HR,  NRSP  Micro 
Finance  Bank  Limited,  Bahawalpur  is  directed  to 
decide  the  petitioner’s  application,  if  pending  disposal 
with him, within 15 days after receipt of certified copy 
of  this  order  strictly  in  accordance  with  law  through  a 
well reasoned speaking order after allowing opportunity 
of hearing to petitioner and all concerned persons under 
intimation to Deputy Registrar (Judicial) of this Court.” 
 
2. 
Perusal  of  order/letter  dated  21.05.2018,  annexed  with 
this  petition  as  Annexure  ‘C’,  reveals  that  after  issuing 
aforesaid  direction,  the  petitioner  was  heard  in  person  on 
17.05.2018  in  respect  of  his  grievance,  which  in  itself  is 
sufficient  compliance  of  this  Court’s  order.  Besides,  the 
averments  made  in  this  contempt  application  do  not  cover 
Section  3  of  the  Contempt  of Court Ordinance, 2003. Even  
 
 
 
 
 
otherwise, the petitioner has tried to challenge the validity of 
the said order-letter. Suffice it to observe that this forum is not 
to  explain  the  legitimacy  or  otherwise  of  the  said  order  in 
view  of  the  law  laid  down  by  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  a 
case  reported  as  Chief  Executive,  Multan  Electric  Power 
Company  (MEPCO),  Multan  and  others      VS      Messrs 
Colony  Textile  Mills  LTD  and  others  (2012  SCMR  906), 
wherein it was held as under:- 
 
“08.  Once a finding has been handed down 
by the Committee, it would not be for us to 
comment  upon  that  as  this  Court  by  no 
stretch  of  imagination  can  sit  in  judgment 
over the said finding as a Court of appeal. It 
was  in  view  of  this  essential  aspect  of  the 
case  that  this  Court  while  disposing  of 
Criminal  Original  Petition  No.82  of  2009 
observed  that  petitioners  may  avail  remedy, 
if so desired, before the competent forum in 
view  of 
the 
Committee.” 
the  finding  submitted  by 
 
3. 
In  view  of  the  above  this  petition  is  devoid  of  force 
hence dismissed. However, the petitioner is at liberty to avail 
the remedy before the appropriate forum  against the decision 
taken by the authority in accordance with law.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
               (MUHAMMAD AMEER BHATTI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                 JUDGE. 
Approved for reporting. 
       JUDGE. 
 
 
  
Gull* 
 
