JUDGMENT SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE  
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
   Usama Ahmad Mela    vs.   Mohsin Nawaz Ranjha, etc 
Date of hearing: 
19.11.2018 
JUDGEMENT  
Petitioner by: 
M/s. Muhammad Shahzad Shoukat and Taha Asif, 
Advocates 
Respondent No.1 by: 
Mr. Khalid Ishaque, Advocate 
Respondents No.2 to 5 by 
Ex-parte 
Amicus curie 
M/s. Shan Gul and Muhammad Arif Raja, Addl. 
Advocates General. 
SHAHID WAHEED,J.  Challenge  in  this  election  petition 
under  Section139  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  is  to  the  election  of 
respondent  No.1  Mohsin  Nawaz  Ranjha,  as  a  Member  of  National 
Assembly from Constituency No.89-Sargodha-II in General Elections, 
2018.  The said election has been questioned on two grounds: firstly, 
the respondent No.1 was not, on the nomination day, qualified for, or 
was  disqualified  from,  being  elected  as  a  member  of  the  National 
Assembly; and, secondly the election suffers from corrupt and illegal 
practices.  
2. 
Vide order dated 05.10.2018, the process, subject to question of 
maintainability of the election petition, was issued through the modes 
suggested in sub-section (2) of Section 145 of the Elections Act, 2017. 
In  response  to  the notice  respondent  No.1  through  Mr. Khalid Ishaq, 
Advocate  entered  appearance  before 
this  Tribunal,  whereas 
respondents No.2 to 5 had not turned up and thus, through order dated 
18.10.2018, they were proceeded against ex-parte. On the next date of 
hearing,  that  is,  25.10.2018,  respondent  No.1  submitted  written 
statement  wherein  the  allegations  made  in  the  election  petition  were 
traversed      by  raising  preliminary  objection  qua  maintainability  of 
election  petition.  The  case  was  therefore,  fixed  for  arguments  on 
maintainability of the election petition.  
2 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
3. 
The  first  objection    to  the  maintainability  of  the  election 
petition  is  that  it  is  hit  by  mandatory    provision  of  Section  144 
(1)(a),(b)  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  which  requires:  (i)  that  every 
election  petition  shall  contain  a  precise  statement  on  which  the 
petitioner  relies;    and,  (ii)  full  particulars  of  any  corrupt  or  illegal 
practice or other illegal act alleged to have been committed, including 
the  names  of  the  parties  and  modes  and  manner  alleged  to  have 
committed  corrupt  practice  or  illegal  acts.  It  is  contended  that  term 
corrupt or illegal  practice is not a term of art or something alien to the 
scheme of law relating to election disputes but instead corrupt practice 
has  been  defined  in  Section  167  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  which 
implies  that  for  making  the  allegation  of  corrupt  practice  what 
contents  have  to  be  incorporated  in  an  election  petition;  and;  that  in 
the  present  case  no  details  or  material  particulars  have  been 
incorporated in this election petition and thus, the same is liable to be 
rejected  for  being  based  on  vague,  flimsy  and  unsubstantiated 
allegation. 
4.  M/s  Shan  Gul,  and  Raja  Muhammad  Arif,  learned  Addl. 
Advocate  General,  in  response  to  notice  under  Section  152  of  the 
Elections Act, 2017 entered appearance and assisted this Tribunal  on 
the preliminary objection, under discussion. According to them: (i) the 
term  “and”  appearing  between  Section  144(a)  and  144(b)  is 
conjunctive  and  one  cannot  maintain  an  election  petition  by  merely 
complying  with  Section  144(a)  while  ignoring  Section  144(b).  The 
material facts naturally give rise either to a corrupt practice, an illegal 
practice or an illegal act and, therefore, the same have to be satisfied 
separately  with  respect  to  date  and  place;  (ii)  that  while  corrupt  and 
illegal practice have been defined in Chapter X of the Elections Act, 
2017, the term illegal act has not been defined, which may prompt the 
petitioner to suggest that it is only of case of corrupt or illegal practice 
that  can  be  brought  and  not  cases  of  other  illegal  acts.  However,  a 
perusal  of  Section  156  puts  paid  to  such  arguments  because  Section 
156 specifically recognizes illegal acts other than corrupt and, illegal 
3 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
practices  in  the  form  of  Section  156  clause  (a)  &  (b).  In  addition 
Section  231  incorporates  by  reference  Article  62  and  63  of  the 
Constitution.  Any  violation  thereof  can  also  perpetuate  an  election 
petition, therefore, the material facts spoken of in Section 144(a) have 
to  be  complemented  by  the  details  of  corrupt  or  illegal  practice  or 
illegal act. Elaborating this argument it is submitted that if a candidate 
is less than 25 years of age at the time of election then this fact after 
being  mentioned  as  a  material  fact  leads  to  the  illegal  act  (when 
nomination  paper  was  submitted  and  when  he  touted  himself  as 
eligible)  shall  have 
to  be  mentioned  separately  by  way  of 
amplification. According to them the above is the correct position also 
because  the  word  “and”  is  employed  to  express  the  relation  of 
addition, the adding of something to  that which preceded. In support 
of  above  arguments  reference  has  been  made  to  words  and  phrases, 
2003 Edition, Vol. I, page 381, “Muhammad Arshad Khan v. J & 
P. Coats Pakistan Ltd. Karachi and 2 others” (PLD 1977 Karachi 
83),  “Usman  Dar  and  others  v.  Khawaja  Muhammad  Asif  and 
others”  (2017  SCMR  292),  “Mir  Saleem  Ahmed  Khosa  v. 
Zafarullah  Khan  Jamali  and  others”  (2017  SCMR  664)  and 
“Nawab  Ali  Wassan  v.  Syed  Ghous  Ali  Shah  and  others”    (2018 
SCMR 87).     
5. 
 Responding  to  the  above  noted  arguments,  the  petitioner's 
counsel submits that the word "and" occurring between clause (a) and 
clause  (b)  of  sub-section  (1)  of  Section  144  has  not  been  used  to 
convey  the  idea  that  the  said  two  clauses  must  be  read  conjectively; 
that  word  "and"  should  be  read  as  “or”  so  as  to  maintain  harmony 
among  different  provisions  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  and  to  avoid 
any redundancy of any provision; that clause (a) of sub-section (1) of 
Section  144  relates  to  Section  156(1)  (a)  and  (b)  whereas  provisions 
of clause (b) of Section 144 (1) of the Elections Act, 2017 are related 
to  clause  (c)  and  clause  (d)  of  Section  156  (i)  of  the  Elections  Act, 
2017; that since the election of respondent No.1 has been challenged 
on  all  grounds  mentioned  in  Section  156  (1)  of  the  Elections  Act, 
4 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
2017,  the  election  petition  cannot  be  held  to  be  non-complaint  with 
Section 144 of the Elections Act, 2017 by invoking the word "if any 
provision " used in Section 145 of the Elections Act, 2017; and, that if 
there  is  any  deficiency  in  the  contents  of  the  election  petition,  the 
same  may  be  allowed  to  be  rectified  by  granting  permission    to  the 
petitioner  under  Section  149  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  which 
contemplates  that  the  Election  Tribunal  may,  at  any  time  before  the 
commencement of recording of evidence and upon such term  and on 
payment of such costs as it may direct, allow the petitioner to amend 
the  election  petition  in  such  manner  as  may,  in  its  opinion,  be  
necessary  for  ensuring  a  fair  and  effective  trial  and  for  determining 
the real question at issue but shall not permit raising of a new ground 
of  challenge  to  the  election  through  such  amendment.  He  referred  to 
the  cases  of  “Saifi  Development  Corporation  Ltd.  v.  Workers 
Union” (PLD 1965 (W.P.) Karachi 347), “Muhammad Hussain v. 
The  Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore  and  others”  (PLD  1966 
(W.P.)  Lahore  128),  “Khan  Nasrullah  Khan  v.  (1)  The  Member, 
Election  Commission,  Government  of  Pakistan,  Lahore  (2)  The 
Returning  Officer,  Constituency  of  the  National  Assembly  of 
Pakistan  No.NW-11,  Peshawar  II,  and  (3)  Mian  Jamal  Shah”  
(PLD  1966  (W.P.)  Lahore  850),  “Farooq  Ahmad  Khan  Laghari 
and  37  others  v.  Sh.  Muhammad  Rashid,  Chairman,  Federal 
Land  Commission  and  another”    (PLD  1981  Lahore  159)  and 
“Khadim  Hussain  and  another  v.  The  Addl.  District  Judge, 
Faisalabad and others” (PLD 1990 Supreme Court 632).  
6. 
Before  examining  the  rival  contentions  canvassed  at  the  Bar 
qua  the  requirements  of  sub-section  (1)  of  Section  144  of  the 
Elections Act, 2017 it would be apposite to observe here that role of 
the  Court/Tribunal  while  interpreting  any  Statute  is  not  to  alter  its 
provisions  but  to  iron  out  its  creases  so  as  to  avoid  any  absurdity  or 
inconsistency or redundancy. In other words it is the duty of the Court 
/Tribunal to avoid “head on clesh” between two Sections of the same 
Act  and,  “whenever  it  is  possible  to  do  so,  to  construe  provisions 
5 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
which appear to conflict so that they harmonies”. It is also said that a 
statute  is  an  edict  of  Legislature.  The  elementary  principle  of 
interpreting  or  construing  statute  is  to  gather  the  mens  or  sententia 
legis  of  the  Lagislature.  Keeping  the  said  principles  in  mind,  a 
conjoint  reading  of  different  provisions  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017 
suggests that any election to a House and Provincial Assembly which 
is tainted with corrupt practice or illegal practice or illegal acts cannot 
be  allowed  to  be  sustained.  It  is  for  that  reason  Section  156  and 
Section 158 of  the  Elections  Act, 2017 provide  different grounds  for 
challenging  election,  which  may  relate  to  either  corrupt  practice  or 
illegal  practice  or  illegal  acts.  It  appears  that  the  Legislature,  for  the 
said reason, through Section 144 of the Elections Act, 2017 has made 
election  petition  composite of  material  facts  and  material  particulars. 
Clause  (a)  of  sub-section  (1)  of  Section  144  which  corresponds  to 
Order VI Rule 2 enjoins the petitioner to narrate precise statement of 
the  material  facts,  in  the  election  petition,  on  which  he  relies  while 
clause (b) of Section 144 (1) is analogous to Order VI Rules 4 & 6 of 
CPC  calls  for  full  particulars,  which  are  necessary  to  amplify,  refine 
and  emblish  the  material  facts.  The  purpose  of  clause  (a)  of  sub-
section  (1)  of  Section  144  is:  (i)  to  give  to  returned  candidate 
intimation of  the  case  so that the  case  may  be  met, (ii) to  enable the 
Tribunal to determine what is really at issue between the parties; and, 
(iii)  to  prevent  deviations  from  the  course  which  litigation  on 
particular cause of action must take whereas the object of clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of Section 144 of the Elections Act, 2017 is to present 
as full a picture of the cause of action with such further information in 
detail as to make the opposite party understand the case he will have 
to  meet.  There  may  be  some  overlapping  between  material  facts  and 
particulars  but  the  two  are  quite  distinct.  The  distinction  between 
“material fact” and “full particulars/material particulars” used in the 
said  two  clauses  of  Section  144(1)  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  is 
important  because  different  consequences  may  flow  from  deficiency 
of  such  facts  or  particulars in the  pleadings.    Failure  to  plead even  a 
single  material  fact  leads  to  an  incomplete  cause  of  action  and 
6 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
incomplete  allegations  of  such  a  charge  are  liable  to  be  struck  off 
under  Order  VI  Rule  16  CPC.  If  the  election  petition  is  based  solely 
on those allegations which are vague and general in nature or lacking 
in  material  facts,  the  petition  is  liable  to  be  summarily  rejected  for 
want  of  cause  of  action.  In  the  case  of  a  petition  suffering  from  a 
deficiency of material particulars, the Tribunal has discretion to allow 
the  petitioner  to  supply  the  required  particulars  even  after  the  expiry 
of limitation. In this regard it would be pertinent to refer the following 
extract from the judgment handed down by the Indian Supreme Court 
in the case of “H.D. Revana v. G. Puttaswamy Gowda and others” 
(AIR 1999 Supreme Court 768): 
“This  Court  has  repeatedly  pointed  out 
the 
 
distinction between „material facts‟ and „particulars‟. In so 
far  as  „material  facts‟  are  concerned,  this  court  has  held 
that they should be fully set out in the Election Petition and 
if any fact is not set out, the petitioner cannot be permitted 
to  adduce  the  evidence  relating  thereto  later;  nor  will  he 
be  permitted  to  amend  the  petition  after  expiry  of  the 
period of limitation prescribed for an Election Petition. As 
regards  particulars,  the  consistent  view  expressed  by  this 
Court, is that the petition cannot be dismissed in limine for 
want of particulars and if the Court finds that particulars 
are  necessary,  an  opportunity  should  be  given  to  the 
petitioner 
the 
particulars.” 
the  petition  and 
to  amend 
include 
7. 
In  the  above  backdrop,  I  have  examined  the  contents  of  the 
present election petition and found that it contains a precise statement 
of  the  material  facts  with  regard  to  the  ground  that  respondent  No.1 
was  not,  on  the  nomination  day,  qualified  for,  or  was  disqualified 
from,  being  elected  as  a  member  of  the  National  Assembly  but  it  is 
lacking  in  material particulars  of  corrupt or  illegal practice. The  said 
omission is not fatal as under Section 149 of the Elections Act, 2017 
the  petitioner  may  be  allowed  to  amend  the  election  petition  for 
determining  the  real  question.  Thus,  the  objection  that  the  election 
petition  is  non-complaint  with  Section  144(1)  of  the  Elections  Act, 
2017 is without any substance and, it is hereby repelled.  
8. 
There  is  another  objection  to  the  instant  election  petition. 
7 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
According  to  sub-section  (4)  of  Section  144  of  the  Elections  Act, 
2017, the election petition and its annexures are required to be signed 
by petitioner and petition shall be verified in the manners laid down in 
the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  for  the  verification  of  pleadings. 
Grouse  of  respondent  No.1  is  that  election  petition  has  not  been 
verified  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and, thus the same is summarily liable to be rejected.  
9. 
There  is  no  cavil  to  the  proposition  that  the  verification  of  the 
election  petition  is  required  by  sub-section  (4)  of  Section  144  of  the 
Elections Act, 2017 and it must be made in the manners laid down by 
Order VI Rule 15 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The object of 
requiring verification of election petition is to fix the responsibility for 
the averments and allegations in the petition on the person signing the 
verification and, at the same time, discouraging wild and irresponsible 
allegations  unsupported  by  facts.  It  is  for  that  reason  verification  of 
contents of the election petition is required to be made on oath to be 
administered  by  the  Oath  Commissioner,  who  has  been  bound  down 
to  record  and  to  endorse  verification/attestation  that  oath  has  been  
actually,  physically  and  duly  administered  to  the  election  petitioner/ 
deponent. The mode  and manner of verification /attestation has been 
settled by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of “Lt.-
Col.(Retd)  Ghazanfar  Abbas  Shah  v.  Mehr  Khalid  Mehmood 
Sargana and others” (2015 SCMR 1585) and the relevant paragraph 
thereof reads as under: 
the  affidavit, 
independent  of 
“Taking into account the verification of the election 
petition 
it  has  been 
conspicuously  noticed  that  there  is  no  date  of  place 
mentioned  in  the  verification  i.e.  at  what  date  and  what 
place the verification was made by the appellant. The two 
stamps of the oath commissioner, Lahore Cantt, affixed at 
the bottom of the verification also do not postulate the date 
on  which  the  verification  was  made  by  the  election 
petitioner. Besides, it is not reflected from the verification 
whether 
time  of 
verification before the Oath Commissioner because he has 
not  been  identified  with  reference  to  his  national  identity 
card,  rather  by  some  Advocate,  whose  name  and 
the  appellant  was  present  at 
the 
8 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
particulars  are  not  even  mentioned  on 
the  said 
verification.  Therefore,  on  account  of  the  deficiencies 
identified above, we hardly find the verification to be valid 
in  terms  of  spirit  of  provisions  of  section  55(3)  of  the 
ROPA  and in line with the law laid down by this court in 
various  dicta.  Resultantly,  we  have  no  hesitation  to  hold 
that the verification is not in accord with law” 
Now  in  the  light  of  above  cited  paragraph  the  attestation  of 
verification, of the contents of the election petition, made by the Oath 
Commissioner is examined. In the case on hands, oath commissioner 
beneath  the  verification  affixed  his  rubber  stamp  which  reads  as 
under: 
Declared on oath before me 
On 22-9-18 
Mr. Usman Ahmed Mela 
S/o Ghias Ahmed Mela 
R/O Sargodha 
Identified by In person at 9.00 A.M. 
 
Sd/- 
(ABDUL SHAKOOR) 
Oath Commissioner 
Lahore High Court, Lahore 
Notification No.24/General/X.B.9(b)1. 
Date Lahore 06-1-2017 
Tem Expiry Date 26-12-2019 
 
Perusal of the rubber stamp of the Oath Commissioner makes it clear 
that the petitioner was not present at the time of verification before the 
Oath  Commissioner  because  he  was  not  identified  with  reference  to 
his  computerized  national  identity  card.  It  is  also  not  clear  from  the 
stamp  as  to  at  what  place,  the  oath  was  practically  and  physically 
administered.  The  words  “declared  on  oath  before  me”  used  in  the 
stamp  of  Oath  Commissioner  are  not  sufficient  being  ambiguous  as 
they do not   indicate as to what was declared on oath or whether the 
contents  of  the  verification  were  made  on  oath  before  the  Oath 
Commissioner. The said statement being patently ambiguous does not 
meet with the criterion determined by the  Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan for due attestation of verification, thus irresistible conclusion 
is  that  verification  of  the  election  petition  is  not  in  accordance  with 
law. 
9 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
10.  The  petitioner  has  also  enclosed  his  affidavit  with  the  election 
petition. The question arises as to whether the affidavit enclosed with 
the  election  petition  is  sufficient  for  establishing  the  fact  that  the 
election  petition  has  been  verified  in  accordance  with  law.  The  law 
governing  this  question  has  been  examined  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Ghazanfar  Abbas  Shah  (supra). 
Appraising  the  affidavit  enclosed  with  the  election  petition  on  the 
basis  of  above  cited  precedent  it  becomes  clear  that  the  same  is  also 
not  valid  for  the  reason:  firstly,  that  the  same  rubber  stamp, 
reproduced  above,  affixed  by  the  Oath  Commissioner  beneath 
verification,  has  also  been  used  by  the  Oath  Commissioner  for 
attesting  the  verification  of  this  affidavit.  Since  the  identification  of 
the  deponent  was  not  made  with  reference  to  his  computerized 
national identity card it cannot be held valid attestation; secondly, the 
time  and  place  of  making  of  affidavit  has  not  been  specified  and, 
thirdly,  the  affidavit  does  not  fulfill  the  requirements  of  the  High 
Court  Rules  and  Order.  Non  verification  of  the  election  petition  in 
accordance with the mandatory provision of sub-section (4) of Section 
144  of  Elections  Act,  2017  is  fatal  as  this  defect  after  the  expiry  of 
limitation  cannot  be  allowed  to  be  rectified.  This  flaw  is  thus 
sufficient  to  reject  the  election  petition  under  sub-section  (1)  of 
Section 145 of the Elections Act, 2017. 
11.  Last objection to the election petition is that election petitioner 
has not attached with this petition an affidavit of service to the effect 
that  a  copy  of  the  petition  along  with  copies  of  all  annexures, 
including list of witnesses, affidavit and documentary evidence, have 
been sent to all respondents by registered post or courier service and 
thus, it is liable to be rejected. On being confronted with this objection 
the  petitioner’s  counsel  took  me  to  page  No.148  of  the  Election 
Petition  and  submitted  that  due  compliance  of  clause  (c)  of  sub-
section (2) of Section 144 of the Elections Act, 2017 was made at the 
time  of  filing  of  election  petition;  and,  thus  this  objection  has  no 
substance.    I  have  examined  the  contents  of  the  affidavit  of  service 
Election Petition No.40 of 2018 
which reads as under:- 
10 
“I, the above named deponent do hereby solemnly affirm 
and declare as under:- 
That  I  have  served  the  respondents  with  notice  sent 
under registered A.D. post (along with copies of petition 
and Annexures thereto); 
That  I  have  today  filed  an  election  petition  regarding 
election  of  NA-89-Sargodha-II  before  the  Hon‟ble 
Election Tribunal.” 
The  above  cited  contents  of  the  affidavit  indicate  that  along 
with  notices  the  petitioner  had  only  sent  copy  of  the  petition 
and  annexures  thereto.  According  to  clause  (c)  of  sub-section 
(2) of Section 144 of the Elections Act, 2017, the petitioner was 
required to send a copy of election petition along with copies of 
all  annexures 
including 
list  of  witnesses,  affidavit  and 
documentary  evidence.  It  appears  that  the  petitioner  had  only 
sent copy of election petition and its annexures but not the list 
of  witnesses,  affidavit  and  documentary  evidence.  This 
omission makes the service, as contemplated in the above said 
provision  of  law,  defective.  Second  flaw  is  that  this  affidavit 
has  also  not  been  made  in  accordance  with  the  mandatory 
provisions  of  the  High  Court  Rules  and  Order.  Thus,  this 
affidavit  being  defective  renders  election  petition  incompetent 
before this Tribunal. 
12.  Upshot  of  the  above  discussion  is  that  the  election 
petition  in  hands  is  not  compliant  with  the  mandatory 
provisions  of  Section  144  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  and  thus 
the same is summarily rejected.     
JUDGE 
Announced in the Open Court on__________ 
(SHAHID WAHEED) 
 
 
 
    
 
Approved for reporting.  
 
M.R.Shad*     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
JUDGE                                      
