CJDA 38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, 
MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.471 OF 2012 
(Muhammad Ashraf vs. The State etc.) 
Date of hearing: 
20.11.2018 
Appellant: 
Mr.  Mudassar  Altaf  Qureshi, 
Advocate alongwith appellant. 
State: 
Syed Nadeem Haider Rizvi, DPG 
Complainant: 
Mr.  Nishat  Ahmad  Siddiqui, 
Advocate 
 
 
FAROOQ  HAIDER,  J.:  Through  the  above  mentioned 
appeal  Muhammad  Ashraf  (appellant) has assailed the  judgment 
dated 29.06.2012 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge, 
Sahiwal,  whereby  Muhammad  Ashraf  (appellant)  has  been 
convicted  and  sentenced  under  Section  302 
(b)  PPC 
to 
imprisonment  for  life  alongwith  payment  of  compensation  of 
Rs.1,00,000/-  to  the  legal  heirs  of  deceased  Majid  under 
Section 544-A Cr.P.C. and in default thereof to further undergo 
six months S.I. with benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. 
2. 
Brief  facts,  as  per  written  complaint  (Ex.PA)  submitted 
by  Haji  Khalid  Mahmood  complainant/PW-1,  are  that  on 
31.12.2007  Monday  at  about  7:00  a.m.  he  was  coming  to  his 
house  at  Chak  No.178/G.L.  from  his  agricultural  land  after 
taking  milk,  on  the  way  accused  Khadim  Hussain  and 
Muhammad Ashraf cut a joke to his nephew Majid upon which 
his  nephew  Majid  also  responded  to  said  joke  whereupon  the 
said  accused  gave  filthy  abuses  to  his  nephew,  however,  his 
 
Criminal Appeal No.471/2012. 
2 
nephew  Majid  came  at  home.    After  10/15  minutes,  accused 
Muhammad  Idrees  armed  with  hatchet,  Khadim  Hussain, 
Muhammad  Ashraf  armed  with  hatchet,  Muhammad  Akram 
and  Muhammad  Aslam  armed  with  sotas  alongwith  two 
unknown persons forcibly entered into the house of his nephew 
Majid  and  dragged  him  (Majid)  out  of  his  house.    Khadim 
Hussain and Muhammad Ashraf gave hatchet blows at his head 
whereas Muhammad Idrees gave wrong side of hatchet blow at 
his  right  leg  whereupon  his  nephew  Majid  was  injured. 
Whereas Muhammad Akram and Muhammad Aslam gave sota 
blows  to  complainant’s  brother  Muhammad  Rafique  which 
landed  on  his  arm  and  thumb.    In  the  said  occurrence  one 
Muhammad  Shoukat  and  complainant’s  nephew  Muhammad 
Liauqat  were  also  injured.    On  hue  and  cry,  complainant, 
Muhammad Ramzan, Shafique and other people attracted to the 
place of occurrence and accused persons decamped from there. 
The complainant alongwith injured Majid and Rafique came at 
Police Station Dera Rahim and after getting dockets, they went 
to  the  hospital  in  the  company  of  Abdul  Ghafoor  Constable 
where  the  doctor,  after  examining  his  nephew  Majid,  referred 
him  to  the  Civil  Hospital,  Sahiwal  who  was  admitted  in  Civil 
Hospital  Sahiwal  in  unconscious  condition  and  his  life  was  in 
danger.  Later on injured Majid succumbed to the injuries in the 
hospital, as such, Section 302 PPC was added in the F.I.R. 
3. 
On  the  conclusion  of  the  investigation,  Muhammad 
Ashraf (present appellant) and his co-accused Khadim Hussain, 
Muhammad Akram, Muhammad Idrees and Muhammad Aslam 
 
Criminal Appeal No.471/2012. 
3 
(since  acquitted)  were  challaned  to  the  Court.    They  were 
formally  charged  under  Sections  302,  148,  149  PPC,  to  which 
they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 
4. 
Prosecution produced its  eleven witnesses and then after 
tendering reports of experts closed its evidence. 
5. 
Then  statements  of  the  accused  were  recorded  under 
Section  342  Cr.P.C.  in  which  they  refuted  the  allegations 
levelled against them. 
6. 
PW-6 Dr. Tanveer Ahmad medically examined Majid in 
injured condition and found following injuries on his body: 
i) 
An incised wound 7 x 1 ½ cm on the middle 
of  head,  8  cm  from  the  right  and  left  ear. 
Bone was exposed. 
ii)  An  incised  wound  2  x  ½  cm  muscle  deep 
alongwith injury No.1. 
iii) 
Swelling  on  the  4  x  4  cm  right  leg  lower 
segment. 
 
After  death  of  Majid,  PW-4  Dr.  Saeed  Ahmad,  Medical 
Officer, DHQ  Hospital, Sahiwal  has  conducted  the  autopsy  on 
his dead body and found the following injuries: - 
i) 
A scar mark (surgical) 15 cm x 1 cm on top 
left side of head. Antero posteriorly. 
ii)  A  scar  mark  (surgical)  6  cm  x  1  cm  on  top 
left side of mid of head. 
iii)  A scar mark 7 cm x 1 cm on back left side of 
head. 
iv)  A  scar  mark  7  cm  x  ½  cm  on  frontal  right 
side of head. 
 
7. 
The  learned  trial  court  after  conclusion  of  the  trial  has 
convicted  and  sentenced  appellant  Muhammad  Ashraf  as 
mentioned  above  while  acquitted  accused  Khadim  Hussain, 
 
Criminal Appeal No.471/2012. 
4 
Muhammad Akram, Muhammad Idress and Muhammad Aslam 
vide impugned judgment dated 29.6.2012. 
8. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  submitted  that 
impugned conviction and sentence recorded through impugned 
judgment are against the law and facts; that learned trial Court 
failed  to  appreciate  material  available  on  the  record;  that 
impugned judgment is result of misreading and non-reading of 
evidence;  and  that  impugned  judgment  containing  conviction 
and sentence awarded to the appellant is liable to be set aside. 
9. 
Conversely  learned  law  officer  assisted  by  the  learned 
counsel  for  the  complainant  has  supported  the  impugned 
judgment. 
10.  Arguments heard.  Record perused. 
11.  As  mentioned  above,  in  this  case  five  accused  persons 
namely  Muhammad  Ashraf  (present  appellant),  Khadim 
Hussain,  Muhammad  Akram,  Muhammad 
Idress  and 
Muhammad  Aslam  were  nominated  whereas 
two  were 
mentioned  as  unknown,  who  could  not  be  unsurfaced 
throughout.    Four  of  the  aforementioned  nominated  accused 
persons  namely  Khadim  Hussain,  Muhammad  Akram, 
Muhammad  Idress  and  Muhammad  Aslam  were  acquitted 
through the aforementioned judgment whereas present appellant 
was  convicted  and  sentenced  as  mentioned  above.    It  is 
pertinent  to  mention  here  that  Muhammad  Ashraf  accused 
(present  appellant)  and  Khadim  Hussain  accused  (since 
acquitted) were given the same and identical role without even 
an iota of difference i.e. they both were given collective role of 
 
Criminal Appeal No.471/2012. 
5 
inflicting  hatchet  blow  on  the  head  of  Majid  (deceased  of  the 
case;  Khadim  Hussain  has  been  acquitted  as  mentioned  above 
and  there  is  no  independent  corroboration  available  against 
Muhammad  Ashraf  appellant  to  justify  impugned  judgment  to 
the  extent  of  convicting  him  and  awarding  sentence  as 
mentioned  above.    In  this  regard,  reliance  is  placed  upon  the 
case  of  “Mst.  Sughra  Begum  and  another  versus  Qaiser 
Pervez and others” (2015 SCMR 1142), “Irfan Ali Versus The 
State”  (2015  SCMR  840)  and  “Muhammad  Ali  versus  The 
State” (2015 SCMR 137).  As much as hatchets were allegedly 
recovered  from  both  of  them  i.e.  Muhammad  Ashraf  and 
Khadim  Hussain  but  neither  the  same  were  bloodstained  nor 
sent  for  expert  opinion  for  determination  of  availability  of 
blood  on  the  same  or  otherwise,  so,  this  piece  of  evidence  is 
also of no help to the prosecution and on this score even there is 
no  difference  in  the  case  of  both  of  them.    Muhammad  Idress 
was  also  alleged  to  have  caused  wrong  side  of  the  hatchet  on 
the right leg of Majid deceased but he has also been acquitted.  
Muhammad  Akram  and  Muhammad  Aslam  co-accused  were 
alleged  to  have  caused  sota  blows  on  Muhammad  Rafique, 
Muhammad  Shoukat  and  Liaquat  Ali  but  they  have  also  been 
acquitted. 
  It 
is  also  pertinent 
to  mention  here 
that 
aforementioned  three  injured  witnesses  were  not  produced 
before  the  trial  Court  and  their  Medico  Legal  Examination 
reports  were  also  not  produced  during  the  trial,  therefore, 
inference  would  go  against  the  prosecution  in  view  of  Article 
129(g)  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.    As  far  as 
 
Criminal Appeal No.471/2012. 
6 
statement  of  Majid  Ex.PS  is  concerned,  even  in  the  said 
statement both Khadim Hussain and Muhammad Ashraf present 
appellant  were  given  similar  role.    It  is  also  important  to 
mention  here  that  said  statement  was  not  even  attested  by  the 
doctor.    It  has  also  come  on  record  that  Majid  after  treatment 
was  discharged  from  the  hospital  and  he  came  to  home  and 
after  lapse  of  about  eight  months  he  died.    Motive  neither 
detailed  nor proved by  the prosecution.   Prosecution  could  not 
bring  any  material  on  record  to  distinguish  the  role  of 
Muhammad  Ashraf  present  appellant  from  Khadim  Hussain 
accused (since acquitted).  Prosecution also could not prove that 
injury  No.1  was  caused  by  Muhammad  Ashraf  present 
appellant,  so,  case  of  Muhammad  Ashraf  (appellant)  is  at  par 
with  Khadim  Hussain  (since  acquitted).    FIR  was  also  got 
recorded  with  delay.    In  view  of  above,  prosecution  could  not 
prove  its  case  against  Muhammad  Ashraf  appellant  beyond 
shadow of doubt. 
 
As  far  as  attempt  of  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General 
assisted by  the learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  for  relying 
upon  plea  of  present  appellant  “that  it  all  happened  all  of  a 
sudden,  spur  of  moments”  contained  in  his  statement  under 
Section  342  Cr.P.C.  is  concerned,  suffice  to  observe  that 
prosecution has to prove its own case beyond shadow of doubt 
and  when  prosecution  has  otherwise  failed  to  prove  its  case, 
then  accused  cannot  be  convicted  on  the  basis  of  any  plea 
advanced  by  him  in  his  statement  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C. 
rather he would deserve acquittal.  In this regard, reference can 
 
Criminal Appeal No.471/2012. 
7 
be  respectfully  placed  upon  the  case  of  “Azhar  Iqbal  versus 
The State” (2013 SCMR 383) and its paragraph No.2 is hereby 
reproduced asunder: - 
for 
the 
learned  counsel 
“After  hearing 
the 
appellant  and  the  learned  Additional  Prosecutor-
General,  Punjab  appearing  for  the  State  and 
having  gone  through  the  record  of  the  case  with 
their assistance it has straightaway been observed 
by  us  that  both  the  learned  courts  below  had 
rejected  the  version  of  the  prosecution  in  its 
entirety  and  had  then  proceeded  to  convict  and 
sentence  the  appellant  on  the  sole  basis  of  his 
statement  recorded  under  section  342,  Cr.P.C. 
wherein  he  had  advanced  a  plea  of  grave  and 
sudden  provocation.    It  had  not  been  appreciated 
by  the  learned  courts  below  that  the  law  is  quite 
settled by now that if the prosecution fails to prove 
its  case  against  an  accused  person  then  the 
accused  person  is  to  be  acquitted  even  if  he  had 
taken  a  plea  and  had  thereby  admitted  killing  the 
deceased.  A reference in this respect may be made 
to  the  case  of  Waqar  Ahmad  v.  Shaukat  Ali  and 
others  (2006  SCMR  1139).    The  law  is  equally 
settled  that  the  statement  of  an  accused  person 
recorded  under  section  342,  Cr.P.C.  is  to  be 
accepted  or  rejected  in  its  entirety  and  where  the 
prosecution’s evidence is found to be reliable and 
the  exculpatory  part  of  the  accused  person’s 
statement  is  established  to  be  false  and  is  to  be 
excluded  from  consideration  then  the  inculpatory 
part  of  the  accused  person’s  statement  may  be 
read in support of the evidence of the prosecution.  
This  legal  position  stands  amply  demonstrated  in 
the cases of  Sultan Khan v. Sher Khan and others 
(PLD  1991  SC  520),  Muhammad  Tashfeen  and 
others  v.  the  State  and  others  (2006  SCMR  577) 
and  Faqir  Muhammad  and  another  v.  the  State 
(PLD  2011  SC  796).    It  is  unfortunate  that  the 
Lahore High Court, Lahore had failed to apply the 
said settled law to the facts of the case in hand” 
 
12.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  instant  appeal  is 
allowed,  impugned  conviction  and  sentence  recorded  through 
the impugned judgment dated 29.6.2012  passed in case arising 
out of FIR No.5/2008 dated 4.1.2008 under Sections 302, 148, 
149  PPC  registered  at  Police  Station  Dera  Rahim,  District 
 
Criminal Appeal No.471/2012. 
8 
Sahiwal, is hereby set aside and Muhammad Ashraf appellant is 
acquitted  of  the  charge.    The  appellant  is  on  bail,  hence,  his 
surety is discharged from all liabilities. 
(Farooq Haider) 
Judge 
Naeem 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
Judge 
