Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
 MULTAN BENCH MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
(Ashiq Ali and 6 others v. The State and another)  
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
           
 
Appellant  by:  Mian Ahmad Mehmood, Advocate.  
Complainant by:  Nemo.  
State by: 
       Date of hearing: 25.01.2018 
Mr. Nadeem Haider Rizvi, Deputy District Public 
Prosecutor.  
 
----------------------------------- 
Ch. Abdul  Aziz, J.   This  judgment  shall  dispose  of  the afore-
captioned  appeal  filed  by  seven  appellants  namely  Ashiq  Ali, 
Muhammad  Hanif,  Sarfraz  alias  Kaka,  Muhammad  Younas,  Abdul 
Rehman, Jamshaid alias Kaka and Tahir (against conviction) which is 
arising  out  of  judgment  dated  15.03.2012  passed  by  learned 
Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Chichawatni  in  case  FIR  No.65/2010 
dated 19.03.2010 for the offence under section 376 (2) PPC registered 
at  Police  Station  Ghaziabad,  Chichawatni,  District  Sahiwal.  The 
learned  trial  court  through  the  impugned  judgment  convicted  and 
sentenced all the appellants in the following terms:- 
 
 
Jamshaid  alias  Kaka,  Muhammad  Younas,  Abdul 
Rehman alias Kala and Tahir (appellants) 
Under section 376 (2) PPC to undergo imprisonment of life each 
as well as to pay fine of Rs.25,000/- each and in default whereof to 
further undergo SI for two months.  
Ashiq  Ali,  Muhammad  Hanif 
(appellants) 
Under  section  114  PPC  read  with  section  376  (2)  PPC  to 
undergo  imprisonment  of  life  each  as  well  as  to  pay  fine  of 
Rs.25,000/- each and in  default whereof to  further undergo SI  for 
two months. 
and  Sarfraz                               
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
2 
The benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C. was also  extended in  favour 
of all the appellants.” 
 
2. 
Briefly  stated  the  facts  of  the  prosecution  case  as  unveiled  by 
Muhammad  Nasir  complainant  (PW.5)  in  FIR  (Exh.PE/1)  are  to  the 
effect  that  on  the  intervening  night  of  11/12.03.2010  at  about  9:00 
p.m.,  his  sister  Mst.  Shakila  aged  about  16-years  was  sleeping  with 
her  sisters  in  the  house;  that  his  parents  had  gone  to  Faisalabad  in 
connection  with  a  marriage;  that  Mst.  Shakila  went  to  the  fields  for 
easement  where  appellants  namely  Tahir,  Kaka,  Younas,  Ashiq, 
Hanifa, Sarfraz and Kala were already present who caught hold of her; 
that Tahir (appellant) committed rape with her whereas the remaining 
appellants  were  present  while  guarding  the  incident;  that  on  the  hue 
and  cry  of  Mst.  Shakila  Bibi,  Ghulam  Rasool  (given  up  PW)  and 
Irshad  (PW.4)  were  attracted  to  the  spot  and  on  seeing  them,  the 
accused persons fled away; that he was informed about the occurrence 
by the family members through telephone  and on 18.03.2010 he came 
home  where  Mst.  Shakila  (victim)  and  the  PWs  narrated  the  tale  of 
incident to him.  
3. 
The matter was investigated by  Muhammad Ashraf SI (PW.7), 
during  which  he  got  medically  examined  Mst.  Shakila  (victim)  on 
20.03.2010.  He  obtained  warrants  of  arrest  of  all  the  accused  except 
Muhammad  Younas  (appellant)  as  well  as  their  proclamation  and 
handed  over  the  same  to  Muhammad  Ayub  242/C  for  execution.  He 
arrested  Sarfraz,  Muhammad  Younas,  Abdul  Rehman  alias  Kala, 
Jamshaid  and  Muhammad  Hanif  on  different  dates  and  later  on  got 
former  three  medically  examined  for  the  evaluation  of  their  potency 
and  submitted  incomplete  report  under  section  173  Cr.P.C.  on 
05.06.2010. 
4. 
The prosecution, in order to prove its case against the appellants 
produced  seven  PWs  which  include  Mst.  Shakila  Bibi  (PW.3),  the 
victim, Muhammad Irshad (PW.4), an eyewitness of the occurrence 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
3 
and  Nasir  (PW.5)  complainant  of  the  case,  Lady  Doctor  Hina 
Ambar 
(PW.6)  who  medically  examined 
the  victim,  Dr. 
Muhammad  Saleem  Akhtar  (PW.1)  who  reported  regarding  the 
potency  of  the  appellants  namely  Muhammad  Younas,  Abdul 
Rehman, Muhammad Jamshaid and Sarfraz and Muhammad Ashraf 
SI (PW.7) who conducted the investigation of this case.  
5. 
Lady  Doctor  Hina  Ambar  (PW.6)  on  20.03.2010  medically 
examined  Mst.  Shakila  Bibi  (victim)  and  gave  the  following 
observations:- 
“History  of  rape  on  12.3.2010  by  three  persons.  The  I.O.  was 
directed to collect the clothes worn at the time of incident. Clothes 
were not  provided by the party. She  gave the history that she had 
washed  her  clothes  worn  at  the  time  of  incident.  The  girl  was  of 
average  height  and  built,  well  oriented  in  time,  place  and  person. 
Pulse  rate  80  P/M,  BP  100/70,  R/R  18  P/M,  temperature  was 
normal. 
She gave the history that her LMP started about two weeks ago and 
ended after three days. 
General Examination  
On  general  examination  there  was  no  mark  of  violence  on 
anywhere  of  body.  Local  examination  was  done  in  lithotomy 
position.  Hymen  was  torn.  Tears  were  old.  P/V  examination  was 
non-tender  with  non-bruise  and  swelling.  Vaginal  admitted  two 
fingers easily. 4 external and 4 internal vaginal  swabs were taken 
and sent to the Office of Chemical Examiner, Multan for detection 
of  semen  if  any  +  grouping  and  the  Centre  of  Excellence 
Microbiology  Department,  Punjab  University,  Lahore  for  DNA 
cross-matching. Final opinion about rape would be given after the 
above said reports. I issued MLC Exh.PF, which is in my hand and 
bears  my  signatures.  The  Report  of  Chemical  Examiner,  Multan 
Exh.PG has been received in the Court. As per report Exh.PG the 
above said swabs were not stained with semen. In the view of the 
above  said  report,  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  examinee  was  not 
virgin.”  
 
6. 
Dr.  Muhammad  Saleem  (PW.1)  medically  examined  the 
appellants  namely  Muhammad  Younas,  Abdul  Rehman,  Muhammad 
Jamshaid and Sarfraz for potency test and he gave MLCs (Exh.PA to 
Exh.PD).  
7. 
The learned trial court examined all the appellants under section 
342  Cr.P.C.  who  in  response  to  question  “Why  this  case  was  made 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
4 
against  you  and  why  the  PWs  deposed  against  you”,  made  the 
following one common reply:- 
“It  is  a  false  case.  We  all  the  accused  persons  belong  to  different 
families having independent business and residence. I and my co-
accused belong to Zahid Rasool Group, while complainant belongs 
to  Qayum  Group.  No  such  occurrence  ever  took  place.  The 
complainant and victim were used as a tool by Qayyum Nazim of 
the  Union  Council.  We  were  falsely  involved  in  this  case  for  the 
purpose  of  blackmailing  at  the  instance  of  Qayyum.  Later  on  the 
complainant  party  concocted  and  fabricated  the  story  and  falsely 
involved in this case after consultation and due deliberation. I and 
my co-accused have been involved in this case due to enmity and 
party friction and blackmailing.” 
 
 
The appellants neither made statement under section 340 (2) of 
Cr. P.C.  nor produced any witness in their defence. However, Sarfraz 
(appellant)  produced  in  evidence  copy  of  MLC  (Mark-A).  On  the 
conclusion  of  trial,  the  appellants  were  convicted  and  sentenced  as 
stated above, hence, the instant appeal. 
8. 
It  is  contended  by  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  that  the 
instant case was registered with a delay of about eight days; that such 
delay  gains  more  importance  when  seen  in  the  context  that  no 
satisfactory explanation is offered in this regard; that according to the 
crime report, only Tahir (appellant) was saddled with the allegation of 
having  committed  rape  of  the  victim,  however,  at  later  stage,  all  the 
appellants  were  burdened  with  the  same  blame;  that  though  during 
trial  three  witnesses  appeared  to  tell  the  tale  of  the  occurrence, 
however, from their statements, it evinces that except the victim none 
had the opportunity to witness the crime; that even the victim is found 
guilty  of  making  divergent  statements  in  the  court,  whereby  she 
implicated four of the appellants for the commission of rape; that the 
claim  of  the  victim  is  strongly  negated  from  the  medical  evidence 
brought on the record during the trial; that though the occurrence took 
place  in  the  heart  of  the  vicinity  yet  none  appeared  from  there  to 
support the prosecution case; that the clothes of the victim which she 
was wearing at the time of occurrence were also not subjected to the 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
5 
opinion  of  the  expert  to  ascertain  the  presence  of  semen  stains;  that 
the  appellants  were  convicted  by  the learned trial  court solely  on  the 
basis  of  heinousness  of  the  accusations  which  is  against  the  law  and 
that  from  the  perusal  of  the  prosecution  evidence,  many  doubts 
surfaced  on  the  record,  the  benefit  of  which  was  not  given  to  the 
appellants.  
9. 
On the other hand, the learned DDPP strongly controverted the 
arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  and  submitted  that 
they  are  specifically  nominated  in  the  crime  report  and  that  too  in 
reference to the roles performed by them in the commission of crime; 
that though there is some delay in the registration of FIR, however, it 
was reasonably explained by the prosecution and was attributed to the 
efforts of compromise being made by the accused; that even otherwise 
in  such  like  cases  since  the  family  honour  is  involved,  hence,  the 
delay in the registration of FIR is of no consequence; that the guilt of 
the appellants stands established on the basis of the statements of Mst. 
Shakila  Bibi  (victim)  as  well  as  from  the  testimony  of  two  other 
private  witnesses;  that  the  medical  evidence  provides  reasonable 
support  to  the  allegations  levelled  against  the  appellants;  that  the 
appellants  have  committed  a  gruesome  act  by  sexually  ravishing  the 
victim,  hence  were  rightly  convicted  and  sentenced  by  the  learned 
trial court.  
10.  Arguments heard. Record perused.  
11.  The case of the prosecution comprises upon the statement of the 
victim  namely  Mst.  Shakila  Bibi  (PW.3)  as  well  as  of  Muhammad 
Irshad  (PW.4),  who  is  an  eyewitness  of  the  occurrence  and  the 
medical  evidence  furnished  by  Lady  Doctor  Hina  Ambar  (PW.6). 
Though  Nasir  (PW.5)  also  appeared  as  a  witness  during  trial, 
however,  since  he  is  not  an  eyewitness  of  the  occurrence,  hence  his 
statement apparently is not of immense importance.  
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
6 
12. 
It divulges from the record that the instant case is arising out of 
an  occurrence  having  taken  place  on  11.03.2010  at  about  9:00  p.m. 
within  an  area  known  as  Chak  No.31/11-L,  situated  within  the 
territorial  jurisdiction  of  Police  Station  Ghaziabad,  District  Sahiwal. 
According to the record, the Police Station is situated at a distance of 
9-kilometers  from  the  crime  scene,  however,  the  occurrence  was 
reported  on  19.03.2010  by  Muhammad  Nasir  (PW.5)  through  an 
application (Exh.PE). From above, it can safely be gathered that there 
is  a  delay  of  about  7/8  days  in  the  registration  of  FIR.  From  the 
perusal of the crime report (Exh.PE/1), it evinces that the prosecution 
offered  an  explanation  to  address  the  abovementioned  delay  in  the 
registration of the instant case and attributed it to reconciliatory effort 
of  the  relatives  of  the  accused.  Since  the  prompt  reporting  or 
otherwise  of  a  criminal  case  has  its  own  importance,  hence,  the 
prosecution  was  obliged  to  lead  some  evidence  in  support  of  their 
acclaimed  reconciliatory  efforts.  The  perusal  of  the  record  is 
suggestive  of  the  fact  that  no  evidence  indeed  was  led  by  the 
prosecution in this behalf.  
13.  From  the  perusal  of  the  application  for  the  registration  of  FIR 
(Exh.PE), it is unearthed that only Tahir (appellant) was saddled with 
the allegation of having committed rape of Mst. Shakila Bibi (PW.3), 
whereas Kaka, Younas, Ashiq, Hanif, Sarfraz and Kala were burdened 
with  the  blame  of  guarding  the  crime  scene,  so  as  to  facilitate  the 
commission of rape. A wade through the prosecution case unfolds that 
in  order  to  secure  the  conviction  of  the  appellants,  the  prosecution 
produced  three  witnesses  who  narrated  the  detail  of  the  occurrence. 
These  witnesses  include  Mst.  Shakila  Bibi  (PW.3)  who  is  the  victim 
of  the  case,  Muhammad  Irshad  (PW.4)  who  attracted  to  the  crime 
scene  after  hearing  her  hue  and  cry  and  claimed  to  have  seen  the 
occurrence.  So  far  as  Muhammad  Nasir  (PW.5),  the  third  witness  is 
concerned,  as  per  admitted  facts,  he  is  not  the  eyewitness  of  the 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
7 
occurrence and while appearing in the dock narrated the detail of the 
incident provided to him by the family members. 
According  to  the  detail  provided  by  the  witnesses,  the 
occurrence  took  place  on  11.03.2010  at  the  evening  time  when  Mst. 
Shakila Bibi was on way to the house of her maternal uncle to attend 
the  call  of  nature  due  to  the  non-availability  of  a  toilet  in  her  house. 
When  she  reached  in  the  street,  she  was  intercepted  by  Ashiq  Ali, 
Muhammad Hanif and Sarfraz who all were armed with pistols. They 
forcibly  took  her  from  the  street  to  a  nearby  wheat  field  of  Master 
Asghar Ali and remaining four appellants namely Tahir, Kaka Zargar, 
Kala  Bhatti  and  Younas  were  already  present  there.  According  to 
Shakila  Bibi  (PW.3),  all  the  appellants  committed  her  rape  turn  by 
turn and on her hue and cry, Muhammad Irshad (PW.3) and Ghulam 
Rasool  (given  up  PW)  were  attracted  to  the  spot  and  witnessed  the 
occurrence.  
14. 
In the  above  backdrop, it  appears to be in  the  fitness  of  things 
firstly  to  have  a  look  over  the  deposition  of  Muhammad  Irshad 
(PW.4),  an  eyewitness  of  the  occurrence.  From  his  examination-in-
chief, it spells out that he has only saddled Tahir (appellant) with the 
allegation  of  having  committed  rape  with  the  victim.  As  regards  the 
remaining appellants, he has attributed them the role of being present 
at  the  crime  scene  while  guarding  the  situation.  Though  he  deposed 
during  his  examination-in-chief  about  the  victim  having  disclosed 
regarding the commission of rape by Tahir, Younas and Kala Sanaira 
(appellants)  as  well,  however,  during  cross-examination,  this  portion 
was proved to be an outcome of dishonest improvement. Likewise, it 
came  on  record  during  cross-examination  that  according  to  his 
statement before the police, the occurrence was not witnessed by him 
and  instead  he  attracted  to  the  crime  scene  after  receiving  the 
information of the occurrence. For reference sake, an extract from his 
cross-examination is being reproduced below:- 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
8 
“I  did  not  recorded  in  my  statement  Exh.DA  that  on  receiving 
information  I  and  Ghulam  Rasool  rushed  to  the  place  of 
occurrence. Confronted with Exh.DA wherein it is so recorded.” 
 
 
Such  portion  from  his  testimony  is  sufficient  to  draw  an 
inference  that  his  claim  of  having  witnessed  the  occurrence  after 
noticing  the  hue  and  cry  of  the  victim  appears  to  be  an  outcome  of 
exaggeration, rendering it unsafe to place explicit reliance on what he 
deposed before the court.  
15.  Before  embarking  upon  the  statement  of  Mst.  Shakila  Bibi,  it 
will be of immense importance to have a look as to how the place of 
occurrence is situated. According to record, the house of the victim is 
situated  in  Chak  No.31/11-L  which  is  inhabited  by  as  many  as  two 
thousand  persons  having  numerous  residential  houses.  Though 
Shakila Bibi has not specifically named her maternal uncle, to whose 
house  she  was  heading  for  availing  toilet  facility,  however,  she 
mentioned about it being situated in the adjacent street. It is important 
to mention here that Shakila Bibi also made reference to certain shops 
which  were  situated close to her house  and  were open  at  the time  of 
occurrence.  Likewise,  Muhammad  Irshad  (PW.4)  also  admitted  in 
unequivocal  terms  that  the  vicinity  of  crime  scene  was  comprising 
upon a densely populated area. Similarly, he acceded to the suggestion 
put  forth  by  the  defence  regarding  the  presence  of  hotel  of  Ghulam 
Mustafa,  saw-machine,  bus-stand  and  numerous  houses  within  the 
distance of 6-acres from the place of occurrence.  
 
From  above,  it  can  safely  be  inferred  that  Shakila  Bibi  victim 
(PW.3)  was  intercepted  and  taken  to  the  crime  scene  from  a  well-
populated  spot  but  even  then  none  from  the  vicinity  appeared  to 
support  the  accusations  incorporated  in  the  crime  report  either  at 
investigation stage or during the trial.  
 
16.  There are multiple factors which call in question the integrity of 
a  witness  and  the  factum  of  making  dishonest  improvements  and 
omissions  in  the  statements  before  the  Court  is  one  of  them.  Once  a 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
9 
witness  is  found  to  have  made  such  material  improvements  and 
omissions,  his  credibility  stands  exposed  to  a  doubt  on  a  plain  view 
and  shatters  the  legal  worth  of  his  testimony  as  well.  In  the  instant 
case,  the  dishonest  omissions  referred  above,  made  by  Muhammad 
Irshad (PW.4), which is also found to be material in nature, is giving 
rise  to  a  doubt.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  while 
embarking upon such issue held in the case reported as Ibrar Hussain 
and others (2007 SCMR 605) as under:- 
“It  is  settled  law  that  person  making  contradictory  statements 
cannot be held worthy and credence as law laid down by this Court 
in  Muhammad  Shafique  Ahmad’s  case  PLD  1986  SC  471.  It  is  a 
settled  law  that  witness  making  improvements  and  changing 
version  as  and  when  suited  according  to  the  situation  then  such 
type  of  improvements  were  found  deliberate  and  dishonest, 
therefore, cause serious doubt on the veracity of such witness.” 
 
Similar view was taken by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in 
the  case  of  Muhammad  Naeem  Inayat  v.  The  State  (2010  SCMR 
1054).  
17.  Since  the  allegation  of  rape  is  always  considered  as  an  act 
bereft  of  any  morality,  hence  gives  rise  to  sentiments  and  emotions 
against the wrong doer and brings sympathy for the victim. However, 
a court, by its very creation, is to administer justice and such objective 
can  best  be  achieved  only  through  decisions  in  accordance  with  the 
available  record  and  in  consonance  with  the  settled  principles  laid 
down for appraisal of evidence. In this backdrop, even the instant case 
is of no exception and this Court is obliged to decide its fate strictly in 
accordance  with  the  material  which  has  come  on  record  during  trial. 
In  the  above  background,  the  charge  of  rape  can  be  established 
through the statement of the victim and the witnesses as well as from 
the  medical  evidence  brought  on  record.  As  regard,  the  medical 
evidence, it  is  derived  from  multiple  sources, out  of  which  some  are 
enumerated as under:- 
(a)  Marks of violence on the genitals; 
(b)  Marks of violence on the person of the victim as well as the accused; 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
10 
(c)  The presence of semen or bloodstains on the clothes of the victim  or 
accused;  
(d)  The presence of seminal material in or around the vagina. 
 
 
In  order  to  find  some  support  from  the  above  mentioned 
material,  this  Court  has  appraised  the  medical  evidence  furnished  by 
Lady Doctor Hina Ambar (PW.6) who medically examined the victim 
on  20.03.2010.  According  to  the  record,  on  the  eventful  night,  the 
victim was about 17/18 years of age and since according to her claim 
she  raised  hue  and  cry  at  the  time  of  being  sexually  ravished  by  the 
appellants,  hence,  it  is  also  expected  from  her  to  have  offered  some 
physical  resistance  as  well.  As  a  necessary  corollary,  there  should 
have  been  some  marks  of  violence  on  her  person  either  due  to  her 
resistance or on account of the sexual lust of the culprits. However, it 
evinces  from  the  statement  of  Dr.  Hina  Ambar  (PW.6)  that  she 
noticed no marks of violence on any part of the person of the victim. 
Likewise, despite specific instructions by Dr. Hina Ambar (PW.6), the 
clothes  of  the  victim  which  she  was  wearing  at  the  time  of  incident 
were  also  not  secured  for  further  examination.  The  clothes  of  the 
victim were an important piece of evidence on two counts. Firstly had 
these clothes been torn, it would have provided some traces about the 
resistance  offered  by  the  victim  and  aggression  of  the  culprits  to 
accomplish  their  designs  and  secondly  their  examination  could  have 
led to the detection of semen or blood stains. Such aspect gains more 
importance when seen in the context of the victim’s stance, according 
to which at the time of occurrence she was deprived of her virginity. 
Needless  to  mention  that  in  such  circumstances  when  she  was 
sexually ravished by three persons, it must have resulted into bleeding 
leaving its stains on her clothes.  
18. 
It  is  further  observed  that  during  examination  of  the  victim, 
Dr.Hina Ambar (PW.6) found her hymen as torn but further opined it 
to  be  having  old  tears.  There  is  yet  another  important  aspect  arising 
out  of  the  medical  evidence  and  pertains  to  the  internal  and  external 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
11 
vaginal swabs secured from the person of the victim and forwarded to 
Chemical  Examiner,  Multan  and  to  the  Centre  of  Excellence 
Microbiology  Department,  Punjab,  Lahore  for  DNA  analysis. 
According to the report of Chemical Examiner (Exh.PG), the vaginal 
swabs  (internal  as  well  as  external)  were  found  not  stained  with 
semen. Dr. Hina Ambar (PW.6) went on to state that the semen can be 
detected  from  the  vagina  within  seventeen  days  of  the  act  of  sexual 
intercourse.  Since  it  appears  to  be  an  important  aspect  of  the  case, 
hence  the  relevant  extract  from  the  cross-examination  of  Dr.  Hina 
Ambar is being reproduced below:- 
“Semen  can  be  detected  in  the  vagina  for  17-days.  The  head  of 
chromosomes  separate  after  three  days  from  the  tail.  The 
chromosomes  became  motile  about  48-hours.  Semen  can  be 
detected within 17 days in case of vaginal swabs.” 
 
 
Since  the  instant  case  from  the  accusation  is  serious  in  nature, 
hence,  instead  of  blindly  following  the  opinion  of  the  doctor,  this 
Court has consulted the medical jurisprudence as well. Dr. S. Siddiq 
Husain in Chapter-XII, SEXUAL OFFENCES of his book titled as 
A  TEXT  BOOK  OF  FORENSIC  MEDICINE  AND 
TOXICOLOGY expressed the following opinion:- 
“In  the  living  woman,  motile  spermatozoa  in  the  vagina  can  be 
found over 100 hours after coitus and non-motile spermatozoa for 
as long as 17 days.” 
 
 
Similar view was expounded by B.R. Sharma in his book titled 
as  Forensic  Science  in  Criminal  Investigation  &  Trials  (FIFTH 
EDITION), which is as under:- 
“In vagina of a living person, spermatozoon may be detected up to 
about  five  to  ten  days,  though  the  number  of  spermatozoon 
detected goes on decreasing with passage of time.” 
The non-detection of semen from the vaginal swabs by the Chemical 
Examiner  has  led  this  Court  to  hold  that  the  record  of  the  case  is 
providing  no  support  to  the  prosecution  accusation.  It  gains  more 
importance when seen in the context that despite the suggestion of the 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
12 
Medical  Officer  no  effort  was  made  to subject  these swabs  for  DNA 
analysis.  
19.  Lastly, it is noticed that Shakila Bibi (PW.3) while appearing in 
the dock saddled four persons namely Tahir, Kaka Zargar, Kala Bhatti 
and  Younas  with  the  allegation  of  having  assaulted  her  sexually. 
Conversely,  Muhammad  Irshad  (PW.4)  went  on  to  say  that  he  and 
Ghulam  Rasool  (given  up  PW)  was  informed  by  the  victim  that  she 
was raped by three persons namely Tahir, Younas and Kaka Sanaira. 
In this regard, it is observed that the instant case was registered after 
about  seven  days  of  the  occurrence  and  according  to  the  tale  of  the 
incident  incorporated  therein,  only  Tahir  (appellant)  was  burdened 
with  the  blame  of  having  committed  sexual  intercourse  with  the 
victim.  This  Court  has  not  been  able  to  reconcile  such  a  glaring 
conflict  between  the  stance  taken  by  the  abovementioned  three 
prosecution  witnesses  as  the  acceptance  of  any  one  of  the  version 
mentioned above necessitates the exclusion of other.  
20.  So far as the non-securing of trouser (Shalwar) of the victim is 
concerned,  it  is  noted  that  such  omission  can  be  attributed  to  none 
other  than  the  victim  herself.  She  has  admitted  with  clarity  that  the 
trouser  (Shalwar)  was  not  produced  before  the  police  during 
investigation  despite  having  blood  stains.  This  feature  of  the  case 
coupled  with  the  fact  that  no  effort  was  made  to  get  the  swabs 
subjected  to  the  DNA  analysis  further  persuaded  this  Court  to  hold 
that  had  these  two  pieces  of  evidence  been  brought  on  record,  they 
would  not  have  supported    the  prosecution  case.  While  arriving  at 
such conclusion, this Court is guided by the provisions of Article 129, 
Illustration  (g)  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  which  is  being 
reproduced below:- 
129.  Court may presume existence of certain facts. The Court 
may  presume  the  existence  of  any  fact,  which  it  thinks  likely  to 
have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural 
events, human conduct and the public and private business, in their 
relation to the facts of the particular case. 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
13 
 
Illustrations 
 
 
(g) 
The court may presume: 
that  evidence  which  could  be  and  is  not  produced 
would,  if  produced,  be  unfavourable  to  the  person 
who withholds it. 
 
 
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of 
Muhammad  Rafique, etc. v. State  & others  (PLJ  2011  SC  191)  held 
as under:-  
  
  
“that if any party withholds the best piece of evidence then it can 
fairly be presumed that the party had some sinister motive behind 
it.  The  presumption  under  Article  129  (g)  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order can fairly be drawn that if PW would have been examined, 
his evidence would have been unfavourable to the prosecution.”  
21.  The  discrepancies,  omissions  and  conflicts,  mentioned  above, 
are giving rise to a doubt which derives a prudent legal mind to lean 
against  the  version  advanced  by  the  prosecution  case.  There  is  no 
cavil to the proposition that the benefit of every reasonable doubt is to 
be  extended  to  an  accused  which  can  best  be  provided  through  a 
judgment  of  acquittal.  Even  as  per  saying  of  the  Holy  Prophet 
(p.b.u.h.), the mistake in releasing a criminal is better than punishing 
an innocent person. Same principle was also followed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Ayub  Masih  v.  The  State 
(PLD 2002 SC 1048), wherein, it was observed as under:- 
“….  It  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  here  that  this  rule 
occupies  a  pivotal  place  in  the  Islamic  Law  and  is  enforced 
rigorously in view of the saying of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h) that 
the “mistake of Qazi (Judge) in  releasing a criminal is better than 
his mistake in punishing an innocent.” In supra mentioned case of 
Ayub  Masih,  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  was  also  pleased  to 
observe  as  under:  -  “…The  rule  of  benefit  of  doubt,  which  is 
described as the golden rule, is essentially a rule of prudence which 
cannot be ignored while dispensing justice in accordance with law. 
It  is  based  on  the  maxim,  “it  is  better  that  ten  guilty  persons  be 
acquitted rather than one innocent person be convicted”…” 
 
 22.   In  the  light  of  above  discussion,  I  accept  Criminal  Appeal 
No.217  of  2012  filed  by  seven  appellants  namely  Ashiq  Ali, 
Muhammad  Hanif,  Sarfraz  alias  Kaka,  Muhammad  Younas,  Abdul 
Criminal Appeal No.217 of 2012 
14 
Rehman, Jamshaid alias Kaka and Tahir, set aside their conviction and 
sentence  recorded  by  the  learned  trial  court  and  acquit  them  of  the 
charge  by  extending  them  the  benefit  of  doubt.  Appellants  namely 
Muhammad  Younas,  Abdul  Rehman,  Jamshaid  alias  Kaka  and  Tahir 
are in custody, be released forthwith if not required to be detained in 
any  other  case.  Ashiq  Ali,  Muhammad  Hanif,  Sarfraz  alias  Kaka 
(appellants)  are  on  bail  and  as  such  their  sureties  stand  discharged 
from their bail bonds.  
    
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
(Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
          Judge 
 
 
  (Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
          Judge 
 
 
Najum* 
