Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Writ Petition No.5591 /2018 
 
JUDGMENT 
Muhammad Tuseef and 4 others 
Vs. 
The State Bank of Pakistan and 30 others 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Decision:    12.06.2018 
Petitioners by:   M/s.  Haroon-ur-Rasheed  &  Gulzar  Hussain 
Bukhari, Advocates. 
 
Respondents by:  Malik  Sohail  Ameer,  Legal  Advisor  & 
Muhammad Ajmal (R.M.). 
Mr.  Muhammad  Tahir  Saeed  Ramay,  Assistant 
Advocate-General.  
Ch.  Sajjad  Amjad  Khan,  Assistant  Attorney-
General.     
 
 
 
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J:-    This  single  judgment  will  dispose  of 
the instant petition as well as another Writ Petition No. 5639 of 2018 
titled “Muhammad Saleem v. the Manager FINCA Microfinance Bank 
Ltd. etc.” (the “Petitions”) as the issues involved in the Petitions are 
similar and interconnected.  
 
2. 
Through 
the  petitions,  filed  under  Article  199  of 
the 
Constitution  of 
the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (the 
“Constitution”),  the  Petitioners  have  prayed  that  the  Respondents 
No.2  &  3  be  restrained  from  recovering  the  amount  of  loan/finance 
obtained by the Petitioners from the Microfinance Banks by adopting 
coercive measures in violation of the due course of law. 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            2 
 
3. 
Brief  facts  of  the  instant  cases  are  that  the  Petitioners  are  the 
residents  of  the  backward  area  of  the  District  Bahawalpur.  The 
Petitioners  and  former  Respondents  No.  4  to  31  obtained  loans  from 
the Respondent No.1 for one year from April 2017 to April 2018 but 
due to financial position of the Petitioners, the said loan amounts are 
not being paid to the Microfinance Banks. The Petitioners allege that 
the  Respondent  No.2  is  threatening  and  adopting  coercive  measures 
through  the  Respondent  No.3  for  the  recovery  of  said  loans  without 
adopting  the  legal  procedure  as  prescribed  under  the  Financial 
Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance,  2001  (the  “Recovery 
Ordinance”). Hence, these Petitions.    
 
4. 
The learned counsel for the Petitioners inter alia submitted that 
the  Respondent  No.  2  in  Writ  Petition  No.  5591/2018  and  the 
Respondent  No.1 
in  Writ  Petition  No.  5639/2018 
(the 
“Respondents”)  are  the  Microfinance  Banks  established  in  2002 
under 
the  Microfinance 
Institution  Ordinance,  2001 
(the 
“Microfinance  Ordinance”);  that  the  Microfinance  Banks  are  going 
to  recover  the  alleged  loans  from  the  Petitioners  by  arrest  and 
threatening/harassing  them  which  is  totally  against  the  law;  that  for 
the  recovery  of  said  amount  the  proper  procedure  has  been  provided 
under  the  Recovery  Ordinance;  that  under  the  Recovery  Ordinance, 
the  Respondents  should  file  a  suit  before  the  Banking  Court  and 
thereafter  they  may  adopt  coercive  measures  in  accordance  with  law 
and  without  adopting  the  procedure  prescribed  under  the  Recovery 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            3 
Ordinance,  the  act  of  recovery  of  said  loan  amounts  is  illegal  and 
against  Articles  4  and  10-A  of  the  Constitution.  In  Writ  Petition  No. 
5639/2018, the Petitioner has also alleged that the Petitioner obtained 
loan  of  Rs.1,50,000/-  from  the  Respondents  which  was  without  any 
interest  but  when  the  Petitioner  tried  to  return  the  principle  amount, 
the  Respondents  started  threatening  him  and  issued  letter  dated 
30.05.2018  mentioning  the  recoverable  amount  as  Rs.1,96,500/-  by 
adding interest on the said amount. 
 
5. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondents 
appeared  and  vehemently  contested  the  arguments  advanced  by  the 
learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioners  and  prayed  for  dismissal  of  the 
Petitions  on  the  grounds  that  the  nature  of  loan/finance  obtained  by 
the Petitioners is not to be dealt with by the Banking Court under the 
Recovery  Ordinance,  and  to  invoke  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Banking 
Court,  the  parties  must  fall  under  the  definitions  of  the  “Financial 
Institution”  and  the  “Customer”  as  provided  in  the  Recovery 
Ordinance. He further contended that the Petitioners do not have any 
nexus  with  the  definitions  of  the  above  referred  Recovery  Ordinance 
rather  the  amount  is  to  be  recovered  through  a  summary  suit  under 
Order XXXVII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“CPC”); that at 
the  time  of  obtaining  the  loans,  the  Petitioners  duly  signed  different 
documents including cheques and now they are refusing their liability 
to  repay  the  said  facility.  To  fortify  his  contentions,  the  learned 
counsel  has  placed  reliance  on  the  cases  titled  Syed  Itrat  Hussain 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            4 
Rizvi  v.  Messrs  Tameer  Micro  Finance  Bank  Limited  through 
Attorney  and  another  (2018  CLD  116  [Sindh])  and  Marhaba 
Pakistan etc. v. HBL etc. (2017 CLD 995) = (PLJ 2017 Lahore 600). 
 
6. 
The  learned  Law  Officer also  vehemently  opposed the petition 
and  submitted  that  there  is  nothing  on  file  to  show  that  any  coercive 
measures have been adopted against the Petitioners rather they will be 
dealt  with in  accordance  with the law;  that  these  Petitions  have  been 
filed mere on the basis of apprehensions and assumptions, as such are 
not maintainable. 
 
7. 
I have heard the arguments of both the parties and perused the 
record. 
 
 
 
8. 
In  both  the  Petitions,  the  Petitioners  have  taken  the  specific 
stance  that  the  recovery  of  the  loan  obtained  by  them  from  the 
Respondents  is  to  be  made  under  the  Recovery  Ordinance.  Whereas, 
on the other hand, the learned counsel for the Respondents submitted 
that  the  case  of  the  Petitioners  does  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of  the 
Recovery Ordinance rather the recovery of loan facility is to be made 
by  filing  a  summary  suit  under  Order  XXXVII  of  CPC.  The 
controversy,  therefore,  arising  out  of  the  instant  petitions  is  that 
whether the  procedure  provided  in  the  Recovery  Ordinance  has  to be 
followed for recovery of the loans obtained by the Petitioners from the 
Microfinance Banks? 
 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            5 
9.  
In  order  to  resolve  this  controversy,  it  is  essential  to  see  the 
applicable  provisions  and  definitions  provided  under  the  Recovery 
Ordinance  and  the  Microfinance  Ordinance.  The  Microfinance 
Ordinance  has  been  promulgated  to  regulate  the  establishment, 
business  and  operations  of  microfinance  institutions  for  providing 
organizational,  financial  and  infrastructural  support  to  poor  persons, 
particularly poor women, for mitigating poverty and promoting social 
welfare  and  economic  justice through  community  building  and  social 
mobilization  and  to  provide  for  matters  connected  therewith  or 
ancillary  thereto.  The  Microfinance  Ordinance,  in  Section  2,  has 
defined  the  “customer”,  “microfinance  institution”,  “microfinance 
bank”, “microfinance services” and “poor persons”, as: 
 
 “(d) “customer” means any person or group of persons 
availing the services of a microfinance institution; 
…. 
(i) “microfinance institution” means an institution, which 
extends  micro  credit  and  allied  services  to  the  poor 
through  sources  other 
than  public  savings  and 
deposits;”; 
 
(ia)  “microfinance  bank”  means  an  institution  licensed 
by  State  Bank  under  this  Ordinance  to  establish  and 
operate as microfinance bank;  
 
(j)  “microfinance  services”  means  the  financial  and 
other related services specified in section 6, the value of 
which  does  not  exceed  such  amount  as  the  State  Bank 
may, from time to time, determine; 
 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            6 
(k)  “poor  persons”  means  persons  who  have  meager 
means  of  subsistence  and  whose  total  income  during  a 
year  is  less  than  such  minimum  limit  as  the  State  Bank 
may, from time to time, prescribe;”  
10.  On the other hand, Section 2 of the Recovery Ordinance defines 
the “Financial Institution” and the “Customer” as follows: 
(a) "financial institution" means and includes   
 
(i)   any company whether incorporated within or outside 
Pakistan  which  transacts the business of banking or any 
associated  or  ancillary  business  in  Pakistan  through  its 
branches  within  or  outside  Pakistan  and  includes  a 
government savings bank, but excludes the State Bank of 
Pakistan;   
 
(ii)  a  modaraba  or  modaraba  management  company, 
leasing  company, 
investment  bank,  venture  capital 
company, financing company, unit trust or mutual fund of 
any kind and credit or investment institution, corporation 
or company; and 
 
(iii)  any  company  authorised  by  law  to  carry  on  any 
similar  business,  as  the  Federal  Government  may  by 
notification in the official Gazette, specify;   
…. 
 
(c) "customer" means a person to whom finance has been 
extended by a financial institution and includes a person 
on whose behalf a guarantee or letter of credit has been 
issued by a financial institution as well as a surety or an 
indemnifier;       
 
 
 
 
 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            7 
11. 
It  is  essential  to  highlight  that  Section  3  of  the  Microfinance 
Ordinance clearly bars the applicability of the laws relating to banking 
companies  or  financial  institutions  to  the  microfinance  institutions 
licensed under the Microfinance Ordinance: 
 
“3. Applications of other laws 
 
1.  The  provisions  of  this  Ordinance  shall  be  in  addition 
to,  and,  save  as  hereinafter  provided,  not  in  derogation 
of, any other law for the time being in force. 
 
2.  Save  as  otherwise  provided  in  this  Ordinance,  the 
Banking Companies Ordinance and any other law for the 
time  being  in  force  relating  to  banking  companies  or 
financial  institutions  shall  not  apply  to  microfinance 
institutions 
licensed  under 
this  Ordinance  and 
microfinance  institution  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  a 
banking company for the purposes of the said Ordinance, 
the State Bank of Pakistan Act, 1956 (XXXIII of 1956), or 
any  other  law  for  the  time  being  in  force  relating  to 
banking companies. 
 
3.  Save  as  expressly  provided  in  this  Ordinance,  the 
provisions  of 
this  Ordinance 
shall  have  effect 
notwithstanding  anything  contained 
in  any  rules, 
regulations,  memoranda  or  articles  of  association  of  a 
microfinance  institution  or  in  any  resolution  passed  by 
such institution in its general meeting or by its Board of 
Directors,  whether  the  same  be  applied,  executed  or 
passed  before  or  after  the  commencement  of  this 
Ordinance  and  any  provision  contained  in  any  rules, 
regulations,  memoranda,  articles  or 
resolutions 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            8 
aforesaid shall, to the extent of its inconsistency become 
or be void and of no legal effect.” (emphasis added) 
 
12.   Admittedly, in both the petitions, the Petitioners availed services 
from  the  First  Microfinance  Bank  Limited  and  FINCA  Microfinance 
Bank  Limited  respectively,  which  have  been  established  under  the 
Microfinance  Ordinance.  From  the  above  definitions  provided  in  the 
Microfinance  Ordinance,  it  is  explicit  that  the  Petitioners,  being 
“customers”,  obtained 
the  “microfinance  services” 
from 
the 
“microfinance  institutions”  and/or  the  “microfinance  banks”,  and 
accordingly,  the  Microfinance  Banks  and  the  Petitioners  do  not  fall 
under  definitions  of  the  “financial  institution”  and  “customer” 
provided  in  the  Recovery  Ordinance.  Consequently,  the  case  of  the 
Petitioners does not fall within the domain of the Recovery Ordinance. 
Even  otherwise,  Section  3  of  the  Microfinance  Ordinance  has 
explicitly  barred  the  applicability  of  any  law  relating  to  the  banking 
companies  or  financial  institutions  to  the  microfinance  institutions 
licensed  under  the  Microfinance  Ordinance.  Above  Section  3  further 
clarifies  that  the  microfinance  institutions  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be 
the  banking  companies.  Therefore,  it  can  be  safely  held  that  the 
recoveries  from  the  Petitioners  of  the  loans  obtained  from  the 
Microfinance  Institutions  cannot  be  made  under  the  Recovery 
Ordinance through Banking Court. For this purpose, reliance can also 
be  placed  on  the  case  titled  Syed  Itrat  Hussain  Rizvi  v.  Tameer 
Micro Finance Bank Limited through Attorney and another (2018 
CLD  116  [Sindh]),  in  which  the  Honorable  Sindh  High  Court  has 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            9 
restrained  the  recovery  of  the  loans  obtained  from  the  Microfinance 
Banks  under  the  Recovery  Ordinance  and  has  allowed  such  recovery 
through summary suit under Order XXXVII of CPC, as under: 
 
 
“9.   Besides  above,  a  bare  perusal  of  section  3(2)  of 
Microfinance Institution Ordinance 2001, as reproduced 
in  para  No.2  above,  clearly  reflects  that  the  Banking 
Companies Ordinance and any law for the time being in 
force  relating 
to  banking  companies  or 
financial 
institutions  shall  not  apply  to  microfinance  institutions 
licensed  under 
the  Ordinance  and  microfinance 
institutions shall not be deemed to be a banking company 
for the purposes of the said ordinance, the State Bank of 
Pakistan Act, 1956 (XXXIII of 1956) or any other law for 
the time being in force relating to banking companies. 
 
10.       From the above legal position, it appears that the 
summary  suit  filed  by  respondent  No.  1/plaintiff  against 
the appellant/defendant before respondent No.2 [District 
Judge,  Karachi  (Central)]  was  competent  and  was 
rightly decided by the said court.” 
 
13.   Furthermore,  it  also  reveals  from  the  prayers  of  the  Petitions 
that these have been filed mere on the basis of apprehensions and still 
no  action  has  been  taken  against  the  Petitioners.  Therefore,  the 
issuance  of  directions  to  the  Respondents  as  prayed  for  by  the 
Petitioners  would,  at  this  stage,  tantamount  to  throw  arrows  in  the 
dark.  It  is  settled  principle  of  law  that  this  Court  cannot  issue 
directions mere on the basis of apprehensions and assumptions of the 
parties.  Moreover,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondents  has 
W.P.  No.5591 of 2018 
W.P.  No.5639 of 2018   
 
            10 
categorically stated that the recovery from the Petitioners is to be made 
through  summary  suit  under  Order  XXXVII  of  CPC,  and  the 
Respondents are not harassing the Petitioners rather they will adopt the 
proper procedure prescribed under the law. 
14.  
In this view of the discussion made above, I am of the affirmed 
view  that  these  petitions  are  not  maintainable,  and  consequently,  the 
same are hereby dismissed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (JAWAD  HASSAN)                          
 
  JUDGE                                                
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*M.NAVEED* 
