Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.39563 of 2016. 
 
Ameena Haq.    Vs.   Rab Nawaz Khan etc. 
  
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
proceeding 
proceeding 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
 
 
 
29.03.2018.  Sh.  Muhammad  Siddiq-II,  Advocate  for 
the 
petitioner. 
Mian Khalid Habib Elahi, Advocate for respondent 
No.1. 
 
 
Succinctly,  the  facts  forming  factual  canvass 
of the instant petition are that Muhammad Jamil etc. 
were  owners  of  three  residential  quarters  situated  in 
Street  No.48,  Mohallah  Ashfaqpura,  Ghazi  Abad, 
Lahore wherein predecessor-in-interest of the present 
parties and one Mst. Hameeda Bibi were dwelling as 
tenants. During currency of the tenancy predecessor-
in-interest  of  the  parties  and  Mst.  Hameeda  Bibi 
opted  to  purchase  the  said  quarters  and  as  a  result 
two  agreements  were  executed  between  the  vendors 
and predecessor-in-interest of the present parties and 
Mst.  Hameeda  Bibi  according 
to  which  Mst. 
Hameeda  Bibi  intended  to  purchase  one  quarter 
whereas two fell to the part of predecessor-in-interest 
of the present parties. As Haq Nawaz Khan, husband 
of the present petitioner, got transferred all the three 
quarters  in  his  name,  Mst.  Hameeda  Bibi  filed  a 
declaratory  suit  which  was  decreed  by  the  learned 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__2___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
Civil  Judge,  Lahore  vide  judgment  &  decree,  dated 
31.10.2005 and she was held entitled for execution of 
sale  deed  regarding  one  quarter.  Pursuant  to  decree 
passed by the learned Civil Judge, Lahore one quarter 
was  transferred  in  the  name  of  Mst.  Hameeda  Bibi. 
On  the  other  hand,  on  the  demise  of  husband  of  the 
present  petitioner  rest  of  the  two  quarters  devolved 
upon his legal heir and as a result of Surrender Deed, 
bearing document No.5179, Bahi No.1, Jild No.1903, 
dated 09.07.2014, executed by the other legal heirs in 
favour of the petitioner she became sole owner of the 
two quarters. Upon becoming the exclusive owner of 
two quarters the petitioner filed an ejectment petition 
against  respondent  No.1  (the  respondent)  which  was 
dismissed  by  the  learned  Special  Judge  (Rent), 
Lahore  vide  order,  dated  07.12.2015,  against  which 
she  filed  an  appeal  but  without  any  success  as  the 
same  was  dismissed  by  the  learned  Additional 
District Judge, Lahore vide judgment & decree, dated 
11.11.2016; hence this petition. 
2. 
The submissions made by learned counsel for 
the  petitioner  can  be  summed  up  in  the  words  that 
though father-in-law of the petitioner entered into an 
agreement to sell regarding two quarters but the sale 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__3___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
deed having  exclusively  been  registered in the name 
of  husband  of  the  petitioner,  other  legal  heirs  of 
Tamaz  Khan  (predecessor-in-interest  of  the  parties) 
had nothing to do with the property in  question; that 
Mst. Hameeda Bibi only challenged transfer of third 
quarter in the name of husband of the petitioner, thus, 
the decree passed in her favour could be read only to 
that  extent;  that  tenant  is  always  a  tenant;  that  the 
respondent had been paying rent during the life time 
of  husband  of  the  petitioner  but  after  his  death, 
despite repeated requests by the petitioner, he refused 
to  pay  the  same,  thus,  the  respondent  fell  within  the 
category  of  defaulter;  that  the  findings  of  the  courts 
below on the basis of decree passed in favour of Mst. 
Hameeda  Bibi  cannot  sustain  for  the  reason  that 
much  after  the  decree  a  Surrender  Deed  was 
registered  in  favour  of  the  petitioner  whereby  two 
quarters  were 
transferred 
in  her  name 
to 
the 
exclusion  of  anybody  else  and  that  when  the 
respondent  failed  to  show  any  title  document  his 
status  could  not  be  considered  better  than  that  of  a 
tenant,  thus,  he  was  bound  to  vacate  the  premises. 
Relies on Abbas Ali Khan v. Mst. Farhat Iqbal and 2 
others  (2009  SCMR  1077),  Barkat  Masih  v. 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__4___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
Manzoor  Ahmad  (Deceased)  through  L.Rs  (NLR 
2004  Civil  702),  Sh.  Manzoor  Ahmad  and  others  v. 
Mst.  Iqbal  Begum  and  others  (1989  SCMR  949), 
Bashir  Ahmad  v.  Abdul  Hamid  and  another  (1983 
SCMR 302), Abdul Hameed v. Abdul Rasheed (1981 
SCMR  527),  Messrs  Lasbella  Industrial  Estate 
Development  Authority,  HUB  through  Managing 
Director and another (PLD 2011 Quetta 48), Rahat 
Iqbal  v.  Allauddin  and  another  (2010  MLD  1988), 
Anjuman  Jamait-ul-Ikhwan  v.  Karachi  Building 
Control  Authority  and  others  (2006  YLR  1395), 
Inam Elahi v. Muhammad Javed and 5 others (2000 
YLR  1343),  Bashir  Ahmad  v.  Abdus  Salam  and  3 
others (1986 CLC 572), Kafayatullah v. Muhammad 
Inayat (1983 CLC 3316) and Raja Muhammad Afzal 
Khan etc. v. Zareena Akram etc. (PLD 1977 Lahore 
662). 
3. 
Conversely,  learned  counsel  representing  the 
respondent,  while  defending  the  impugned  verdicts 
of  the  courts  below,  submits  that in  the  second limb 
of  the  prayer  clause  Mst.  Hameeda  Bibi  challenged 
the sale deed in favour of husband of the petitioner in 
toto, thus, the assertion of the petitioner that she only 
challenged  it  to  the  extent  of  3rd  quarter  is  not 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__5___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
tenable;  that  while  concluding  his  findings,  the 
learned Civil Judge, Lahore held that the sale deed in 
favour  of  husband  of  the  petitioner  was  result  of 
fraud,  thus,  the  title  of  husband  of  the  petitioner 
vanished  away;  that  the  petitioner  succeeded  to  get 
transfer  the  property  in  her  name  on  the  strength  of 
Surrender  Deed  despite  cancellation  of  sale  deed 
executed in the name of her late husband and that as 
father of the respondent entered into an agreement to 
sell  with  the  original  owners  the  respondent  being 
legal heir is a shareholder.  
4.  While exercising his right of rebuttal, learned 
counsel for the petitioner submits that after execution 
of sale deed in favour of husband of the petitioner the 
agreement to sell executed in favour of her father-in-
law was no more enforceable. 
5. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable  length  and  have  also  gone  through  the 
documents, annexed with this petition, as well as the 
case-law cited at the bar. 
6. 
Firstly  taking  up  question  relating  to  title  of 
the  petitioner  after  passing  of  decree  in  favour  of 
Mst. Hameeda Bibi, I am of the view that a perusal of 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__6___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
the  prayer  clause  of  the  suit  filed  by  Mst.  Hameeda 
Bibi  shows  that  though  she  dubbed  the  sale  deed  as 
forged, fabricated and unlawful but she confined her 
claim  to  the  extent  of  one  quarter.  Further,  the 
learned Civil Judge, Lahore while dealing with Issue 
No.8, concluded as under: - 
 
 
“ISSUE No.8. RELIEF. 
That,  in  view  of  my  finding  on  issue 
18. 
No.7,  the  suit  is  decreed  and  the  sale  deed 
bearing  Dastawaiz  No.4536  dated  8.4.1990 
(executed in the office of sub-Registrar Cantt) 
is  declared  illegal,  void,  forged,  result  of 
dishonesty 
and  misrepresentation.  The 
defendants  No.1  &  2  are  ordered  to  execute 
sale  deed  in  favour  of  plaintiff  in  view  of 
agreement  to  sell  dated  9.2.1990  subject  to 
their  title.  That  after  execution  of  sale  deed 
the  plaintiff  will  become  owner  in  possession 
of  1/3 
(one  quarter)  bearing  Khasra 
No.2060/758,  Imarti  Had  Bast,  Mauza  Gunj 
Kumharpura, Ghazi Abad, Cantt.  Lahore. No 
order  as  to  costs.  File  be  consigned  to  the 
record room after preparation.” 
A  cursory  glance  over  the  afore-quoted  findings  of 
the learned  Civil  Judge, Lahore leaves  no  ambiguity 
that after declaring the sale deed as result of fraud to 
the  extent  of  Mst.  Hameeda  Bibi,  an  order  for 
registration of sale deed in her favour to the extent of 
one  quarter  was  passed.  When  the  said  fact  is 
considered  while  putting  it  in  juxtaposition  to  the 
transfer  of  one  quarter  in  favour  of  Mst.  Hameeda 
Bibi, without any objection on any side, the assertion 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__7___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
of  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  that  after 
declaring  sale  deed  as  result  of  fraud  no  title  in  the 
name of husband of the petitioner remained intact, is 
misconceived. 
 
Considering from another angle if for the sake 
of  academic  discussion  it  is  presumed  that  the  Sale 
Deed  in  favour  of  husband  of  the  petitioner  was 
cancelled  even  then  the  said  fact  cannot  be  used  in 
favour  of  the  respondent  for  the  reason  that  after 
cancellation of Sale Deed in favour of the husband of 
the  petitioner  the  land  was  to  revert  back  to  the 
original  owners  without  improving  the  status  of  the 
respondent. 
7. 
It  is  imperative  to  note  over  here  that  while 
dealing with the ejectment petition a Rent Tribunal is 
not supposed to go into disputed questions relating to 
title  rather  it  has  to  decide  the  matter  on  the  pivotal 
question  as  to  whether  tenancy  between  the  parties 
existed  or  not.  Thus,  this  Court  will  not  dilate  upon 
the said question. 
8. 
Now reverting to question relating to tenancy 
between  the  parties,  I  have  observed  that  the 
petitioner,  while  appearing  as  AW-1,  admitted  that 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__8___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
the  respondent  has  been  putting  up  in  the  rented 
premises since the life time of her father. She further 
admitted  that  neither  any  tenancy  was  executed  nor 
the  terms  thereof  were  settled  between  the  parties; 
that during his life time her husband neither filed any 
proceedings  against  the  respondent  nor  gave  any 
notice  rather  he  was  asked  verbally  to  vacate  the 
premises  and  that  the  respondent  lastly  paid  rent  to 
her late husband in August 2014 which was changed 
as  2005  and  then  2010.  Likewise,  Muhammad 
Yousaf,  AW.2,  admitted  that  he  came  to  depose 
before the Court due to friendship with the petitioner. 
He also admitted that he did not witness any tenancy 
between  the  parties.  He  further  admitted  that  no 
tenancy agreement was executed between the parties. 
Similarly,  AW-3  showed  his  lack  of  knowledge 
about  any  tenancy  between  the  parties.  In  this 
backdrop,  one  thing  is  clear  that  the  respondent  is 
residing  in  the  rented  premises  since  the  time  of  his 
father  without  execution  of  formal  tenancy  between 
the parties. So, the assertion of the petitioner that the 
respondent  is  residing  as 
tenant  is  not  worth 
consideration. 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__9___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
9. 
There  is  no  cavil  with  the  preposition  that 
tenant  is  always  a  tenant  but  when  a  person  did  not 
enter the premises in the capacity of tenant he cannot 
be  dubbed  as  such  just  due  to  filing  of  ejectment 
petition  and  that  too  in  absence  of  any  solid  proof. 
Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, when all the 
AWs  admitted  that  the  respondent  has  been  putting 
up  in  the  demised  property  without  any  terms  & 
conditions regarding tenancy since the life time of his 
father,  by  no  stretch  of  imagination  he  can  be 
considered as tenant.  
10.  As per law laid down by the apex Court of the 
country  in  the  case  of  Farhat  Jabeen  v.  Muhammad 
Safdar  and  others  (2011  SCMR  1073)  concurrent 
findings of facts recorded by the courts below cannot 
be  upset  in  Constitutional  jurisdiction  until  and 
unless  they  are  proved  to  be  perverse  or  result  of 
arbitrariness  which  is  not  the  position  in  the  case  in 
hand. 
11.  Now coming to the case-law cited by learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioner,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the 
same is of no help for the petitioner, to the extent of 
tenancy, for the reason that in none of the judgments, 
 
            
W.P. No.39563 of 2016. 
 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__10___ 
S.No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
a  person  did  not  enter  the  premises  as  tenant  was 
subsequently  dubbed  as  tenant  in  absence  of  any 
terms & conditions, verbal or oral. 
12.  As  a  necessary  corollary  to  the  discussion 
made  in  the  fore-going  paragraphs,  I  have  no 
hesitation  to  hold  that  the  petitioner  failed  to 
establish that relationship of landlord and tenant exist 
between the parties.  Consequently, instant petition is 
dismissed with no order as to costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shujaat Ali Khan) 
Judge 
Announced in Open Court today i.e. 24.04.2018.  
Approved for Reporting. 
   
 
 
 
     Judge 
 
G R * 
 
