.:
t'
f-'-.\
Y
(Revised  Form of Blue SliP)
ORDER  OF THE COURT.
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  BAHAWALPUR BENCH,
BAHAWALPUR.
Case No. M.
Crl.A.No.  1 1 1201 4&!YP.
Date of decision:-  18.04.2018.
a) Judgment  approved for reporting.
eal No.49412013/BWP 3
r-
Whether any comment upon the conduct of
the judicial  officer or quality  of the impugned
judgment is desired to be made.
(In case the answer is in the affirmative,
separate confidential note may be sentttg tht
Registrar drawing  his attention to the flrtic
aspect.
Yes/No
YesNo
rt" \ 
Inifiai of thdJutl[e
,.a
Note:-
If the slip is used, the Court Associate  must attach it on top of first
page of the judgment.
bourt Associate  may ask the Judge writing the Judgment whether
the judgment  is to be approved for reporting;  or any comment is to
be made about the Judicial  Officer/quality of judgment'
This slip is only to be used when some action is to be taken.
1.
2.
3.
,t-
\
-tr*tF 
+.b--.-_
\_
Stereo.  HCJDA 38
JUDGMEI{T SHEET
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, BAHAWALPUR  BENCH,
BAHAWALPUR
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Murder Reference  No. 56 of 2013/BWP
(The State v. Haswar Shah & another)
Criminal Appeal No. 494 of 2013/BWP
(Haswar  Shah  & another  v. The State & another)
Criminal Appeal No. 11, of 2014/BWP
(Syed Amjad  Hussain Shah v.lulst.Shamim  Bibi alias Shami & 3 others)
JUDGMEI{T
18.4.2018
Syed Aasim AIi Bokhari, Advocate
Ch. AsghaY AIi GiEl, Depufy Prosecutor
General -\
Mr. Tallat Mehmood Kake za\Advocate
DATE OF
HEARII{G
Appetrlants
by:
State by:
Complainant
by:
TARIO  SALEEM SHEIKH.  J. - By this consolidated
judgment  we propose to decide Murder  Reference No. 56/2013/BWP,
Crl. Appeal No. 494l20l3lBWP and Crl. Appeal No.lllzIl lBWP
arising from case FIR No. 178/2010  dated 1.5.2010  registered  at
Police Station Saddar Hasilpur, District  Bahawalpur, for offences
under Sections 302/376 PPC.
2. 
Brief facts of the case are that on 1.5.2010  Syed Amjad
Hussain Shah (PW-4)  addressed a cornplaint  Exh.PB to the SHO
Police Station Hasilpur  stating that he was a resident of Basti Noor
'-  Shuh,  Mauza Chohan,  and was an agriculturist  by profession'  On
30.4.2010 at about 6:00 p.m., his daughter Faryal Bibi (aged 7/8
\ years) went out in the street  to play. She did not return for about one
ihour which worried him and he set out in her search. He could not
I
{
M.lt.Nq.56/2013/BWP
Crl. AnJeal No.494l201  3/BWP.
Crl. Appeal No.1 1/2014/BWP.
-2-
find her the whole night even though he looked for her in every nook
and corner of the village,  including the graveyard.  The following
morning,  at about 6/7:00  a.m., he along with his brother  Syed
Makhdorn Hussain Shah (PW-5) and Syed Shahzad  Hussain Shan
(given  up PW) again went towards the graveyard  while searching for
Faryal Bibi where  they saw her dead body lying on a branch of a tree
and blood was oozing  frorn her mouth. Some of it had also dropped on
the ground. They also noted  that her Shalwar was blood-stained and
neck was scratched which indicated  that she had been raped and then
stranguiated.  The Complainant  suspected that Haswar Shah alias
Baghay Shah (Appellant in Crl. Appeal No.49412013/BWP),  Syed
Sadaqat Ali Shah and Syed  Rehmat Ali Shah had committed the
offence because he had refused to give the hand  of his elder daughter
in marriage  to Irshad  Shah. The afore-named  accused  and Irshad  Shah
had been  extending  threats. of dire consequences to him. Manzoor
Ahmed/SI (PW-12) received-.tlre  said complaint and on its basis
registered FIR No.178/2010 (Ehx.PB/l) on  1 .5.2010 at 8:20 a.m.
3. 
The investigation  of the case was also entrusted  to
Manzoor Ahmad/SI  (PW-12). He went to the graveyard  where  the
dead body of Faryal Bibi was found, prepared Injury Statement
(Exh.PM), Inquest  Report (Exh.PN), rough  site plan (Exh.PO) and
dispatched  the corpse to THQ Hospital, Hasilpur, for autopsy  under
the escort of Elahi Bakhsh 2021C  (PW-1).  He collected blood stained
soil from underneath the dead body of Faryal Bibi and secured  it vide
Recovery Memo Exh.PF.  Through a separate  Recovery Memo
Exh.PG  he took into possession  the branch of the tree on which her
dead body  had been placed. After post-mortem  examination was done,
Elahi Bakhsh  Constable  (PW-l)  produced before him Postmortem
Report (Exh.PJ/l-4), pictorial  diagram (Exh.PWl-z)  and last wom
blood stained clothes of the deceased  which he secured vide Recovery
Memo Exh.PA.  Then he handed over the corpse  to the legal heirs and
. deposited  the aforesaid articles with the Muhar:rar for safe custody. On
3.5.2010, he summoned  Haswar Shah (Appellant  in Crl. Appeal
M.R.No.56/2013/BWp
Crl. Anpeal No.494l2013/BWp.
Crl. ApLeal No.I I/2014lBWp.
-3
\
No.494/2013lBwP),  sadaqat Shah and Rehrnat shah for invesrigation
but kept their arrest pending. on 4.5.2010,  he took the said accused to
Lahore for their DNA test. on 5.5.2010,  he interrogated, Afzal shah
and on 11.5.2010,  he took him and Jabbar Shah (Appellant in crl.
Appeal No.494/2013/Bwp)  to Lahore for their DNA test. on
12.5.2010, the complainant  made a written application Exh.pc
wherein he nominated Appellants  Haswar  shah, Jabbar  shah and
three others,  namely, Irshad Shah,  Mukhtar  Shah and Mst.shamim
Bibi (who have since been acquitted).  an 14.5.2010,  the Investigation
officer  also recorded  statements  of pws syed Makhdoom  shah (pw-
5), Asif shah (Pw-6), zafar Iqbal (pw-10) and Muhammad Ati (pw-
11) under section 161 cr.p.c. on 14.5.2010,  he anested  Haswar
shah,  Jabbar  Shah, Mukhtar shah  and on 15.s.2010  took Mst.shamim
Bibi into custody. on 17.5.2010,  the coraplainant got his statement
recorded  with him to the ef{ect that he had accepted the plea of
innocence of sadaqat shah anii\Rehmat shah whereupon they were
exonerated.  on 19.5.2010  Manzoor  Ahrnad/sl got Haswar shah  and
Jabbar shah medically  examined for their potency. During
investigation  Haswar  shah and Jabbar  Shah pointed out the place of
occuffence regarding  which Memos Exh.pD & pE and site plan
Exh.PP  were  prepared. on 29.5.2010 he got prepared  scaled site plan
Exh.PL  regarding  the said place through patwari  Muhamm  ad AfzaI
(Pw-9). Manzoor  Ahmad/SI found that all the five accused  were
involved in the commission  of offence. Report  under  Section  173
Cr.P.C was submitted  accordingly.
4' 
The learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge sum-moned  the
Appellants and co-accused  Mukhtar shah, Irshad Shah  and
Mst.shamim  Bibi for trial and indicted thern on g.7.2010. They  denied
the charge and claimed trial. In order to prove the charge the
prosecution examined  12 witnesses in all. complainant  Syed Amjad
'Hussain  Shah appeared  as pw-4. Syed Makhdoom  Hussain shah
(Pw-5) and Muhammad  Asif Gillani (pw-6)  testified abour extra-
iudicial confessions  of Appellants  Haswar  shah & Jabbar Shah and
{
:
r
l
I
[,li
l
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
If-
Y
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP
Crl. Apneal No.494l201  3/BWp.
Crl. Anneal No.l l/2014lBWp.
-4-
co-accused Mukhtar. zafar Iqbal (pw-10) and Muhammad Ali (pw-
i 1) furnished last seen evidence. Dr. Muhammad saleem Arif (pw-7)
and Dr. Kalsoom Iqbal (pw-8) provided medical  evidence. The
Investigation officer, Manzoor Ahmad/sl  (pw-12),  gave details  of
his investigation  and the evidence  he coliected  in this case. The
remaining  witnesses were formal in nature. on 2.l0.z0l3,learned
prosecutor closed  the prosecution evidence  after tendering reports of
the chemical Examiner  (Exh.pe and Exh.pr),  DNA (Exh.pR/l),
Histopathoiogist  (Exh.P S ) and  S erologi  st (Exh.pU).
5. 
After the close of prosecution  evidence  the leamed trial
court gxamined Haswar  shah  and Jabbar Shah and their co-accused
under Section  342 cr.p.c. They all refuted the allegations  levelled
against them and professed innocence.  when Haswar Shah was asked
asto why he had been implicated in this case and why the pws had
deposecl  against  him he stated fut it was a blind murder and there was
no evidence  against  him to connect  hirn with it. The police  arrested
many people during  the investigation  but exonerated them. He added
that he got engaged with complainanios  daughter Aqsa Bibi but he
snapped  that tie. The Complainant  and the pws were closely related
to each other. They had a grudge against  him and exploited  the
occasion to take revenge  from him ancl other members  of his family.
They concocted a story in connivance with the police  and entangled
him, his father Mukhtar Shah, mother Shamim Bibi, maternal uncle
Jabbar shah and brother Irshad Shah in this case. He maintained that
even the motive set out in the FIR was farse. Irshad shah  was married
5/6 yearsprior  to the occurrence and never ever demanded  ihe hand of
the complainant's  daughter. Jabbar Shah  adopted the plea of Haswar
Shah. Neither  these two Appellants nor their co-accused got recorded
their statements on oath under  Section 340(2) Cr.p.C. They did not
examine any witness  in their defence  either.
6. 
On the conclusion  of the trial, vide judgment  dated
12.12.2013, the learned Additional Sessions Judge acquitted  Mukhtar
I
i
t'*II
I
I
I
I
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP
Crl. Apneal No'494/201  3/BWP'
Crl. AppeaL  No.1  1 /2014/BWP'
5
shah, Irshad shah and Mst.shamim Bibi alias Shammi.  However,  he
convicted  and sentenced Haswar  shah and Jabbar  Shah as under:
i)
ii)
convicted  under  section 302(b)  PPc for committing  Qatl-
e_Amd of Faryal pli,i and sentenced  to death with a
direction to pay Rs.1,00,000/  each as compensation lg lh:
legal heirs or the cleceased  in terms of Section 544-A
Cr.P.C.
Convicted under Section  37 6 PPC  and sentenced  to death
with fine of Rs.1,00,000/-  each,  half of which (if recovered)
would be paid to the legal heirs of the deceased  and in
default thereof to undergo simple imprisonment for a
further  period of two years. Further compensation  of
Rs.50,000/- was also ordered  to be paid to the legal heirs of
deceased  in terms of Section  544-A Cr.P.C.
Haswar  Shah and Jabbar Shah have filed Crl' Appeal
7. 
No. 49412013/BWP  against  their conviction  and sentence whereas  the
learned Additional  Sessions Judge has sent Murder Reference
No. 56l2oI3lBwP to this court under Section 374 Cr'P'C' for
confirmation of their death.slqtence. On the other hand,  Complainant
SyedAmjadHussainShahhasfiledCriminalAppeal
No.l1/2014IBWP to assaii the acquittal of Mst.Shamim Bibi alias
Shammi, Mukhtar Shah and Irshad  Shah'
In support of Crl' Appeal  No'494/2013/BWP  Syed Aasim
8. 
Ali Bukhari, Advocate, contended  that it was a blind murder. The
Complainant had falsely  implicated the Appellants  in this case to take
revenge  because  Haswar  shah had snapped  his engagement with his
daughter  Aqsa Bibi and had refused to marry her' There was no
tangible evidence  to connect  the Appellants  with the offence'  He
argued that, firstly, allthe private witnesses were interested witnesses
being  related inter se and with the Complainant.  Secondly,  there were
glaring contradictions in the prosecution  evidence  which had been
ignored  by the iearned  trial Court. Thirdly, acquittal of the co-accused
of the Appellants by the leamed trial Court had created a serious dent
in the prosecution's  case with regard to the involvement  of the
Appellants as well. Fourthly,  the last seen evidence furnished by Zafar
Iqbai(Pw-10)wasconcocted.Hewasthematernalcousinofthe
I
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP  !
Crl. Anneal No.494  12013/BWP.
-
Crl. Anneal No. lll20l 4/BWP.
-
6
Cornplainant yet he did not inforrn him or the police for 14 days that
on 30.4.2010  he had seen the Appellants following  Faryal Bibi.
Similarly the testimony of Muhammad  Ali (PW-l1)  was fabricated
who alleged  that he saw Mukhtar  Shah and Shamim Bibi carrying a
sack to the graveyard. Fifthly, the Appeilants had no occasion to made
extra-judicial  confession which was created to strengthen  the
prosecution case. Sixthly, the motive was not proved. Lastly, it was a
case of circumstantial  evidence  but the prosecution  failed to link the
Appeliants with the commission  of the offence. The learned  counsel
prayed that this appeal may be accepted  and the Appellants  be
acquitted  of the charge.
g. 
on the other hand, the learned Deputy  Prosecutor
General assisted by the learned  counsel for the Complainant
vehemently  opposed this appeal.  He contended  that the prosecution
had proved its case against  the Appellants  Haswar Shah and Jabbar
Shah beyond any shadow  of doubt tirrough  the evidence  of last seen
and extra-judicial confession  which was colroborated by medical
evidence  and motive. The Appellants had committed a heinous
offence.  Therefore,  the death  sentence awarded to them by the learned
trial Court be maintained. He prayed that the Appellants'appeal  may
be dismissed and the Murder  Reference  be answered  in the
affirmative.
10. 
So far as crl. Appeal No.l1/2014iBWP is concerned,  it
was argued  that Irshad Shah, Mukhtar Shah and Shamim Bibi were
also involved  in the occurrence.  The learned trial Coufr had misread
the evidence  to their extent and had erred in acquitting  them. It was
prayed that they may also be punishcci  in accordance  with law.
11. 
have gone through  the available  record with their able assistance.
We have heard the lea,ned  counsel  for the parties  and
The unfortunate incident in which  Faryal Bibi was
12. 
ravished and murdered took place rvithin  the territorial  limits of Police
7l
I
I
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP
Crl. Anpeal No.494l2013/BWP.
Crl. Appeal No.1  1/2014/BWP.
7
Station Saddar Hasilpur and FIR No.178i2010  (Exh.PB/1)  about this
incident was registered on 1.5.2010 at 8:20 a.m. at the instance  of
Syed Amjad Hussain Shah (PW-4) who was the father of the
deceased. AdmittedlY, he was not the eye-witness of the occulrence.
He stated  that his daughter  left the house on 30.4.2010  to play in the
street and went missing  and on the following day her dead body was
found lying on a branch of a tree in the graveyard.  However,  he
suspected that Haswar  Shah,  Syed  Sadaqat Ali Shah and Syed Rehmat
Ali Shah were involved in the offence. On 12.5.2010,  he made a
supplementary  statement (Exh.PC) stating that he had probed  into the
matter himself and had found that Haswar Shah, Jabbar Shah and
Irshad Shah had actualiy cornmitted the murder of his daughter while
Mukhtar Shah alongwith  his wife Shamim Bibi carried her body to the
graveyard  and disposed  it of. Then, on 17.5.2010,  he made another
statement in which he exonerated  Sadaqat  Shah and Rehmat  Shah'
Apart from his desire to enrolqmaxitnum number of people from the
opposite side in this case, it appears  from his deposition recorded
during the trial that the aforesaid statements were based  on the
,,findings"  of the sniffer dog and a 'Khoji' (tracker)  that he had
privately arranged.  Without commenting on the reliability and
admissibility  of the alleged  findings, we observe that the prosecution
does not rely on them and neither  examined the dog trainer nor the
tracker  at the trial. Its case rests on the last seen evidence,  the extra-
judicial confessions  of Haswar Shah, Jabbar Shah  and Mukhtar Shah,
medical evidence and the motive.
The evidence of the last seen furnished by-Zafar Iqbal
13.
(PW-10) is the cornerstone  of the prosecution  case. He deposed  that
on30.4.2010 at about 617:00  p.m. he was returning  from the house of
his mother-in-law to his own house when he saw Haswar  Shah and
Jabbar  Shah following Faryal Bibi in the street.  He subsequently
learnt that she was raped  and murdered.  Perusal of the record shows
.that he joined the investigation  and made a statement to this effect on
I4.5.2Ot0.It is intriguing that Zafar Iqbal was the maternal  cousin of
I
iYl.l\.1\\r.s/v'-vrv' 
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP
Crl. Appeal No.494l201  3/BWP'
Crl. Aprreal  No.1  1/2014/BWP'
-  ^
Y 
' 
8
the Complainant yet he did not inform him about the above-said  fact
and kept mum for 14 long days. During  his cross-examination  he
attempted to explain this delay by taking the plea that he went to
Lahore on30.4.20i0  and came back on I2.5.20I0. we are afraid this
plea does not help him. He admitted  that his wife informed  him about
the incident on i.5.2010. Keeping  in view his close relationship  with
the complainant,  it was unnatural  for him not to contact him or the
police immediately. More importantly'  even if  he returned on
12.5.2010, there is no explanation  why he delayed joining the
investigation  till 14.5.2010.  In our considered  opinion, the testimony
of Zafar Iqbal lacks credibilitY'
In addition to what we have discussed in the preceding
14.
paragraph,wehavenotedthatthetestirnonyofZafatlqbal(PW.10)is
in direct conflict  with that of syed Makhdoom  Hussain shah (PW-5)
who deposed  that he had infprmed  him about the aforementioned  fact
on the very day of occurre#. ft also contradicts his claim that he
went to Lahore. Relevant  excerpt  frorn the cross-examination  of Syed
Makhdoom  Hussain  Shah is reproduced hereunder:
15.
,,zafar Shah  told me that Faryal Bibi was going  ahead while Jabbar
Shah & Haswar Shah were going behind her. Zafar  Shah told me
this fact on the day of alleged  occurrence.  He told me about the
said fact lll12 hours  before lodging  the FIR'"
The next piece of  evidence relied upon by the
prosecutionisthestatementofMuhammadAiiShah(Pw-11)who
deposed that on the fateful  day when  he got up for his Fajar prayer he
sawMuk*rtarShahandShamimBibipassinginfrontofhishouse
carryingasack.Itwassubsequentlydiscoveredthatthesaidsack
contained the corpse of Faryal Bibi and they dropped it in the
graveyard.ThetestimonyofMuirarnmadAliShahtoodoesnot
inspire contldence.  First, his statenrcnt  is based on conjcctures and
surmises. He did not witness the accused disposing  of the corpse  as
aforesaid.  Secondly, the alleged sack was not recovered  during
investigation.  Thirdly, the dead body of Faryal Bibi was found lying
[-
t
(,-
M.R.No.56/2013/BWB
ffi  Ap neal No.494l20  l, 3/BWP'
qrtjppeat  No.1  1/201 4/BWP'
-9
on a branch  of a tree in the graveyard.  It does not appeal  to a prudent
mindthatMukhtarShahandShamimBibiwouldtakeitoutfromthe
sackandthenputitthere.Fourlhly,MukhtarShahandShamimBibi
weretheparentsofHaswarShahandlrshadShahwhileshamimBibi
wasthesisterofJabbarShah.ItratherSeemspreposterousthatthey
wouldallowthemtoravishandmurderthegirlandthentakethebody
themselves to the graveyard to dispose it of. Lastly, the statement
under section 161 Cr.P.C of Muhammad Ali shah (PW-11) was
recordedbythelnvestigationofficeronl4.5.20l0.Itissettledlaw
that where the statement of a witness is recorded  with delay without
anycogentreasonitimpingeshiscredibility.Relianceisplacedon
Svecl St""a m"n"**"a Sn"n t 
SCMR 550), 
MullammadKhanv.MaulaBakhshandanother(1998SCMR570)'
The learned  Depilq  Prosecutor General also referred to
16. 
IdentificationMemosExh.PDandExh.PEwhichpurporttoshowthat
0993
Q9g6 SCMR  1553) and
duringphysicalremandHaswarShahandJabbarShahthemselves
disclosedtheplaceofoccurrence.Hecontendedthatthisdisclosure
led to discovery of a fact which was an incriminating  evidence under
Article 40 of the Qanoon-e-Shahadat  order, 1984 (the "QSO")'  and
fortifiedtheprosecutioncase.Perusaloftherecordrevealsthatthe
Investigating officer, Manzoor  Ahrnad/sl  (Pw-12), categorically
admittedinhiscross-examination(Page-g8ofthepaperbook)thathe
cametoknowabouttheplaceofoccurrenceon14.5.20110while
HaswarShahandJabbarShahmadetheallegeddisclosureon
23.5.2010. This means that the fact in question  was alteady  in the
knowledgeofthepolicesoitcannotberegardedasdiscoveryofnew
,factwithinthemeaningofArticle40,ibid.|nMst.AskarJanand
othersv.MuhammadDaudandothers(2010SCMR1604),the
the application  of
, Hon,ble  Supreme court of pakistan  dilated on
Article  40 and held as under:
i
M.R.  No.56/201 3/BIYB 
ffi*or  xo.+s4l?Q1slswP.
ffin.ut  No.lll2014/BwP'
- -
r0 -
,,Thus, in order to apply Article 40 of the order, the prosecutton
must establish  that inrormation given by the accused led to the
discovery  of som. rurt deposed b-v him and the discovery  must be
of some fact which  the police had nbt previously  learnt from any
other source and that ttri knowledge oi th. fact was first derived
from the information  given by the accused.  Reference is also
invited to Jaffer Hussai' v. 3tut. of Maharashtra (AIR 1970
Supreme  Court 1934)'"
The prosecution  heavily relies on the extra-judicial
17 . 
confession  allegedlY made by Haswar Shah, Jabbar  shah and Mukhtar
Syed Makhdoom Hussain (PW-5)  deposed
Shah to Prove the charge'
present athis Dera with Muhammad  Asif
that on 13.5.2010  he was
saidaccusedapproachedthem.Theytook
Gillani (PW-6)  when the
requested  for their help to seek pardon from
them aside and separatelY
the ,Complainant. First of ali Mukhtar  Shah  admitted that Haswar
Shah.andJabbarShahrapedFary'alBibiandthenkiliedherbecause
theyfearedpolicewouldarrestthem.Heofferedtogivethehandof
hisdaughtertothesono{theCoinplainant.AfterhimHaswarShah
and Jabbar  Shah individuafi  maile confession about their guilt and
addedthattheyhadcommittedth';offenceontheabetmentoflrshad
shah. pw-6 Muharnmad Asif Gilliuri deposed on the safile line' It is
settledlawthatextra-judicialconlissionmustbereceivedwithutmost.
caution  for the reason that it car, be procured  effortlessly and easily
others  v. Baslrarat and others-))
concocted. In  ee Sniid Mumtaz cr :*;, 
,remeCourtofPakistanobserved:
(2006SCMR23I),theHon,bleS...'
"
--- 
"17  ...This Court ai.'i its predecessor  coyrts (Federal  Court)
haveelaboratelylaicioo*nthelawrelatincextra.judicial
confessionsstartingf'o*At*udv'TheCrown-(PLD1951FC
103-107)uptothelatest.e-"J"oi"ialconfessionhasalwaysbeen
taken with a pinch "t t"f'' it  e9*'"1 v'' The Crown' it was
observedthatintfi"ouot'y(asawhole)extrrjudicialconfession
"  must be received with utmost caution' "'  As observed  by the
Federal  court, *. *ouir.iiout. especially  referring to this part
a norm when  the pror.",rlriJn-;;;,  otherwise succeed'  Rather it
ofthecountry,ttratextra.judi"iot"onr"'.ions.lravealmostbecome
may be observed  *itft toncltn * *"ff as with regret tl"t t::  tl:
t*tiL"tttt'Ofnt"t-fuiit to prop'erly  investisate  the case' he
resorts to padding  uno tontottions  titce extra-iiici"l:"tft::l:::;
such  confessions by no*f huue  become  the signs of incompetent
I  investigation'"
M.R.No.5612013/BWP
Crl. Appeal No.494l2013/BWP.
Crl. Appeal No.l 1/2014/BWP.
11
In view of the foregoing,  rn Sarfraz Khan v. Stute und 2
18.
others  (PLI 1996 SC 9), the august  Supreme'Court  of Pakistan  held
that a three-fold proof is required to rnake extra-judicial  confession
the basis  of conviction,  firstly, that in fact it was made; secondly, that
it was voluntarily  made; and thirdly,thal it was truly made.  The Court
must ask itself as to why the accused should  at all confess.  Indubitably
the phenomenon  of confession  is not altogether  unknown  but in order
to determine  its genuiness  the Court  should look at the circumstances
in which it is made  and the motivating factors behind it. In Saiid
Mumtaz's case, supra, while emphasizing  this issue the Apex  Court
made  the following observations:
"It is but a natural curiosity to ask as to why a person ol'sane mind
should at all confess. No doubt the phenomenon  of confession  is
not altogether  unknown but being a human conduct, it had to be
visual ized, appreciated  and consequented  upon purely in the
background  of a human conduct.  ; ..Why  a person guilty of offence
entailing  capital p&ishment should at aII confess.  There could be a
few motivating fact&s like: (i) to boast off, (ii) to ventilate the
suffocating  conscience,  and (iii) to seek help when actually  trapped
by investigation.  Boasting  off is very rare in such like heinous
offbnces  where fear dominates  and is always done before an
extreme confident as well as the one who shares close secrets. To
make  confession  in order to give vent to one's pressure on mind
and conscience is another  aspect of the same psyche.  One gives
vent to  one's feelings only before a  strong and close
confldent.  . ..Another most important and natural  putpose of
making extra-judicial  confession  is to seek help from a third
person.  Help is sought  firstly, when a person is sufficiently  trapped
and secondly, from one who is authoritative,  socially or officially."
In "Tahir Javed v. The state" (2009 scMR 166), the
19.
Hon'ble
Supreme  Court of Pakistan further explained:
"It may be noted  here that since  extra-judicial  confession is easy to
procure as it can be cultivated  at any time, thereford,  normally, it is
considered  as a weak piece of evidence  and Court  would expect
sufficient and reliable conoboration for such type of evidence.  The
extra-judicial  confession,  therefore,  must be considered  with
overall context  of the prosecution  case  and the evidenoe  on record.
Right from the case of Ahrned  v. The Crown PLD 1951 FC 107 it
has been tirne and again laid down by this court that extra-judicial
confession  can be used  against  the accused only when it comes
from unimpeachable sources  and trustworthy  evidence is available
to corroborate  it. Reference  in this regard may be made  to the
following  reported judgrnents:  (i) Sajid Murntaz and others v.
Basharat and others (2006 SCMR 231), (ii) Ztaul Rehman v. The
{  stut. (2001 SCMR 1405), (iii) Tayyab  Hussain  Shah v. The State
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP
Crl. Appeal No.494l201  3iBWP.
Crl. Anpeal No.1  1/201 4/BWP.
12-
(2000 SCMR 683) and (iv) Sarfraz v. The State and others (1996
scMR 188)"
In the instant  case, it is observed  that Syed Makhdoom
20.
Hussain shah (Pw-5) and Muhammad Asif Gillani  (Pw-6)  were the
real brothers of Complainant Syed Amjad Hussain Shah. The
prosecution has not brought  any rnaterial  on the record to show that
Haswar  Shah, Jabbar  Shah or Mukhtar  Shah had any of the reasons
discussed hereinabove  to make confession before  them. More
importantly,  the PWs claimed  that when the accused  came to their
Dera they were alone and were not accompanied  by any respectable
of the locality  or a common friend. Keeping in view the gravity of the
ch'arge it was not possible for them to approach them directly
particularly when the occurrence was fresh  and tempers were high' In
their cross-examination  PW-5 and PW-6 stated that 819 of their
relatives  were present  outside  the Dera.It is intriguing  that they did
not react on seeing them:-\p. ven their own conduct was unnatural'  In
this regard  reference  may be made to the following  excetpt from the
cross-examination  of syed Makhdoom Hussain  Shah (Pw-5):
,.After hearing  the talk of the accused,  we did not beat them and-
also did not apprehend  them though we were annoyed but as the'
otherpeoplewerepresentoutourDeraandtherewasan
apprehension  of killing of accused by those people if they got
information.  The persons 8/9 who were present out of Dera were
our relatives  and some  persons  came to say Fatiha. The people
present outside the Dera  saw the accused while coming inside  our
Dera and going  outside  our Dera. We did not disclose  about the
said confession of accused to the persons  who were present  outside
the Dera on that day. Volunteered we did not tell them lest they
should be killed. I had no sympathy with the accused persons  as to
save their lives from the persons standing outside the Dera."
For what has been discussed above,  weare of the view
21. 
that the prosecution  evidence of extra-judicial  confession is not
reliable.
Dr. Kalsoom Iqbal (PW-8) conducted autopsy of Faryal
22.
Bibi on 1.5.2010. She observed  that post-mortem staining was present
on different  parts of the body of the deceased  and rigor rnortis had
'developed. Her face was swollen blotchy and cyanosed. Red patchier
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP
Crl. Appeal No.494l201  3/BWP.
Crl. Apngal No.l l/2014/BWP.
L3
marks  were present on the whole  face, each abrasion measuring  about
2 cm x Yz cm. clotted blood was present in the mouth  and left side of
the nose, pupils were dilated,  conjunctivae were congested, lips were
blue, hands were clenched, nails and tips of the fingers were  blue and
toes of the feet were also blue. Multiple  bruises  were present  on the
neck,  each measuring 3 cm x 2 cm. Abrasions  were also present  all
around the neck measuring  about 2 cmx 1 cm skin deep. Dr. Kalsoom
Iqbal opined that Faryal Bibi was subjected to rape which teared her
vaginal wall leading to coma and compression of the neck,  acute
hypoxia and eventually to death in the ordinary course of nature.
Injuries were ante-mortem  and caused by hornicidal  throttling.  In her
estimation,  the probable  time that elapsed  between death and post-
moftem was more than 14 hours and less than 24 hours.  Samples  from
visceras'were  taken for detection of poisoning  and vaginal swabs for
detection  of semen and DNA test. Hyoid bone was sent to the
pathologist  for determination of fracture.  After receiving  the report of
the Chemical Examiner, the Medical Officer observed that poison  was
not detected  and swabs were stained  with semen and blood. The report
of the histopathologist  revealed  ante-mortem  injury to hyoid bone.
She further stated that after taking into consideration  the above-
mentioned reports, including  the post-rnortem report, she was of the
opinion that the deceased's  death was caused by throttling  and rape.
Dr. Muhammad Saleem Arif (PW-7)  medically  examined
23.
Haswar  Shah & Jabbar Shah  and found  that they were fit to perform
sexual act. DNA Test Report  Exh.PR  is negative  and does not connect
them with the offence.  Even if  this report is exoluded from
consideration on the ground that the biochemist  was not examined  at
the trial and it is not admissible in evidence  per se under Section  510
Cr.P.C, the testimony  of Dr. Kalsoorn  Iqbal (PW-8) would  be of no
avail to prosecution  because  the medical evidence  which she has
furnished is only confirmatory  in nature and does not identifu the
culprits. It does  not raise finger at any accused of the instant  case.
Il'
I
I
I
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP
Crl. Appeal No.494l201  3/BWp.
Crl. Appeal No.l l/2014lBWp.
14-
24.
In complaint Exh.PB and FIR Exh.PB/l the Complainant
alleged that the motive  behind  the occurrence  was that he had refused
to marry his elder daughter to Irshad shah. However,  Syed
Makhdoom Hussain (Pw-5) in his statement  before the learned trial
Court alleged that Irshad Shah suspected that the Complainant  had
illicit relations with his wife. Although  Syed Makhdoom  Hussain
stated that this was an "additional reason"  behind  the occurrence,  one
cannot  gainsay that the prosecution  was wavery  about the motive and
during the trial it did not produce any independent  witness to prove
any of those that it suggested.  Even Manzoor  Ahmad/SI  (pw-12)  did
not collect any evidence in this regard when he investigated  this case.
In  a  case based on circumstantial evidence the
25.
prosecution is obligated to show that different pieces of evidence
brought on the record  are inter-linked  so as to make a single chain
whose  one end touches  the tqad person and the other clenches  the
neck of the accused.  Further, the evidence  rnust be of a quality to be
incompatible  with the innocence  of the accused.  Any rnissing link in
thechainwoulddestroytheentireprosecutioncase.InHashimoqsim
and another v. The state (2017 scMR 986) the Hon'ble  Supreme
Court of Pakistan ruled:
"In cases of  circumstantial  evidence, there are chances  of
procuring and fabricating evidence. Therefore,  Courts are required
to take extra  care  and caution  to narrowly examine  such evidence
with pure judicial approach to satisfy itself,  about its intrinsic
worth and reliability, also ensuring  that no dishonesty was
colnmitted  during the course  of collecting such evidelce by the
Investigators....circumstantial  evidence may sometimes  appear  to
be conclusive but it must always be narrowly exanined, if only
because this count of evidence may be fabricated in order to cast
suspicion  on another, therefore,  it is all the more  necess ary before
drawing inference, if  the accused's  guilt from circumstantial
evidence  to be sure and that there are no other co-existing
circumstances,  which weaken or destroy the inference then, in that
case alone it may be relied  upon otherwise, not at all.,'
On a thorough reappraisal  of the evidence we have found
26.
that the prosecution  has failed to prove its case beyond  reasonable
doubt. Therefore, we accept crl. Appeal No.494 /2013/Bwp  and set
aside the conviction  and sentence awarded  to Appellants  Haswar  Shah
t
M.R.No.56/2013/BWP
Cil. Anpeal No.4941201  3/BWP'
brl. Appeal No.l 1/2014/BWP'
- 15
and Jabbar Shah. They are in jail. They shall
not required  to be detained in any other case.
be released forthwith  if
Murder  Reference  No .5612013 lBwP is answered  in the
Haswar Shah and
27.
NEGATIVE  and the death sentence awarded to
JAbbAr ShAh iS NOT CONFIRMED'
we have discarded  the prosecution evidence while
28.
deciding  crl. Appeal  No.49412013/BWP.  Therefore, crl' Appeal
No.1l/2ol4lBwPchallengingacquittalofMst.ShamimBibialias
Shammi, Mukhtar Shah and lrslrad Slrah is lrereby  disrrrissed irr
limine.
