 
 
 
      Stereo. HCJDA38 
 
            Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT MULTAN BENCH  
 
     MULTAN 
 
 
             JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Akhtar Nawaz. 
   versus  
The State, etc. 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009 
Mst. Naseem Akhtar.  
   versus   Akhtar Nawaz, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.01.2018  
Sikandar Javed, Advocate. 
Nemo 
Date of Hearing  
 
The Appellant by 
 
The Complainant by 
 
The State by 
 
 
 
 
 
Asjad  Javaid  Ghural,  J.:-    Through  the  afore-titled  criminal 
 
 
Mr. Muhammad Ali Shahab, Deputy  
Prosecutor General for the State. 
 
 
appeal under Section 410 Cr.P.C. appellant Akhtar Nawaz has challenged 
the vires of judgment dated 20.10.2009 passed by the learned Additional 
Sessions  Judge,  Chichawatni,  District  Sahiwal  in  case  FIR  No.47  dated 
12.12.2006, in respect of an offence under Section 302 PPC registered at 
Police  Station,  Kassowal,  District  Sahiwal,  whereby  he  was  convicted 
and sentenced as under:- 
 
 
        Under Sections 302 ( B ) PPC 
Life  Imprisonment  as  ‘Ta’zir’  alongwith  compensation  of 
Rs.3,00,000/-  u/s  544-A  to  the  legal  heirs  of  deceased  Fazal-
ur-Rehman,  and  in  default  thereof  to  further  undergo  simple 
imprisonment for 06 months. 
 
Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C was given to the appellant.  
 
2.  
Mst. Naseem Akhtar, mother of the deceased Fazal-ur-Rehman, 
has  filed  Criminal  Revision  No.395/2009  seeking  enhancement  of 
sentence  of  respondent  No.1/Akhtar  Nawaz,  which  shall  be  decided 
through this common judgment.  
3.  
The  prosecution  story  unfolded  in  the  crime  report  (Ex.PA) 
registered  at 
the 
instance  of  Malik  Muhammad  Ajmal  Khan, 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
 
2 
complainant  against  unknown  accused  persons  is  that  his  son  Fazal-ur-
Rehman  did  not  return  to  home  till  night  on  11.02.2006.  He  became 
worried  whereupon  he  along-with  Aamir  Sultan,  a  real  brother  of  said 
Fazal-ur-Rehman  went  in  search  of  Fazal-ur-Rehman  and  when  they 
reached  in  the  area  of  Malik  Ameer  of  Chak  No.103/12-L,  they  saw  a 
bicycle of Fazal-ur-Rehman lying in the mastered crop. They entered in 
the  crop  and  saw  the  dead  body  of  deceased  Fazal-ur-Rehman  lying 
smeared  with  blood.  There  was  a  firearm  injury  at  his  right  temporal 
region  through  and  through  and  they  observed  foot  print  of  three 
persons.  Many  people  of  the  vicinity  had  attracted  there.  In  the 
meanwhile,  Muhammad  Riaz  and  Sher  Afzal  resident  of  239/T.D.A, 
Layyah came there and disclosed that at about 6:00 p.m. on 11.02.2006 
when  they  were  going  from  the  house  of  their  sister  to  their  brother 
Mansab  Khan  on  foot,  they  saw  near  Chak  No.103/12-L  that  Fazal-ur-
Rehman,  while  holding  bicycle  walking  along-with  three  unknown 
persons, who could be recognized, if they come across.   
 
4. 
Muhammad  Ishaq,  Sub-Inspector  (PW-11)  had  inspected  the 
spot  on  12.02.2006,  took  into  possession  the  blood  stained  earth  vide 
recovery memo Exh.PD, secured one crime empty of 30-bore (P-1) from 
the  place  of  occurrence,  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PE,  took  into 
possession  Cycle  (P-2)  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PF,  which  was  lying 
near  the  dead  body,  prepared  injury  statement  Exh.PL  and  Inquest 
Report Exh.PM and sent the dead body of Fazal ur Rehman deceased for 
autopsy,  collected  last  worn  clothes  of  deceased  i.e.  Shalwar  and 
Qameez  (blood  stained)  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PG  and  recorded 
statements of witnesses u/s 161 Cr.P.C. He had arrested the accused on 
14.02.2006  and  sent  him  to  judicial  lock  up  on  15.02.2006  for 
identification  parade,  which  was  conducted  on  21.02.2006, he obtained 
his  physical  remand  who  led  to  the  recovery  of  pistol  (P-6)  (30-bore) 
alongwith  a  live  bullet  (P-7),  which  was  taken  into  possession  vide 
recovery memo Exh.PJ.  He also led to the recovery of bicycle (P-5) of 
the  deceased  vide  recovery  memo  Exh.PH,  prepared  rough  site  plan 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
 
3 
Exh.PN  and  after  completion  of  the  investigation  got  him  challaned  to 
face the trial.   
5.  
Dr.  Aamir  Hussain  Khaira  (PW-9)  had  conducted  postmortem 
on the dead body of deceased Fazal ur Rehman on 12.02.2006 at 02:30 
p.m. and observed following injuries:- 
Injury No.1 
 
A  firearm  wound  3  cm  x  2  cm  with  inverted  and 
black  margins  on  right  side  of  head,  just  on front  of 
right pinna (entry wound). 
Injury No.2 
 
A firearm wound ½ x ½ cm with everted margins on 
left side of head on front (1.5 cm of left pinna).  (Exit 
wound). 
     
On dissection, the walls of chest,  the pleura on both sides  and both lungs 
were  found  damaged.    Both  sides  of  heart  were  containing  blood,  lower 
part of heart was bruised and blackish due to injury on the chest. The blood 
vessels  of  thorax  were  injured  underneath  the  injuries.    All  the  injuries 
were ante-mortem.  The injuries on the skull and on the back and front of 
chest  and  neck  were  sufficient  to  cause  death  due  to  hemorrhages  and 
shock  in  ordinary  course  of  nature  as  the  brain  heart  and  lungs  were 
damaged. The probable duration between injuries and death was immediate 
while between death and postmortem about 12 hours.            
6.  
At  the  commencement  of  the  trial,  the  learned  trial  Court  had 
framed  a  charge  against  the  appellant  to  which  he  pleaded  not  guilty  and 
claimed to be tried.  
7. 
The  prosecution  had  produced  11-witnesses.  Besides  the  report 
of Chemical Examiner (Ex.PP) and the report of Serologist  (Ex.PQ),  and 
report of Forensic Science Laboratory Punjab Lahore Ex.PTand closed the 
prosecution  evidence.  The  appellant  in  his  statement  recorded  under 
Section 342 Cr.P.C. had denied and controverted all the allegations leveled 
against  him,  He  neither  opted  to  make  statement  under  Section  340(2) 
Cr.P.C. nor had he produced any witness in his defence.  
 
8. 
Learned  trial  Court,  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial,  had  convicted 
and  sentenced  the  appellant  supra,  hence  the  instant  criminal  appeal  has 
been filed. 
 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
4 
 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submits  that  it  was  a  blind 
9.   
murder and no one had seen the same with his own eyes; that the entire set 
of    witnesses  mentioned  in  the  crime  report  has  been  given-up  by  the 
prosecution being won over or unnecessary; that the evidence adduced by 
the  prosecution  has  been  introduced  during  investigation,  which  was 
cooked up and managed to falsely implicate the appellant in the murder in 
issue;  that  the  evidence  of  last  seen  adduced  by  Muhammad  Saleem  is 
negated  by  the  prosecution  itself  as  the  Investigating  Officer  had 
summoned  sniffer  dogs  to  trace  out  any  clue  with  regard  to  the  real 
culprits;  that  only  evidence  of  extrajudicial  confession  being  the  weakest 
type of the evidence has no corroboration at all from any other independent 
source of evidence; that the recovery of bicycle belonging to the deceased 
shown to  be  effected  at the  instance of the  appellant  has not been proved 
by the learned trial Court;  that the recovery of pistol 30-bore shown to be 
effected  at  the  instance  of  the  appellant  was  sent  to  the  office  of  Punjab 
Forensic  Science  Agency  for  its  comparison  with  the  empty  already 
secured from the place of occurrence and report was received with positive 
result  but  the  same  is  not  beneficial  for  the  prosecution  because  crime 
empty  was  submitted  in  the  aforesaid  office  after  the  arrest  of  the 
appellant;  that  the  prosecution  has  miserably  failed  to  prove  the  charge 
against  the  appellant  beyond  shadow  of  reasonable  doubt  and  finally  a 
prayer has been  made for the acquittal of the appellant from the charge of 
murder in issue. 
10. 
Conversely, learned Deputy Prosecutor General appearing for the 
State  has  gracefully  conceded  that  the  only  evidence  available  with 
prosecution  was  the  extrajudicial  confession,  which  has  no  corroboration 
from any independent source of evidence and, thus, the same is not enough 
to maintain the conviction and sentence of the appellant. 
 
11. 
I  have  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant,  learned  Deputy 
Prosecutor  General  appearing  for  the  State  and  have  perused  the  record 
with their assistance. 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
5 
 
 The prosecution case hinges upon the circumstantial evidence in 
12. 
the shape of last seen, extrajudicial confession and the recovery of pistol as 
well as bicycle owned by the deceased. 
The  prosecution  case  consists  of  two  set  of  evidence.  Initially 
Malik  Muhammad  Ajmal  Khan set the  law  in  motion, stating therein that 
Fazal-ur-Rehman was son of his paternal cousin namely Habib Sultan who 
had  passed  away.  On  11.02.2006,  till  night  Fazal-ur-Rehman,  had  not 
come  in  the  house. On  the  following  day  he  felt  worried  and  took  Aamir 
Sultan,  real  brother  of  Fazal-ur-Rehman,  with  him  and  went  in  search  of 
Fazal-ur-Rehman.  They  reached  in  the  agricultural  land  of  Malid  Umeed 
situated  in  Chak  No.102/12-L,  and  saw  a  bicycle  in  the  mustered  crop; 
they  step  forward  and  saw  the  dead  body  of  Fazal-ur-Rehman,  lying 
smeared  with  blood.  They  observed  that  a  fire  shot  had  hit  at  his  right 
temporal  region  through  and  through,  they  also  observed  the  footprint  of 
three persons near the dead body. Upon their hue and cry, many people of 
the vicinity attracted there. Muhammad Riaz and Sher Afzal both resident 
of  239/T.D.A  Layyah  also  reached  there.    They  disclosed  that  on  the 
preceding day at about 6:00 p.m. they were proceeding from the house of 
their sister to  the house  of Mansab  Khan  by  foot  when they  reached  near 
Chak  No.103/12-L,  they  confronted  with  Fazal-ur-Rehman  while  holding 
bicycle in his hands and walking along-with 2/3 unknown accused persons, 
who could be recognized, if they come across again.  The complainant had 
shown his suspicion that the said unknown accused persons had committed 
the  murder  of  Fazal-ur-Rehman.    Muhammad  Ishaq  Sub-Inspector  (PW-
11)  had  arrested  the  appellant  and  got  him  sent  to  judicial  lock-up  on 
15.02.2006  for  the  purpose  of  test  identification  parade.  On  21.01.2006, 
the  identification  parade  was  held  in  jail  premises  and  accused/appellant 
was identified by the aforesaid witnesses but surprisingly all the witnesses 
including complainant, Aamir Sultan , the real brother of the deceased and 
both  the  witnesses  of  last  seen  namely  Muhammad  Riaz  and  Sher  Afzal, 
who had claimed that they had seen the deceased lastely in the company of 
three  unknown  accused  persons  and  subsequently  they  identified  the 
accused  during  test  identification  parade,  which  was  held  in  the  jail 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
 
6 
premises  under  the  supervision  of  Judicial  Magistrate,  had  been  given-up 
by  the    prosecution.  Aamir  Sultan  was  given  up  being  unnecessary, 
whereas rest of the witnesses were given-up i.e Muhammad Riaz and Sher 
Afzal  being  won  over  and  nothing  has  been  left  with  the  prosecution  to 
prove the case. 
13. 
During investigation, new evidence were generated in the shape of 
statement of Muhammad Saleem (PW-6) being the witness of last seen and 
two other witnesses namely Anjum Zia (PW-4) and Aamir Shehzad (PW5) 
being the witnesses of extrajudicial confession.  Muhammad Saleem (PW-
6),  had  deposed  before  the  learned  trial  Court  that  on  11.02.2006  at 
Maghrib  Wela,  he  was  going  on  foot  from  Chak  No.103/12-L  to  Chak 
No.102/12-L,  he  saw  Fazal-ur-Rehman  deceased  and  appellant  Akhtar 
Nawaz  near  the  mustard  crop  of  Muhammad  Ameer  where  they  were 
sitting and two bicycles  were parked beside there. On  his  confronting the 
appellant told him that they were old friends and had met after a long time. 
On  the  following  day,  they  received  an  information  with  regard  to  the 
murder of Fazal-ur-Rehman, he went to the place of occurrence and made 
statement before the police. It is  quite astonishing that Muhammad Saleem 
PW-6  was  figured  nowhere  in  the  whole  episode  but  subsequently  the 
prosecution  had  managed  him  to  depose  as  a  witness  of  last  seen. 
Muhammad  Saleem  (PW-6)  had  claimed  to  have  got  recorded  his 
statement before the police at the place of occurrence on 12.02.2006. If, the 
presence of said witness of last seen is taken to be true that he got recorded 
his statement on 12.02.2006, then what prompted the Investigating Officer 
and the prosecution to summon sniffer dogs on 13.02.2006, for the purpose 
to  trace  out  a  clue  with  regard  to  the  real  culprits.  It  goes  without  saying 
that the sniffer doges were brought to bring out any hint or clue to proceed 
further  with  the  investigation  and  the  statement  of  Muhammad  Saleem 
(PW-6),  which  had  been  shown  to  be  recorded  on  12.02.2006  was 
absolutely  wrong,  it  means  that  the  said  witness  was  managed  at  some 
subsequent stage and his statement in this regard had been intruded by the 
police in back dates. The evidence of PW-6 is not worth reliance.  
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
7 
 
Another piece of evidence in the shape of extrajudicial confession 
14. 
was  introduced  by  Anjum  Zia  (PW-4)  and  Aamir  Shehzad  (PW-5)  who 
stated  that  on  12.02.2006  at  04;45  p.m.,  they  were  sitting  in  the  drawing 
room of Aamir Shehzad when the appellant came there on a bicycle for the 
purpose  to  return  the  same  upon  which  Aamir  Shehzad  had  stated  that  it 
was not his bicycle because at the back of said bicycle name of   Fazal-ur-
Rehman  was  written,  who  had  already  been  murdered.  The  appellant  had 
confessed  before  them  that  he  had  committed  the  murder  of  Fazal-ur-
Rehman  because  a  year  before  he  had  committed  sodomy  with  him.  The 
appellant  in  anxiety  took  the  bicycle  of  Fazal-ur-Rehman,  instead  of  his 
own  and  made  a  request  for  pardon  from  the  legal  heirs  of  Fazal-ur-
Rehman. Thereafter, the appellant went out along-with the bicycle owned 
by  Fazal-ur-Rehman,  they  went  to  the  place  of  occurrence  where  police 
was  already  present  there  and  made  their  statements.  The  statements  of 
both  the  said  witnesses  is  a  bundle  of  lies  because  neither  they  had 
apprehended  the  appellant  at  the  spot  nor  they  made  him  sit  there  nor 
furnished  any  information  to  the  police  with  regard  to  extrajudicial 
confession  made  by  the  appellant.    The  story  of  bicycle  as  introduced  by 
the prosecution then what was the wisdom behind to let the appellant free 
along-with  bicycle  owned  by  the  deceased.  This  un-natural  and  inhuman 
conduct of both the said witnesses could not be easily ignored. According 
to  prosecution  own  case  Muhammad  Saleem  (PW6)  had  reached  at  the 
place of occurrence at 02:00 p.m. and got recorded his statement, whereas 
the  witnesses  of  extrajudicial  confession  have  admitted  that  they  got 
recorded  their  statements  at  the  place  of  occurrence  before  the  police  at 
05:00  p.m.  on  the  same  day.  As  it  has  already  observed  that  if  on 
12.02.2006,  the  evidence  of  last  seen  and  in  the  shape  of  extrajudicial 
confession had been brought on record then what was the reason behind to 
bring the sniffer dogs on 13.02.2006 with the intention to trace out the clue 
with  regard  to  the  actual  culprits,  which  shows  that  the  evidence  of  last 
seen  and  extrajudicial  confession  had  been  created  and  manipulated  for 
cooking  up  a  false  story  just  for  the  purpose to implicate  the appellant in 
the alleged occurrence. The evidence which provided the foundation of the 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
 
8 
case,  has  already  been  given  up  by  the  learned  prosecutor  in  consultation 
with  the  mother  of  the  deceased  including  Aamir  Sultan  a  real  brother  of 
the  deceased  and subsequently  the  evidence  gathered by  the  Investigating 
Officer  in  connivance  with  the  mother  of  the  deceased  could  not  inspire 
confidence. 
15. 
Dr.  Aamir  Hussain  Khaira  (PW-9)  had  conducted  postmortem 
on the dead body of deceased Fazal ur Rehman on 12.02.2006 at 02:30 
p.m.    After    conducting  examination  Medical  Officer    had  observed  a 
firearm wound with inverted and black margins on right side of head,  a 
firearm wound with everted margins on left side of head. Scalpe on left 
and  right  side  of  head  was  destroyed,  skull  was  fractured  on  left  and 
right  side  of  head.  Membrains  and  brains  were  destroyed-spinal  card 
intact.  
 
 
He  had  opined,  the  cause  of  death  due  to  shock  distraction  of 
brain,  due  to  injury  No.1  and  2,  which  were  ante  mortem  in  nature.  
Probable duration between injury and death was immediate and between 
death  and  postmortem  was  within  24-hours.    The  purpose  of  post-
mortem  examination is  always  to  ascertain  the  cause of death,  number, 
locale and seat of injuries, kind of weapon used, duration between injury 
and death and between death and post-mortem and the medical evidence 
alone is not sufficient to raise finger to any specific culprit. In the case in 
hand  medical  evidence  lends  no  support  to  the  ocular  account  or  the 
circumstantial evidence, which has already been discarded by this Court. 
17.                                   Having scanned the entire prosecution evidence nothing has 
been brought on record to connect the appellant with the alleged murder 
in  issue.  The  prosecution  has  miserably  failed  to  build  a  chain  to 
establish  the  link  of  the  appellant  with  the  murder  in  issue.  The 
prosecution  has  produced  Muhammad  Saleem  (PW-6)  as  a  witness  of 
last seen and Anjum Zia along with Aamir Shehzad to prove the factum 
of  extrajudicial  confession  made  by  the  appellant  but  the  same  has  not 
been believed and straightaway discarded. It is an admitted fact that the 
sniffer  doges  were  summoned  to  get  some  help  on  13.02.2006,  to  find 
out  a  clue  with  regard  to  the  alleged  occurrence,  which  negates  the 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
 
9 
prosecution  evidence,  which  had  been  created  in  back  dates  and  the 
statements  recorded  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.,  were  intruded  in  the 
record in back dates to show that on arrival of the police at the place of 
occurrence the witnesses got recorded their statement  at the spot but the 
witnesses could not prove their presence at relevant time at the place of 
occurrence. The first set of witnesses including the complainant, Aamir 
Sultan  his companions, who went to search the deceased and on the way 
Muhammad  Riaz  and  Sher  Afzal  met  them,  who  disclosed  that  the 
deceased  had  been  seen  by  them  in  the  company  of  three  unknown 
accused  persons,  seems  more  close  to  the  reality  as  footprints  of  three 
persons  were  found  available  near  the  dead  body  but  unfortunately  the 
complainant including Aamir Sultan, Muhammad Riaz, Sher Afzal  and 
Judicial  Magistrate  have  been  given  up    being  won  over  and  being 
unnecessary.  The bicycle shown to be recovered from the appellant has 
not  been  proved    and  even  positive  report  of  Punjab  Forensic  Science 
Agency  with  regard  to  matching  of  the  crime    empty  with  the  pistol 
shown to be recovered from the appellant  could not get any support to 
the  prosecution  as  the  empty  was  sent  to  the  aforesaid  office  after  the 
arrest of the appellant, which means that the said empty was manovured 
before dispatching the same.  It has been held by the apex Court in the 
plethora  of  judgments  that  in  the  cases  involving  circumstantial 
evidence, entailing the punishment of capital sentence, the nature of all 
circumstances  must be interlinked  making out  a  single unbroken  chain, 
where one end of the same touches the dead body and the other the neck 
of the accused.  Reliance is placed on case titled “HASHIM QASIM and 
another versus The STATE” (2017 SCMR 986) wherein it has been held 
as under:- 
“ Keeping in view the above, the case of the prosecution appears 
to  have  been  based  entirely  on  circumstantial  evidence.    Placing 
reliance  on  circumstantial  evidence,  in  cases  involving  capital 
punishment,  the  superior  Courts  since  long  have  laid  down 
stringent  principles  for  accepting  the  same.  It  has  been  the 
consistent view that such evidence must be of the nature, where, 
all    circumstances  must  be  so  inter-linked,  making  out  a  single 
chain,  an  unbroken  one,  where  one  end  of  the  same  touches  the 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
 
10 
dead  body  and  the  other  the  neck  of  the    accused.  Any  missing 
link  in  the  chain  would  destroy  the  while  and  would  render  the 
same  unreliable  for  recording  a  conviction  on  a  capital  charge. 
Reference  is  made  to  the  cases  of  Muhammad  Aslam    v.    The 
State  (PLD  1992  SC  254)  and  Ch.  Barkat  Ali    v.    Major Karam 
Elahi Zia (1992 SCMR 1047). 
 
I  am  not  oblivious  of  the  facts  that  in  the  cases  of  circumstantial 
evidence,  there  always  remains  the  chance  of  fabrication,  therefore, 
the Courts are required to take extra care and caution and examine the 
case  narrowly  and  if    the  co-existing  circumstances  destroy  the 
inference with regard to the accused’s guilt, the same cannot be relied 
upon. The relevant dictum laid down in the aforementioned judgment 
of august Supreme Court of Pakistan at page No.994 is as under:- 
 
 
“  In  cases  of  circumstantial  evidence,  there  are  chances  of 
procuring  and  fabricating  evidence,  therefore,  Courts are  required 
to take extra case and caution to narrowly examine such evidence 
with  pure  judicial  approach  to  satisfy  itself,  about  its  intrinsic 
worth  and  reliability,  also  ensuring  that  no  dishonesty  was 
committed  during  the  course  of    collecting  such  evidence  by  the 
Investigators. If there are apparent indications of designs on part of 
the  investigating  agency  in  the  preparation  of  a  case  resting  on 
circumstantial evidence, the court must be on its guard against the 
trap of being deliberately misled into a false inference. If the court 
fails  to  observe  such  care  and  caution  and  hastily  relies  on  such 
evidence,  there  would  be  a  failure  of  justice.  Reference  may  be 
made to the case of Fazal Elahi  v. Crown (PLD 1953 FC 214) and 
of Leizor  v.  The Queen (PLD 1952 PC 109).” 
 
In  view  of  the  said  settled  principle  of  law,  I  am  not  in  agreement 
with the observation made by the learned trial Court qua the reasons 
for  conviction  and  sentence  of  the  appellant  on  the  basis  of  the 
available evidence.  I have come to the irresistible conclusion that the 
prosecution  has  miserably  failed  to  substantiate  the  charge  leveled 
against  the  appellant  through  cogent  and  confidence  inspiring 
evidence. 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
 
11 
21.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  criminal  appeal  filed  by 
appellant  Akhtar  Nawaz  is  allowed,  his  conviction  and  sentence 
awarded by the learned trial Court are set aside and he is acquitted of 
the  charge  by  giving  him  the  benefit  of  doubt.    He  is  directed  to  be 
released  forthwith  from  jail,  if  not  required  to  be  detained  in 
connection with any other case.   
22. 
 Criminal  Revision  No.395  of  2009  filed  by  Mst.  Naseem 
Akhtar/complainant  seeking  enhancement  of  sentence  of  respondent 
No.1/appellant  is  dismissed  for  the  reasons  recorded  in  the  aforesaid 
detailed judgment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Asjad Javaid Ghural)  
 
    Judge  
   APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    Judge 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ramzan*  
Crl. Appeal No.775 of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.395 of 2009  
 
 
 
12 
