JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
M/s Gulistan Textile Mills Limited 
Versus   
Federation of Pakistan & others 
           
 
 
Date of Hearing. 
PETITIONERS BY: 
RESPONDENTS BY: 
J U D G M E N T 
 
06-11-2018 
 
M/s  Mehmood  Arif,  M.  Baqir  Hussain, 
Mehmood  Ahmad  and  Muhammad  Naeem 
Munawar, Advocates. 
M/s Ch. Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, Iftikhar Ahmad 
Mughal,  Rana  Muhammad  Mehtab,  Sh.  Izhar  ul 
Haq,  Sarfraz  Ahmad  Cheema,  Ch.  Imtiaz  Elahi 
and Nabeel Rafaqat Ch. Advocates. 
Mr. Nasar Ahmad, D.A.G. 
 
Shahid  Karim,  J:-  This  petition  and  connected 
petitions  W.P  No.95144  of  2017,  W.P  No.218646  of 
2018, W.P No.136806 of 2018, W.P No.136736 of 2018, 
W.P  No.205774  of  2018  and  W.P  No.227754  of  2018 
raise a common question of law and are being decided by 
a common judgment. 
The Issue: 
2. 
The question relates to the construction of the word 
“taxes”  mentioned  in  section  32  of  the  Customs  Act, 
1969  (Act,  1969).    That  word  was  added  in  the  entire 
section  32  wherever  the  context  required  and  has  been 
inserted  by  Finance  Act,  2014.    By  way  of  illustration, 
sub-section  (2)  of  section  32  is  reproduced  below  and 
around which the entire controversy revolves: 
―32  (2)  Where,  by  reason  of  any  such  document  or 
statement as aforesaid or by reason of some collusion, 
any  duty,  taxes  or  charge  has  not  been  levied  or  has 
been  short-levied  or  has  been  erroneously  refunded, 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
2 
the  person  liable  to  pay  any  amount  on  that  account 
shall  be  served  with  a  notice  within  73[five]  years  of 
the relevant date, requiring him to show cause why he 
should not pay the amount specified in the notice.‖ 
 
It  can  be  seen  from  a  reading  of  section  32(2) 
3. 
reproduced above that a person liable to pay any amount 
of  duty  or  taxes  or  other  charges  which  has  not  been 
levied  or  has  been  short  levied  or  has  been  erroneously 
refunded,  shall  be  served  with  a  show  cause  notice 
requiring  him  to  show  cause  why  he  should  not  pay  the 
amount specified in the notice.  The petitioners have been 
served with a show cause notice (the dates are different in 
all cases but that has no bearing on the outcome of these 
petitions)  whereby  proceedings  have  been  set  in  motion 
under  Section  32  of  the  Act,  1969  requiring  the 
petitioners  to  show  cause  as  to  why  certain  amounts  of 
sales  tax  and  income  tax  should  not  be  recovered  from 
them.  The challenge of the petitioners is premised on the 
proposition that an officer of Customs or more precisely 
the  Collector,  Collectorate  of  Customs  (Adjudication) 
does  not  have  the  jurisdiction  to  enter  upon  and  decide 
the  liability  of  the  petitioners  in  respect  of  payment  of 
any  amount  of  sales  tax  or  income  tax  as  these  amounts 
can only be recovered by initiating proceedings under the 
respective laws under which they have been imposed, viz. 
Sales  Tax  Act,  1990  (Act,  1990)  and  Income  Tax 
Ordinance,  2001  (Ordinance,  2001).    The  proposition 
would  have  been  a  simple  one  had  the  amendment  of 
2014  by  insertion  of  the  word  “taxes”  not  been  made  in 
section 32 of the Act, 1969. 
 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
3 
The Facts: 
4. 
The  facts  can  be  stated  shortly.    It  will  not  be 
relevant to state the facts of each petition separately.  For 
the  sake  of  brevity  the  facts  brought  forth  in  W.P 
No.67182 of 2017 are being narrated.  The petitioner is a 
manufacturer-cum-exporter of yarn and has been carrying 
out business under “Duty and Tax Remission for Export” 
rules  contained  in  sub-chapter  VII  of  Chapter  XII  of  the 
Customs  Rules,  2001  notified  by  Federal  Board  of 
Revenue 
(FBR) 
through  SRO  450(I)/2001  dated 
18.06.2001.    This  scheme  will  hereinafter  be  referred  as 
DTRE Scheme and under which the FBR has allowed the 
manufacturer-cum-exporter  to  procure  tax  free  input 
goods to be used in the manufacturing of goods meant for 
export  subject  to  the  conditions  and  other  restrictions 
prescribed  therein.    The  petitioner  imported  Polyester 
Staple Fiber used in the manufacturing of PC yarn meant 
for export through 8 GDs during the period from July to 
November, 2011 and got their clearance without payment 
of  customs  duty,  sales  tax  and  advance  income  tax.    An 
audit  was  conducted  in  respect  of  the  petitioner  and 
pursuant to the audit of the record of the petitioner a show 
cause notice dated 16.6.2017 was served on the petitioner 
by  the  Collector  of  Customs  (Adjudication)  containing 
allegations with respect to alleged short levy of sales tax 
as  well  as  income  tax.    To  reiterate,  the  petitioners  in 
these petitions challenge the authority of the Collector to 
adjudicate  upon  show  cause  notice  as  according  to  the 
learned  counsel 
for 
the  petitioners 
the  essential 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
4 
jurisdictional  facts  do  not  exist  so  as  to  confer  the 
jurisdiction on the Collector to proceed in the matter. 
The arguments and statutory provisions: 
5. 
The  arguments  which  featured  in  the  case  will  be 
adverted to during the course of this opinion and are not 
required  to  be  reproduced.    In  a  nub,  the  centrality  of 
those  arguments  revolved  around  challenge 
to 
the 
authority  of 
the  Collector 
to  proceed  with 
the 
adjudication on the ground that the matter of recovery of 
taxes under the Act, 1990 and the Ordinance, 2001 vests 
in  the  authorities  and  forms  set  up  under  those  statutes 
and  the  Collector,  Collectorate  of  Customs  having  been 
empowered  under 
the  Act,  1969  neither  has 
the 
jurisdiction  nor  the  power  to  either  adjudicate  on  the 
matter or to order the recovery of those taxes.   
6.  Certain  provisions  of  the  three  statutes  will  have  a 
gravitational  pull  on  the  controversy  being  decided 
through  this  judgment.    The  legal  landscape  may  be 
referred to firstly in order to understand the precise scope 
of the controversy and lend actuality to the dispute.   
7.  By 
a  notification  SRO  886(I)/2012  dated 
28.07.2012  the  FBR  has  directed  that  the  Collector, 
Collectorate  of  Customs  (Adjudication)  shall  adjudicate 
cases  relating  to  amounts  falling  in  the  jurisdiction  of 
Collectorates and Directorates mentioned in column  3 of 
the Table in that notification.  However, this notification 
is  relevant  only  to  the  extent  of  conferring  territorial 
jurisdiction  on  the  respective  Collectorates.    The  source 
of  power  of  adjudication  which  vests 
in 
these 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
5 
Collectorates  can  be  traced  to  section  179  read  with 
section  32  of  the  Act,  1969.    Section  179,  so  far  as 
relevant, provides that:- 
179.  Power  of  adjudication.-  (1)  Subject  to  sub-
section (2), in cases involving confiscation of goods or 
recovery  of  duty  and  other  taxes  not  levied,  short 
levied  or  erroneously  refunded,  imposition  of  penalty 
or any other contravention under this Act or the rules 
made  thereunder,  the  jurisdiction  and  powers  of  the 
officers  of  Customs  in  terms  of  amount  of  duties  and 
other  taxes  involved,  excluding  the  conveyance,  shall 
be as follows, namely.‖ 
 
8. 
Priorly, section 179 read as follows: 
Subject  to  sub-section  (2),  in  cases  involving 
―(1) 
confiscation of goods or imposition of penalty under this 
Act  or  the  rules  made  thereunder,  the  jurisdiction  and 
powers of the Officers of Customs in terms of amount of 
duties  and  other 
the 
conveyance, shall be as follows:--‖ 
involved,  excluding 
taxes 
 
9.  A  juxtaposition  of  the  two  provisions,  one  the 
current form and the other prior to its substitution would 
show  that  an  amendment  was  made  through  the  Finance 
Act,  2012 by  which a change  was brought  about  in  sub-
section (1) of section 179 and the contours of the powers 
of the Collector were expanded.  It will be seen that prior 
to  its  amendment,  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Collectorates 
merely  extended  to  cases  involving  “confiscation  of 
goods or imposing of penalty under this Act  or the rules 
made  thereunder”.    By  the  amendment  the  jurisdiction 
was extended to cases involving not only confiscation of 
goods  but  also  to  recovery  of  duty  and  other  taxes,  not 
levied,  short  levied  or  erroneously  refunded,  imposition 
of penalty or any other contravention under the Act or the 
rules  made  thereunder.    As  if  this  was  not  enough  the 
provision  went  on  to  stipulate  that  the  jurisdiction  and 
powers of the officers of Customs in terms of amount of 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
6 
duties and “other taxes” involved shall be as mentioned 
in  sub-section  (1)  of  section  179.    Thus,  what  is 
discernible  at  once  is  the  fundamental  change  brought 
about  in  section  179  by  conferring  jurisdiction  on  the 
Collector of Customs to recover duty and other taxes not 
levied or short levied. The words “other taxes” inserted in 
section  179  are  of  paramount  significance.    They  are 
presumed  to  have  been  brought  in  by  a  reasoned  and 
deliberative  policy  making  by  the  legislature  and  cannot 
be ignored to make a fetish of that process.  These words 
have been woven in the fabric of the Act, 1969 to achieve 
a  purpose  and  the  Courts  must  interpret  these  words  in 
such  a  manner  so  as  to  give  effect  to  the  purpose  and 
policy underlying the amendment.  This case is about the 
proper  interpretation  to  be  put  on  these  words  by  this 
Court.  It was said by Chief Justice Muhammad Munir in 
PLD 1957 SC (Pak) 219 at 233 that: 
―Ever  since  man  learnt  to  express  his  feelings  and  the  
thoughts  in  words,  the  function  of  the  person  to  whom 
the  words  are  addressed,  a  function  of  which  he  is 
scarcely  conscious,  has  been  to  understand  what  is 
intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  speaker;  but  ever  since 
law  began  to  be  written  the  duty  of  those  to  whom  it  is 
addressed or who are called upon to expound it has been 
to discover the intention of the law giver.‖ 
 
10.  Although  the  amendment  in  section  179  had  been 
made in the year 2012 by the addition of the words “other 
taxes”  and  their  recovery  while  conferring  jurisdiction 
and  power  on  the  officers  of  Customs,  a  corresponding 
amendment  was  not  made  in  section  32  which  is  a 
provisions  conferring  powers  of  adjudication  on  the 
Collectorates  (Adjudication). 
  This  amendment,  as 
explicated, was made by Finance Act, 2014 and the word 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
7 
“taxes” was inserted wherever it was thought necessary to 
be  done  by  the  legislature.    This  completed  the  essential 
nexus between section 32 and section 179 and necessarily 
filled the void which existed prior to the said amendment.  
This  was  done  to  remove  the  unsavory  effect  that  while 
the officers of Customs had the pecuniary jurisdiction to 
proceed  to  recover  duties  and  other  taxes  not  levied  or 
short levied yet could not issue a show cause notice under 
Section 32 so as to require the person in default to pay the 
amount of sales tax and income tax specified in the notice 
for no such power could be culled out from section 32. 
11.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  referred  to 
section 148 of the Ordinance, 2001 which empowers the 
Collector  of  Customs  to  collect  advance  tax  from  every 
importer  of  goods  on  the  value  of  goods  at  the  rate 
specified in part II of the First Schedule.  This provision 
merely mandates the Collector of Customs to  collect  the 
advance  tax  from  the  importer  of  goods  and  does  not 
relate  to  the  recovery  of  any  such  amount  subsequent  to 
the importation of goods in case the advance tax has not 
been levied or recovered.  The learned counsel also made 
a reference to  section  162 of the Ordinance, 2001 which 
recites that: 
―162.  Recovery  of  tax  from the  person  from  whom  tax  was 
not  collected  or  deducted.—  (1)  Where  a  person  fails  to 
collect  tax  as  required  under  Division  II  of  this  Part  or 
Chapter  XII or  deduct  tax  from  a  payment  as  required  under 
Division  III  of  this  Part  or  Chapter  XII,  the  Commissioner 
may  pass  an  order  to  that  effect  and  recover  the  amount  not 
collected  or  deducted  from  the  person  from  whom  the  tax 
should have been collected or to whom the payment was made.  
 
(2) The recovery of tax under sub-section (1) does not absolve 
the person who failed to deduct tax as required under Division 
III of this Part or Chapter XII from any other legal action in 
relation  to  the  failure,  or  from  a  charge  of  10[default 
surcharge]or the disallowance of a deduction for the expense 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
8 
to  which  the  failure  relates,  as  provided  for  under  this 
Ordinance.‖ 
 
12.  The  above  provision  indeed  gives  power  to  the 
Commissioner  to  pass  an  order  for  the  recovery  of  the 
amount  of  income  tax  which  has  not  been  collected  or 
deducted  from  the  person  from  whom  tax  should  have 
been  collected  or  whom 
the  payment  was  made.  
However,  the  said  provision  clearly  provides  that  the 
recovery of tax under sub-section (1) does not absolve the 
person  who  failed  to  deduct  tax  as  required  under 
Division  III  of  this  Part  or  Chapter  XII  from  any  other 
legal  action in  relation  to the failure or from  a charge of 
default surcharge as provided under the Ordinance, 2001.  
In  this  case,  admittedly,  no  proceedings  in  terms  of 
section  162  were 
initiated  by 
the  Commissioner 
concerned  and  the  arguments  of  the  petitioners  proceed 
on  the  assumption  that  sufficient  powers  vest  in  the 
Commissioner to recover the taxes from the person from 
whom  tax  was  not  collected  or  deducted  under  Section 
162  and  therefore  the  powers  being  exercised  by  the 
Collector  of  Customs  under  Section  32  cannot  be  set  in 
motion or initiated against the petitioners.  This argument 
has no legal basis and cannot be countenanced.  The mere 
fact  that  a  power  has  been  conferred  on  an  officer  to 
initiate  an  action  in  respect  of  recovery  of  tax  does  not, 
ipso facto, means that that is the only power which can be 
exercised  and  no  other  power  or  jurisdiction  can  be 
exercised to effect recovery of the tax which has not been 
levied or short levied.  Plainly, the powers which vest in 
different  authorities  are  not  mutually  destructive  but 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
9 
complementary  to  each  other  and  unless  the  legislature 
clearly  provides  to  the  contrary,  those  powers  can  be 
exercised without prejudice to any other power conferred 
under  the  law.    If  the  argument  of  the  petitions  was  to 
prosper,  then  all  proceedings  of  recovery,  except  one 
under  Section  162,  would  be  deemed  to  be  barred  even 
under  the  Ordinance,  2001.    No  such  prohibition  can  be 
read into section 162. 
13.  Of critical importance is another amendment which 
was made in section 6 of the Act, 1990.  By Finance Act, 
2015  the  words  “including  recovery”  were  added  to  the 
said provision which now reads as under:- 
―6.  Time  and  manner  of  payment.  –  (1)  The  tax  in 
respect  of  goods  imported  into  Pakistan  shall  be 
charged and paid in the same manner and at the same 
time as if it were a duty of customs payable under the 
Customs Act, 1969 and the provisions of the said Act 
including  section  31A  thereof,  shall,  so  far  as  they 
relate 
to  collection,  payment  and  enforcement 
including  recovery  of  tax  under  this  Act  on  such 
goods  where  no  specific  provision  exists  in  this  Act, 
apply.‖ 
 
14.  Thus,  prior  to  the  amendment,  section  6  merely 
provided  that  the  tax  in  respect  of  goods  imported  into 
Pakistan  shall  be  charged  and  paid  in  the  same  manner 
and  at  the  same  time  as  if  it  were  a  duty  of  customs 
payable  under  the  Customs  Act,  1969  and  that  the 
provisions  of  the  Act,  1969  so  far  as  they  relate  to 
collection,  payment  and  enforcement  of  tax  shall  apply.  
Later  on  by  the  Finance  Act,  2015  the  words  “including 
recovery”  were  added  by  which  the  inevitable  intention 
sought  to  be  conveyed  by  the  legislature  was  that  the 
provisions of the Act, 1969 shall also apply in respect of 
recovery  of  tax  to  be  paid  under  the  Act,  1990.    There 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
10 
could  not  be  any  other 
intention  so  clearly  and 
unequivocally expressed by the legislature in inserting the 
words  “including  recovery  of  taxes”  in  section  6  of  the 
Act,  1990  which  for  all  intents  and  purposes  confer  the 
jurisdiction in respect of recovery of tax on the officer of 
Customs  exercising  jurisdiction  under  the  Act,  1969.  
Thus the policy of the Act, 1990, post-amendment, seems 
to be to confer the powers of recovery in the hands of the 
Officers  of  Customs  in  respect  of  sales  tax  levied  on 
imported goods.  This has been carved out of the general 
power to adjudicate matters of sales tax recovery vesting 
in  the  Officers  of  Sales  Tax  and  is  part  of  the  entire 
scheme  of  things  by  which  amendment  was  made  in 
different  statutes  so  as  to  create  a  seamless  web  of 
statutory enterprise.  In short, matters relating to recovery 
of all imposts at the stage of importation are sought to be 
entrusted  to  one  class  of  Officers  and  regulated  by  a 
single law. 
15.  This  brings  us  to  the  related  submission  of  Mr. 
Nasar  Ahmad,  Deputy  Attorney  General  who  also  read 
section 11 of the Act, 1990 which states that: 
“11. Assessment of Tax & Recovery of Tax not levied 
or short levied or erroneously refunded] .– (1) Where 
a  person  who  is  required  to  file  a  tax  return  fails  to 
file the return for a tax period by the due date or pays 
an amount which, for some miscalculation is less than 
the  amount  of  tax  actually  payable,  an  officer  of 
Inland Revenue shall, after a notice to show cause to 
such  person,  make  an  order  for  assessment  of  tax, 
including imposition of penalty and default surcharge 
in accordance with sections 33 and 34:  
 
Provided  that  where  a  person  required  to  file  a  tax 
return files the return after the due date and pays the 
amount  of  tax  payable  in  accordance  with  the  tax 
return  along  with  default  surcharge  and  penalty,  the 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
11 
notice  to  show  cause  and  the  order  of  assessment 
shall abate.  
(2)  Where  a  person  has  not  paid  the  tax  due  on 
supplies  made  by  him  or  has  made  short  payment  or 
has  claimed  input  tax  credit  or  refund  which  is  not 
admissible under this Act for reasons other than those 
specified  in  sub-section  (1),  an  officer  of  Inland 
Revenue  shall  after  a  notice  to  show  cause  to  such 
person,  make  an  order  for  assessment  of  tax  actually 
payable by that person or determine the amount of tax 
credit  or  tax  refund  which  he  has  unlawfully claimed 
and  shall  impose  a  penalty  and  charge  default 
surcharge in accordance with sections 33 and 34.  
 
(3)  Where  by  reason  of  some  collusion  or  deliberate 
Act any tax or charge has not been levied or made or 
has  been  short  levied  or  has  been  erroneously 
refunded,  the  person  liable  to  pay  any  amount  of  tax 
or  charge  or  the  amount  of  fund  erroneously  made 
shall be served with the notice requiring him to show 
cause  for  payment  of  the  amount  specified  in  the 
notice. 
 
(4)  Where,  by  reason  of  any  inadvertence,  error  or 
misconstruction any tax or charge has not been levied 
or  made  or  has  been  short-levied  or  has  been 
erroneously refunded, the person liable to the amount 
of tax or charge or the amount of refund erroneously 
made  shall  be  served  with  a  notice  requiring  him  to 
show cause for payment of the amount specified in the 
notice:  
 
Provided  that,  where  a  tax  or  charge  has  not  been 
levied  under  this  sub  section  the  amount  of  tax  shall 
be recovered as tax fraction of the value of supply.‖ 
 
16.  The  precise  submission  was  that  section  11  which 
relates  to  the  assessment  of  tax  and  recovery  of  tax  not 
levied  or  short  levied  or  erroneously  refunded  under  the 
Act, 1990, merely restricts to the supply of goods and not 
to the import of goods for which the proceedings can only 
be  undertaken  by  the  Collector  of  Customs  under  the 
provisions  of  the  Act,  1969.    This  argument  runs  an 
ingenious  course  as  the  reading  of  sub-section  (1)  of 
section  11  inevitably  conveys  an  impression  that  the 
recovery of taxes and any proceedings to be taken under 
Section 11 have to be in respect of the tax due on supplies 
made by a registered person and not imports made by the 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
12 
said  person.    Yet  a  holistic  reading  of  the  entire  section 
11  would  show  that  the  argument  has  little  constituency 
and cannot prosper.  Sub-sections 3 and 4 do not speak to 
supplies  only  and  so  the  word  „supplies‟  cannot  be  read 
into  those  provisions.    They  simply  refer  to  any  tax  or 
charge  which  has  not  been  levied  or  has  been  short-
levied.    There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  show  cause 
notice may be issued in respect of an amount of sales tax 
required to be paid at the import stage.  Another reason to 
regard  the  argument  as  untenable  is  that  prior  to  the 
amendments  in  the  Act,  1969,  section  11  was  the  only 
provision  under  which  the  recovery  was  made  and  the 
amendments have only the effect of conferring concurrent 
jurisdiction on the Officers of Customs.  That jurisdiction 
can  be  exercised  either  by  the  Officers  of  Sales  Tax  or 
Customs.  There is nothing in section 11 of the Act, 1990 
which  is  a  provision  in  pari  materia  Section  32  of  the 
Act, 1969 relating to the adjudication of disputes   which 
in any manner prohibits the proceedings to be taken under 
Section 32 of the Act, 1969 in respect of recovery of sales 
tax  or  income  tax  short  levied  nor  does  it  preclude  an 
adjudicative process to be undertaken by the Collector of 
Customs. 
17.  However,  the  central  question  animating  these 
petitions is to locate and ascertain the true intention of the 
legislature in adding the word “taxes” to sections 32 and 
179  of  the  Act,  1969.    The  first  principle  that  comes  to 
mind while placing a construction on the said provisions 
is a well-worn rule that redundancy cannot be attached to 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
13 
any  words  added  by  the  legislature  in  a  statute.    In 
particular  if  the  legislature  has  added  those  words 
subsequently, the intention can very well be gathered that 
the words have been added with a purpose and in order to 
achieve a goal. 
18. 
It is a settled canon of construction that “a textually 
permissible 
interpretation 
that 
furthers 
rather 
than 
obstructs  the  document‟s  purpose  should  be  favoured”.  
Reading  Law,  The  Interpretation  of  Legal  Texts  by 
Antonin  Scalia  and  Bryan  A.  Garner,  elaborates  the 
canon thus: 
―This  canon  follows  inevitable  from  the  facts  that 
(1)  interpretation  always  depends  on  context,  (2) 
context  always  includes  evident  purpose,  and  (3) 
evident purpose always includes effectiveness.‖ 
 
19.  The  same 
treatise  refers 
to  another  rule  of 
interpretation  vouched  by  superior  Courts  and  which, 
more than any other,  compels this Court to  hold that the 
word „taxes‟ has a consequence and cannot be ignored.  It 
is  known  as  the  Surplusage  Canon  and  has  been 
described as follows: 
―If possible, every word and every provision is to be 
given  effect  (verba  cum  effectu  sunt  accipienda). 
None should be ignored. None should needlessly be 
given  an  interpretation  that  causes  it  to  duplicate 
another provision or to have no consequence.  
 
The  surplusage  canon  holds  that  it  is  no  more  the 
court’s  function  to  revise  by  subtraction  than  by 
addition.  A provision that seems to the court unjust 
or  unfortunate  (creating  the  so-called  ca-sus  made 
inclusus) must nonetheless be given effect.  As Chief 
Justice  John  Marshal  explained:  ―It  would  be 
dangerous  in  the  extreme,  to  infer  from  extrinsic 
circumstances,  that  a  case  for  which  the  words  of 
an instrument expressly  provide, shall be exempted 
from its operation.‖  Or in the words of Thomas M. 
Cooley:  ―The  courts  must…lean  in  favor  of  a 
construction  which  will 
render  every  word 
operative,  rather  than  one  which  may  make  some 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
14 
idle  and  nugatory.‖    This  is  true  not  just  of  legal 
texts  but  of  all  sensible  writing:  :Whenever  a 
reading arbitrarily ignores linguistic components or 
inadequately account for  them, the reading may be 
presumed improbable.‖ 
 
―Lawyers  rarely  argue  that  an  entire  provision 
should  be  ignored—but  it  does  happen.    For 
example,  in  Fortec  Constructors  v.  United  States, 
the  quality-control  paragraph  of  a  construction 
contract with the Army read as follows: 
 
All work ... shall be subject to inspection and test 
by the Government at all reasonable times and at 
all places prior to acceptance. Any such inspection 
and  test  is  for  the  sole  benefit  of  the  Government 
and  shall  not  relieve  the  Contractor  of  the 
responsibility  of  providing  quality 
control 
measures to assure that the work strictly complies 
with  the  contract  requirements.  No  inspection  or 
test  by  the  Government  shall  be  construed  as 
constituting or implying acceptance.  
 
When  the  Army  demanded  that  the  contractor 
demolish  and  reconstruct  noncompliant  work,  the 
contractor protested that the on-site Army inspector 
had  failed  to  notify  Fortec  of  the  defects  and  that 
this  silence  constituted  an  acceptance  of 
the 
original  work.    The  court  correctly  rejected  this 
argument: 
 
To  agree  with  Fortec's  contention  would  render 
clause 10 meaningless. This court must be guided 
by  the  well  accepted  and  basic  principle  that  an 
interpretation  that  gives  a  reasonable  meaning to 
all  parts  of  the  contract  will  be  preferred  to  one 
that  leaves  portions  of  the  contract  meaningless. 
Therefore,  Fortec's  contention  is  rejected  for 
being  inconsistent  with  contract  clause  10.  The 
Corps  quality  assurance 
inspections  did  not 
constitute an acceptance of the work.‖ 
 
20. 
It was held in United States v. Butler, 297 US 1, 65 
(1936) (per Roberts, J) that: 
―These  words  cannot  be  meaningless,  else  they 
would not have been used.‖ 
 
21.  The  observations  reproduced  above  convey  in  the 
most basic sense the rule that every word has to be given 
effect and the courts cannot subtract or add any word in a 
statute.  
22.  As  adumbrated,  there  is  a  chronology  of  events 
which clearly depicts a conscience attempt on the part of 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
15 
the legislature to add the word “taxes” in the scheme and 
structure of the Act, 1969.  For instance, section 179 prior 
to its amendment by Finance Act, 2012 so far as relevant, 
did  not  confer  jurisdiction  on  the  officers  of  Customs  in 
respect  of  recovery  of  duty  and  other  taxes  not  levied, 
short  levied  or  erroneously  refunded.    Thus,  by  the 
amendment  brought  about 
in 
the  year  2012 
the 
jurisdiction  of  the  officers  of  Customs  was  expanded  to 
include adjudication of cases relating to recovery of duty 
and  other  taxes  and  did  not  remain  confined  to  cases 
involving  confiscation  of  goods  or  imposition  of  penalty 
“under 
this  Act  or 
the  rules  made 
thereunder‖.  
(underlining  supplied).    Thus,  the  power  of  adjudication 
was materially expanded not only to include the power of 
recovery of duty but also other taxes.  At that time section 
32  did  not  chime  well  with  the  amended  section  179.  
This was realized by the legislature and through Finance 
Act, 2014 section 32 was amended in such a way that the 
word  “taxes”  was  added  so  as  to  confer  jurisdiction  on 
the  officers  of  Customs  for  making  adjudication  in 
respect of taxes which had been levied or had been short-
levied.  It cannot be urged by the petitioners that this was 
without  any  purpose  or  done  thoughtlessly  by  the 
legislature.    If  by  oversight  section  179  had  been 
amended to include the word “taxes” the legislature ought 
to  have  become  wiser  by  excluding  the  word  “taxes” 
from  section 179 rather  than making its intention clearer 
to the contrary by adding the word to section 32 as well, 
for,  it  is  futile  to  confer  the  power  of  adjudication  on 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
16 
officers  of  Customs  while 
failing 
to  make  a 
corresponding  change  in  the  substantive  provision  and 
which  also  prescribes  the  procedure  for  carrying  out  the 
adjudication  proceedings  by  the  officers  of  Customs.  
Thus there is no doubt that the word “taxes” was included 
in  the  scheme  of  the  Act,  1969  with  a  purpose  and 
deliberately.  It is admitted on all hands that no taxes are 
levied  under  the  provisions  of  Act,  1969  and  the  only 
charge  which  has  been  imposed  is  the  duty  of  customs 
under  Section  18  of  the  Act,  1969,  which  prescribes  the 
goods  which  are  liable  to  imposition  of  customs  duty 
prescribed in the first schedule.  The provisions of section 
18  also  envisage  the  levy  of  regulatory  duty  as  well  as 
additional  customs  duty.    However,  the  entire  Customs 
Act,  1969  does  not  refer  to  the  levy  of  taxes  to  which  a 
reference could be made or a relation could be established 
vis-à-vis section 32 and section 179.   As stated above in 
the  preceding  paragraphs,  not  only  the  Income  Tax 
Ordinance, 2001 but also the Sales Tax Act, 1990 require 
the levy and recovery of withholding tax as well as sales 
tax imposed on the imported goods and for their recovery 
to be effected at the time of importation by the officers of 
Customs.    The  officers  of  Customs,  therefore,  act  as  the 
collecting  agent  for  the  income  tax  as  well  as  sales  tax 
authorities from every importer of goods on the value of 
goods  at  the  rate  specified.    It  was  perhaps  thought 
anomalous  by  the  legislature  that  the  recovery  if  any 
effected  or  short-levied  be  recovered  by  the  adjudicative 
process  in  the  Act,  1990  or  the  Ordinance,  2001  rather 
W.P No.67182 of 2017 
17 
than the one prescribed in the Act, 1969.  In my opinion 
the  amendments  which  have  been  brought  about  merely 
serve  to  reconcile  the  powers  of  the  officers  of  Customs 
and  not  only  confers  the  power  to  recovery  at  the 
importation  stage  but  also  confers 
the  power  of 
adjudication under Section 32 of the Act, 1969. 
23.  Notwithstanding  the  above,  the  argument  raised  by 
the  petitioners  would,  at  best,  result  in  conferring  a 
concurrent 
jurisdiction  on 
the  officers  under 
the 
Ordinance,  2001  and  the  Act,  1990  together  with  the 
officers of Customs under Section 32 of the Act, 1969.  It 
has not been asserted by the petitioners that conferring of 
the  jurisdiction  on  the  officers  of  Customs  is  ultra  vires 
the provisions of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 and could not have been so conferred.  If 
the  power  is  concurrent,  then  the  only  plausible  defence 
which may be taken is that the adjudicative process ought 
to be initiated by either of the adjudication offices and not 
by both.  Or that a determination by one would operate as 
preclusion in respect of a subsequent adjudication on the 
same issues. 
24. 
In  view  of  the  above,  these  petitions  are  without 
merit and are dismissed. 
 
(SHAHID KARIM) 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
Announced in open Court on 30.11.2018. 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
* 
Rafaqat Ali 
 
