HCJDA-38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.206739 of 2018 
(Muhammad Yaseen   versus   Additional Sessions Judge & others) 
JUDGMENT 
25-06-2018 
Mr. Adnan Afzal,  
Advocate. 
Mr. Muhammad Hamamd Khan Rai,  
Assistant Advocate General. 
Mr. Muhammad Arsahd Bhatti,  
Advocate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Date of hearing 
Petitioner by 
State by 
 
 
Respondent 
No.4 by 
 
 
 MUHAMMAD QASIM KHAN, J:– Petitioner  seeks 
 
setting  aside  of  order  dated  18-04-2018  passed  by  learned 
Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Gojra,  whereby  revision  petition 
filed  by  Liaqat  Ali/respondent  No.4  was  accepted  and  order 
dated  24-11-2017  passed  by  Magistrate  1 st  Class,  Gojra, 
through  which  application  filed  by  respondent  No.4  for 
disinterment  of  dead  body  of  his  son  Muhammad  Imran  was 
dismissed.    
 
2. 
Briefly  the  facts  of  the  case  are  that  Muhammad 
Imran  son  of  Liaqat  Ali/respondent  No.4  died  of  a  fire  arm 
injury;  after  completion  of  formalities  by  the  police  the  dead 
was  buried;  however,  after  about  three  months  respondent 
No.4  moved  application  for  registration  of  case  against  the 
 
Writ Petition No.206739 of 2018           (Judgment) 
 
 2 
 
headquarters  and  DSP  Circle  Gojra  was  constituted  by 
District  Police  officer,  Toba  Tek  Singh.  The  committee 
submitted  its  report  to  the  effect  that  Muhammad  Imran 
(deceased)  had  committed  suicide  and  application  filed  by 
Liaqat  Ali  was  meant  to  counter  an  application  under  section 
22-A(6)  Cr.P.C.  filed  by  Mst.  Salma  Bibi  against  him  and 
some others. Thereafter, Liaqat Ali filed an application to the 
Ilaqa  Magistrate  for  exhumation  of  dead  body  of  his  son, 
alleging  that  on  20.06.2017  at  about  2.00  p.m.  in  broad 
daylight,  Rana  Saeed  Rehman  SHO  along  with  other  police 
officials  and  some  private  persons  had  committed  the  murder 
of  his  son  Muhammad  Imran;  local  police  joined  hands  with 
the  medical  officer  and  got  conducted  post  mortem  of 
Muhammad Imran in his absence and thus obtained a fake and 
fictitious  post  mortem  report.  The  learned  Ilaqa  Magistrate 
however,  dismissed  the  said  application  vide  order  dated 
24.11.2017,  where-after,  Liaqat  Ali  preferred  a  criminal 
revision  which  was  allowed  vide  order  dated  18.04.2018 
passed  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Gojra,  which 
order is under challenge through the instant writ petition. 
 
in 
3. 
It  is  argued  by  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 
that  Liaqat  Ali/respondent  No.4  had  changed  his  stance 
because  Mst.  Salma  Bibi  (relative  of  one  of  the  nominated 
accused 
the  application  of  Liaqat  Ali)  had  moved 
application  for  registration  of  case  against  Liaqat  Ali  and 
some  others,  otherwise,  there  was  application  of  Liaqat  Ali 
was  totally  a  cock  and  bull  story  with  no  truth  in  it.  Further 
argued  that  firstly  a  committee  of  two  DSP  and  then  the 
learned  Ilaqa  Magistrate  had  declared  the  application  of 
Liaqat  Ali  as  baseless,  but  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 
Judge  while  passing  the  impugned  order  committed  serious 
 
Writ Petition No.206739 of 2018           (Judgment) 
 
 3 
 
 
4. 
Learned  counsel  appearing  for  respondent  No.4, 
however,  opposed  the  contentions  of  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  and  defended  the  impugned  order  by  arguing  that 
Liaqat  Ali/respondent  No.4  being 
father  of 
Muhammad Imran deceased had every right to know about the 
cause  of  his  death,  therefore,  the  impugned  order  is  perfectly 
in accordance with law. 
real 
the 
 
5. 
The  learned  law  officer  argued  that  procedure 
provided  under  section  176  Cr.P.C.,  can  only  be  activated  to 
ascertain  the  cause  of  death.  According  to  the  learned  law 
officer  the  cause  of  death  had  already  been  specified  in  the 
post mortem report already conducted, therefore, disinterment 
of  dead  body  was  not  required.  However,  on  legal  ground  he 
urged  that  revisional  order  cannot  be  challenged  in  writ 
jurisdiction, in the light of case “BADARUDDIN Versus Mehr 
AHMAD RAZA, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE, JHANG and 
6 others” (PLD 1993 Supreme Court 399). 
6. 
 
Heard. Record perused. 
 
7. 
Firstly,  I  will  take  up  the  legal  objection  with 
regard  to  maintainability  of  writ  petition  against  an  order 
passed on a criminal revision.  In the case of “BADARUDDIN 
Versus  Mehr  AHMAD  RAZA,  ADDITIONAL  SESSIONS 
JUDGE,  JHANG  and  6  others”  (PLD  1993  Supreme  Court 
399)  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has  held  that 
after  the  decision  by  a  revisional  court  said  order  attained 
finality  and  could  not  be  assailed  in  writ  jurisdiction.  The 
relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced hereunder: - 
“Second  ground  given  by  the  High  Court  is  that 
writ  will  not  lie  if  final  order  is  passed  by  the 
Revisional Court. There is no   dispute  about  the 
 
 
Writ Petition No.206739 of 2018           (Judgment) 
 
 4 
in 
in 
the 
in  scope 
than  powers 
as  mentioned 
the  writ 
are  wider 
jurisdiction.  By  amendment 
law  now 
Sessions  Court  and  High  Court  have  concurrent 
revisional  jurisdiction  which  is  allowed  in  the 
normal  course  to  be  exercised  first  by  lower 
forum  but  that  does  not  decrease  the  scope  of 
jurisdiction 
such 
circumstances, it is said that if there is finding by 
the  Court  of  competent 
the 
revisional  side  then  it  has  attained  finality.  On 
the  same  question  writ  petition  would  be  non-
maintainable  because  otherwise  it  would  amount 
to  allowing  question  finally  decided  in  one  set  of 
forums  to  be  agitated  afresh  in  another  set  of 
forums  and  that  way  there  will  be  no  end  to  the 
finality.”   
jurisdiction  on 
above. 
In 
This issue was again raised before the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
the  case  of 
of  Pakistan  and  while  deciding 
“MUHAMMAD 
BUTT 
versus 
MUHAMMAD  ASIF  BHATTI  and  others”  (PLD  2011  Supreme 
Court 905), the Hon’ble Apex Court has held as under:- 
it, 
and 
ASHRAF 
others 
in 
in 
for 
for 
that 
counsel 
interfering 
the  appellants 
learned  High  Court 
“Lastly,  attending  to  the  plea  propounded  by  the 
learned 
the 
constitutional jurisdiction could not be exercised by 
the 
the 
revisional  order  of  the  Addl.  District  and  Sessions 
Judge.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  on  account  of  the 
provisions of Article 4 of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  it is an  alienable  right 
of  every  citizen  to  enjoy  the  equal  protection  of  law 
and to be treated in accordance with law, therefore, 
if  a  revisional  Court  has  passed  an  order  which 
does not qualify the test of Article 4 ibid and suffer 
from  a  patent  error,  of 
fact,  such  as  non-
reading/misreading  of  the  facts  on  the  record  or 
has  committed  a  grave  illegality  in  applying  the 
correct  law,  such  as  the  error  of  misapplication 
and  non  application  of  correct  law,  thus  being  an 
illegality  of  a  sheer  nature  can  always  be  rectified 
by 
its 
constitutional  jurisdiction  under  Article  199,  as  no 
bar/limitation 
this  behalf on the  exercise  of 
constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court either 
the  High  Court  while 
exercising 
in 
 
Writ Petition No.206739 of 2018           (Judgment) 
 
 5 
 
The  same  principle  was  followed  in  “MUHAMMAD  ANWAR 
and others versus Mst. ILYAS BEGUM and others” (PLD 2013 
Supreme  Court  255).  By  examining  the  above  two  judgments, 
it  becomes  clear  that  “BADARUDDIN  Versus  Mehr  AHMAD 
RAZA,  ADDITIONAL  SESSIONS  JUDGE,  JHANG  and  6 
others”  (PLD  1993  Supreme  Court  399)  is  the  basic  rule  that 
where  an  order  passed  by  a  revisional  court  does  not  violate 
any  law  and  no  illegality  is  found  to  have  been  committed 
therein,  then  the  same  cannot  be  disturbed  in  constitutional 
jurisdiction,  but  when  an  order  suffers  from  a  patent  error  or 
grave  illegality  has  been  committed  in  applying  the  correct 
law  and  further  the  order  passed  by  the  revisional  court  does 
not qualify the test of Article 4 of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  then  the  same  can  be  rectified  in 
exercise  of  constitutional  jurisdiction.  For  the  reasons  to  be 
recorded  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  this  court  is  convinced 
that  as  the  order  impugned  herein  does  not  stand  the  test  of 
Article  4  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973,  hence  the  instant  writ  petition  is  fully  competent  and 
maintainable. 
 
to 
Now  coming 
legal  position  with  regard 
8. 
to 
Section  176  Cr.P.C.,  there  is  hardly  any  doubt  that  basic  and 
sole  purpose  to  invoke  section  176  Cr.P.C.  is  to  know  about 
the  “cause  of  death”  of  a  person  who  dies  in  the  custody  of 
the police. In this case it is correct that Muhammad Imran son 
of  Liaqat  Ali/  respondent  No.4  died  when  police  was  also 
present,  it  is  also  admitted  position  by  all  that  Muhammad 
Imran  died  of  a  fire  arm  injury  which  figured  on  his  head. 
Furthermore, 
the  deceased  was  got 
conducted,  wherein,  the  doctor  had  noted  fire  arm  injury  on 
the  head  which  also  contained  blackening,  meaning  thereby 
the  post  mortem  of 
 
Writ Petition No.206739 of 2018           (Judgment) 
 
 6 
 
head  of  the  deceased  stands  already  established,  rather  by  the 
respective  stance  of  the  parties,  as  also  by  the  post  mortem 
report  itself.  Therefore,  on  the  face  of  it  there  existed  no 
justifiable reason to have recourse to disinterment of the dead 
body  by 
in  Section  176 
Cr.P.C.,  because  otherwise  assessment  or  determination  of 
facts  that  as  to  why  and  in  what  manner  the  incident  took 
place is clearly a circumstance beyond the mandate of section 
176 Cr.P.C. 
the  process  provided 
invoking 
 
to 
the  above, 
In  continuation 
9. 
the  court  while 
dealing  with  an  application  under  section  176  Cr.P.C.  must 
bear  in  mind  that  although  different  religions/customs  in 
different parts of the world may treat the dead bodies towards 
their  destiny  according  to  their  customs  or  faith,  but  respect 
and  honor  to  the  dead  body  is  almost  common  amongst  all. 
Particularly, Islam upkeeps the dignity and honor of a human-
being  not  only  in  his  life  but  even  afterwards  by  giving  him 
final  bath,  prayers  for  the  departed  soul  and  then  respectful 
burial 
to  earth;  our  faith  does  not  at  any  stage  allow 
desecration to a dead body, irrespective of faith the dead may 
carry. In this context, a quotation is referred:-  
 
 
Writ Petition No.206739 of 2018           (Judgment) 
 
 
Another quote by Hazrat Muhammad 
significance, which is referred below:- 
 7 
 also carries 
“O  people!  I  charge  you  with  ten  rules;  learn  them 
well…for  your  guidance  in  the  battlefield!  Do  not 
commit treachery, or deviate from the right path. You 
must  not  mutilate  dead  bodies.  Neither  kill  a  child, 
nor  a  woman,  nor  an  aged  man.  Bring  no  harm  to  the 
trees,  nor  burn  them  with  fire,  especially  those  which 
are  fruitful.  Slay  not  any  of  the  enemy's  flock,  save 
for  your  food.  You  are  likely  to  pass  by  people  who 
have  devoted  their  lives  to  monastic  services;  leave 
them alone.” 
There  may  be  so  many  other  references  from  Holy  Prophet 
 
Muhammad 
laying  unmatched  humanitarian 
standards for living as well as the dead, but in order to remain 
within  the  context  of  the  case  in  hand,  it  may  not  be  required 
to quote them all.  
10. 
 
In  view  of  above  discussion  since  it  remains  an 
established fact that respect, dignity and the honor required to 
a  dead  body  must  be  protected,  therefore,  while  dealing  with 
an  application  for  disinterment  of  dead  body,  the  courts  shall 
see  that  only  in  cases  of  real  genuineness  and  as  a  last  resort 
such an order shall be issued and the applications filed merely 
on  the  basis  of  apprehensions  must  not  be  acceded  to.  As 
discussed  above  post  mortem  of  the  deceased  was  conducted 
and cause of death has been ascertained by way of  conduct of 
post  mortem  examination  of  the  deceased  and  place  of  injury 
as well as nature of injury are the same as is reflects from the 
application filed by respondent No.4.  
 
Writ Petition No.206739 of 2018           (Judgment) 
 
 8 
 
11. 
 
For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the  order 
passed  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  not  only  suffers 
from  illegality,  patent  error  and  grave  illegality  in  applying 
the correct law; even the order impugned herein is against the 
Statute, 
it  also  does  not  stand 
the 
test  of  morality. 
Consequently,  this  writ  petition  is  allowed,  the  impugned 
order dated 18.04.2018 passed by learned Additional Sessions 
Judge is hereby set-aside. 
 (MUHAMMAD QASIM KHAN) 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
 
                         JUDGE. 
Javed/Rao Azmat* 
 
