           
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
RSA No.89 of 2004 
M/s Colony Textile Mills Ltd. 
Versus   
 
 
Cotton Trading Corporation of Pakistan Ltd. 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of Hearing. 
 
25-09-2018 
 
Mr. Waseem Shahab, Advocate. 
APPELLANTS BY: 
RESPONDENTS BY:  Malik Ghulam Qasim Rajwana, Advocate. 
 
Shahid  Karim,  J:-  This  is  a  second  appeal 
under  Section  100  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure 
(CPC).    It  challenges  the  judgment  and  decree  dated 
07.09.2004 passed by the Addl. District Judge, Multan 
as  well  as  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  20.11.1995 
passed by the Civil Judge, Multan. 
2. 
The  appellant  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  of 
Rs.24,99,052/-  by  way  of  damages  against 
the 
respondent  herein.    The  nub  of  the  case  set  up  in  the 
plaint  was  that  the  Cotton  Trading  Corporation  of 
Pakistan  (“CTC”)  under  the  powers  purportedly 
conferred 
by  Cotton  Ginning  Control 
and 
Development  Ordinance,  1976  took  over  the  Oil 
Expelling  Factory  owned  by  the  appellant.    The 
appellant  was  compelled  to  file  a  constitutional 
petition 
in 
this  Court  which  was  decided  on 
30.06.1977.  The factory was directed to be returned to 
the  appellant.    The  damages  claimed  by  the  appellant 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
2 
 
 
were under various heads including the pilferage of the 
property and goods at the time of taking possession of 
the  Oil  Factory  as  well  as  the  loss  suffered  by  the 
appellant on account of the wrongful take over and the 
profits  which  would  have  accrued  to  the  appellant  in 
case  the  possession  had  not  been  taken  over  by  the 
respondent.    The  suit  was  decreed  on  20.11.1995  and 
thereby  a  partial  decree  was  passed  for  an  amount  of 
Rs.13,03,572/-  by  way  of  damages  sustained  by  the 
appellant.    The  appellant  was  also  held  entitled  to  the 
interest  at  the  rate  of  7%  per  annum  from  date  of 
institution  of  the  suit  till  realization  of  the  decretal 
amount. 
3. 
In  the  first  appeal  before  the  Addl.  District 
Judge,  Multan  the  decree  was  modified  and  the 
appellant  was  held  entitled  to  damages  to  the  tune  of 
Rs.3,17,618.33.  Thus, the loss allegedly occasioned to 
the  appellant  under  some  of  the  heads  claimed  in  the 
plaint  was  discounted  by  the  Addl.  District  Judge  in 
particular  and  some  of  the  losses  claimed  by  the 
appellant  were  granted  by  partially  modifying  the 
decree. 
4. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  at  the 
outset  does  not  press  the  claim  with  regard  to  the 
findings  rendered  by  the  first  appellate  court  on  the 
appellant’s appeal.  It  is pertinent to  mention that two 
appeals were filed, one by the appellant herein and the 
other  by  the  respondent-CTC  which  were  disposed  of 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
3 
 
 
by  a  common  judgment.    The  appeal  filed  by  the 
appellant was dismissed.  Also the appeal filed by the 
respondent  was  held  to  be  barred  by  limitation.  
However,  in  the  same  vein  the  first  appellate  court 
converted  the  appeal  filed  by  the  respondent  into 
cross-objections  in  terms  of  Order  XLI,  Rule  22  CPC 
and  proceeded  to  decide  the  cross-objections  and 
thereby reduced the amount of damages awarded to the 
appellant  by  the  trial  court.    The  learned  counsel  for 
the appellant has raised the following issue of law: 
Whether the first appellate court was empowered to 
convert 
the 
time  barred  appeal 
filed  by 
the 
respondent  in  cross-objections  under  Order  XLI, 
Rule  22  CPC  without  complying  with 
the 
procedural  formalities  given  in  under  Order  XLI, 
Rule 22 CPC”. 
 
5. 
It  may  be  stated  that  in  terms  of  section  100 
CPC a second appeal shall lie to the High Court on the 
grounds  mentioned  in  section  100  and  upon  no  other 
ground.  The question of law raised by the appellant is 
covered by clauses “a” and “c” of section 100 and the 
appellant argues that the decision of the first appellate 
court  is  contrary  to  law  and  a  substantial  error  or 
defect  in  the  procedure  provided  by  the  court  has 
occurred  which  has  produced  error  or  defect  in  the 
decision upon the merits. 
6. 
It  would  be  appropriate  to  reproduce  the 
findings  of  the  first  appellate  court  with  regard  to  the 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
4 
 
 
appeal  filed  by  the  respondent  being  time  barred  and 
the manner in which the first appellate court proceeded 
to treat the said appeal, notwithstanding that the appeal 
was  barred  by  time  as  cross-objections.    It  was  held 
that: 
“…The respondent has not stated single word in the 
grounds  of  the  appeal  or  in  the  application 
submitted by him under  Section 5 of  the Limitation 
Act that such date was given by the Copying Branch 
for  the  delivery  of  the  attested  copies  but  one  the 
date so given by the Copying Branch, the same were 
not  delivered  by  the  Copying  Branch.    In  fact  this 
delay  occurs  due  to  non-collection  of  the  attested 
copies by the respondent, therefore, the appeal filed 
by  the  respondent  on  the  face  of  it  is  barred  by 71 
days.  However, it is an admitted proposition of law 
that  the  respondent  can  also  file  cross  objection in 
the  appeal  filed  by  the  appellant  in  order  to 
challenge the issues which have been decided by the 
learned  Trial  Court  against  him  within  30  days 
after  he  received  notice  by  the  appellate  court.    In 
this  case,  the  appeal  was  filed  before  the  Hon’ble 
High  Court  as  the  District  Judge  lacks  pecuniary 
jurisdiction at that time and the same was admitted 
for regular hearing by the Hon’ble High Court vide 
order dated 3.6.1996.  It has also  been held  by the 
superior courts that even time barred appeal  could 
be  treated  and  disposed  of  as  cross  objection  and 
reliance in this regard is placed on Dr. S.S. Naeem 
ul Hamid Vs. Mst. Tahira Sultana and others (1991 
CLC 853 Lahore).  Therefore, following the dictum 
laid  down  in  the  above  said  judgment,  the  appeal 
filed  by  the  respondent  is  hereby  treated  as  cross 
objection, although the same is barred by time.” 
 
7. 
Thus,  the  Addl.  District  Judge  Multan  held  the 
appeal filed by the respondent to be statute barred and 
having  been  filed  beyond  the  period  of  limitation.  
This  finding  has  attained  finality  and  the  respondent 
has  not  challenged  the  said  finding.    The  learned 
counsel  for  the  respondent  in  fact  admits  that  the 
appeal  was  barred  by  time.    However,  the  first 
appellate  court  without  dismissing  the  appeal  filed  by 
the  respondent  considered  the  said  appeal  as  cross-
RSA No.89  of 2004 
5 
 
 
objections  in  terms  of  Order  XLI,  Rule  22  CPC  and 
thereafter  determined 
those  cross-objections  and 
partially  allowed  the  contentions  raised  by  way  of 
cross-objections  on  the  part  of  the  respondents  and 
reduced  the  amount  of  damages  so  awarded  to  the 
appellant herein. 
8. 
Order XLI, Rule 22 CPC reads as under: 
“22  .  Upon  hearing  respondent  may  object  to 
decree  as  if  he  had  preferred  a  separate  appeal— 
(1)  Any  respondent,  though  he  may  not  have 
appealed from any part of the decree, may not only 
support the decree [409][but may also state that the 
finding against him in the Court below in respect of 
any issue ought to have been in his favour; and may 
also  take  any  cross-objection]  to  the  decree  which 
he  could  have  taken  by  way  of  appeal  provided  he 
has  filed  such  objection  in  the  Appellant  Court 
within one month from the date of service on him or 
his pleader of notice of the day fixed for hearing the 
appeal, or within such further time as the Appellate 
Court may see fit to allow. 
 (2)  Form  of  objection  and  provisions  applicable 
thereto—Such  cross-objection  shall  be  in  the  form 
of a memorandum, and the provisions of rule 1, so 
far  as  they  relate  to  the  form  and  contents  of  the 
memorandum of appeal, shall apply thereto. 
(3) Unless the respondent files with the objection a 
written  acknowledgement  from  the  party  who  may 
be  affected  by  such  objection  or  his  pleader  of 
having received a copy thereof, the Appellate Court 
shall cause a copy to be served, as soon as may be 
after the filing of the objection, on such party or his 
pleader at the expense of the respondent. 
(4) Where, in any case in which any respondent has 
under  this  rule  filed  a  memorandum  of  objection, 
the original appeal is withdrawn or is dismissed for 
default,  the  objection  so  filed  may  nevertheless  be 
heard and determined after such notice to the other 
parties as the Court thinks fit. 
(5)  The  provisions-relating  to  appeal  by  indigent 
persons shall, so far as they can be made applicable 
apply to an objection under this rule.” 
 
9. 
There is no cavil that the mandate of Order XLI, 
Rule  22  CPC  clearly  is  that  any  respondent  may  take 
any cross-objections to the decree which he could have 
taken  by  way  of  appeal.    This  is  in  case  the  said 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
6 
 
 
respondent  has  not  filed  any  appeal  from  the  decree.  
Rule 22 of the Order XLI, CPC further prescribes that 
such  objections  have  to  be  filed  before  the  appellate 
court  within  one  month  from  the  date  of  service  on 
him  or  his  pleader  of  notice  of  the  date  fixed  for 
hearing  for  appeal  or  within  such  further  time  as  the 
appellate  court  may  see  fit  to  allow.    Clearly,  the 
respondent  did  not  file  any  cross-objections  to  the 
decree  and  therefore  there  was  no  occasion  for  the 
appellate  court  to  fix  the  cross-objections  for  hearing 
with  the  appeal  filed  by  the  appellant.    No  question 
arose  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  of  the  appeals 
whether  any  cross-objections  had  been  filed  or  that 
they had been filed within one month from the date of 
service  of  notice  and  consequently  the  appellate  court 
was  not  called  upon  to  dilate  upon  and  consider  the 
filing  of  cross-objections  or  to  condone  the  delay,  if 
any, in its filing.  This question was only considered at 
the  time  of  the  passing  of  the  final  judgment  and 
decree  by  the  appellate  court  and  thus  the  appellant 
herein was taken by surprise and had no opportunity of 
raising  issue  with  the  filing  of  cross-objections  or  to 
the act of treating the appeal filed by the respondent as 
cross-objections.    Plainly,  there  is  a  purpose  of  Order 
XLI,  Rule  22  CPC  and  that  purpose  cannot  be 
circumvented  or  skirted  by  the  appellate  court  by 
treating at its whim any appeal which is barred by time 
as 
cross-objections  without 
recourse 
to 
the 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
7 
 
 
fundamental  objects  given  in  Rule  22  of  the  Order 
XLI,  CPC.    Also  while  doing  so  the  appellate  court 
lost  sight  of  sub-rule  3  of  Rule  22  which  requires  the 
respondent  filing  the  objections  to  obtain  written 
acknowledgement from the party who may be affected 
by such objections or if that has not been done, for the 
appellate court to cause a copy to be served as soon as 
may be after the filing of the objection of such party at 
the  expense  of  the  respondent.    The  exercise  of 
jurisdiction by the first appellate court at the end of the 
hearing  of  the  appeal  and  without  notice  to  the 
appellant  herein  was  a  material  irregularity  and  an 
error of law which impacted the right of appellant to a 
fair  trial  as  well  as  to  afford  him  an  opportunity  of 
properly responding to the grounds raised in the cross-
objections.    It  can  be  seen  that  the  appeal  of  the 
respondent  was  statute-barred  and  this  was  common 
knowledge  and  so  the  appellant  in  the  absence  of  any 
cross-objections  was  satisfied  that  no  adjudication  on 
merits  will  take  place  on  the  appeal  filed  by  the 
respondent.    Therefore,  what  he  had  to  contend  with 
was  his  own  appeal.  It  certainly  came  as  a  surprise  to 
the  appellant  that  without  notice  to  the  appellant  the 
first  appellate  court  of  its  own  volition  and  without 
regard  to  the  essential  ingredients  of  the  Order  XLI, 
Rule  22  CPC,  converted  the  appeal  into  cross-
objections. 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
8 
 
 
10. 
Sub-rule  (3)  is  not  without  a  purpose  and  must 
be  viewed  with  the  seriousness  that  it  deserves.    To 
what avail is the mandate of the provisions if it can be 
ignored  without  reasonable  basis.    The  crucial  words 
are  “the  party  who  may  be  affected  by  such 
objections”.  Thus the legislature was cognizant of the 
grave implications that such an act might entail.  This 
case is a classic example of the need for the procedure 
to be followed meticulously.  The appellant in this case 
has  been  adversely  affected  to  its  detriment  for  the 
failure on the part of the first appellate court to follow 
a  proper  procedure.    It  amounted  to  denial  of  right  of 
hearing and fair trial. 
11. 
The  act  of  the  first  appellate  court  must  have 
come  as  a  surprise  to  CTC  as  well.    Evidently,  CTC 
had not made any request for its appeal to be converted 
into  cross-objections 
let  alone 
file  any  cross-
objections.    Thus  the  provisions  require  the  taking  of 
cross-objections  by  a  respondent  and  if  this  is  not 
done, then alternatively, a request to convert must also 
come  from  the  respondent.    Both  these  events  did  not 
happen and the act of the first appellate court was suo 
motu, and without legal basis.  The first appellate court 
thus 
traveled  beyond 
the  periphery  of  powers 
conferred  upon  it  by  Order  XLI,  Rule  22  CPC  and 
committed  an  error  of  law  which  is  liable  to  be 
rectified in second appeal. 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
9 
 
 
12. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  relied 
upon  the  judgment  reported  as  Dr.  S.S.  Naeemul 
Hamid  v.  Mst.  Tahira  Sultana  and  others  (1991  CLC 
853) which  was also relied upon by  the  first  appellate 
court  while  treating  the  appeal  of  the  respondent  as 
cross-objections.  However, there is a clear distinction 
in  the  said  precedent  from  the  case  in  hand.    In  that 
case  the  memo  of  appeal  described  the  appeal  as  an 
appeal as well as cross-objections and so the intention 
of the respondent was quite apparent and on this basis 
the  learned  Single  Judge  of  this  Court  proceeded  to 
hold  that  the  appeal  could  validly  be  treated  as  cross-
objections.  In the instant case, the first appellate court 
converted the time barred appeal of the respondent into 
cross-objections  without  adverting 
to 
the  aspect 
whether  this  could  at  all  be  done.  Also  the  first 
appellate court did not allude to the aspect of whether 
the  cross-objections  were  within  time  within  the 
contemplation  of  Order  XLI,  Rule  22  CPC  or  not.    If 
the  appeal  was  being  treated  as  cross-objections,  the 
least that the first appellate court should have done was 
to  determine  whether  it  was  within  time  or  not.    Be 
that  as  it  may,  in  my  opinion,  the  process  for 
converting  an  appeal  into  cross-objections  had  to  be 
taken  timously  and  after  due  notice  to  the  appellant 
who  was  necessarily  to  be  adversely  impacted  by  the 
outcome of any determination of cross-objections. 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
10 
 
 
13.  However, 
the  result  reached  by 
the  first 
appellate  court  can  still  be  sustained  on  the  basis  of 
Order XLI, Rule 33 CPC which gives broad and wide 
ranging  powers  to  the  appellate  court  to  make  any 
order that it deems necessary under the circumstances.  
The said provision provides that: 
“33. The Appellate Court shall have power to pass 
any decree and make any order which ought to have 
been  passed  or  made  and  to  pass  or  make  such 
further  or  other  decree  or  order  as  the  case  may 
require,  and  this  power  may  be  exercised  by  the 
Court notwithstanding that  the appeal  is  as to part 
only of the decree and may be exercised in favour of 
all  or  any  of  the  respondents  or  parties  although 
such respondents or parties may not have filed any 
appeal  or  objection:  [Provided  that  the  Appellate 
Court shall not make any order under section 35-A 
in  pursuance  of  any  objection  on  which  the  Court 
from  whose  decree  the  appeal  is  preferred  has 
omitted or refused to make such order.]” 
 
14. 
Therefore,  the  appellate  court  has  the  power  to 
pass  any  decree  and  make  any  order  which  ought  to 
have  been  passed  or  made  and  to  pass  or  make  such 
further or other decree or order as the case may require 
and this power may be exercised in favour of all or any 
of 
the 
respondents  or  parties  although 
such 
respondents or parties may not have filed any appeal or 
objection.    Thus  even  if  the  appeal  filed  by  the 
respondent/CTC  herein 
is 
taken  out  of 
the 
consideration  as  well  as  the  conversion  of  the  said 
appeal  into  cross-objections  by  the  appellate  court  is 
also nullified, the fact remains that the appellate court 
has ample power to pass the judgment and decree that 
it  did  ultimately  upon  an  appraisal  of  the  evidence 
brought  on  record  by  the  parties  with  regard  to  the 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
11 
 
 
issues No.10 and 12.  Clearly, the first appellate court 
did not refer to any new material and based its decision 
primarily  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  on  record  as 
well  as  documents  produced  by  the  counsels  on  the 
appeal 
filed  by 
the  appellant  herein. 
  While 
juxtaposing 
the  respective  findings  of 
the  first 
appellate court as well as trial court, I am persuaded to 
hold  that  the  appreciation  of  evidence  by  the  first 
appellate  court  is  based  on  proper  appraisal  and  has 
more  cogency  and  rationality  and  ought 
to  be 
maintained.    The  first  appellate  court  analyzed  the 
evidence with regard to each head of damages claimed 
and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  no  sufficient  material 
was  brought  on  record  so  as  to  prove  the  claim  of 
mesne  profit  as  well  as  a  claim  to  14%  of  interest  of 
non  delivery  of  the  actual  price  of  Oil  Cakes  in  time.  
Further more, the finding of the trial court with regard 
to a sum of Rs.100,000/- damages due to affliction was 
also  noticed  and  found  to  have  been  based  on 
surmises.    There  is  no  infirmity  in  the  conclusion 
drawn by the first appellate court on this count as well.  
Although  the  first  appellate  court  did  not  advert  its 
attention to the grant of 7% of interest per annum from 
the  institution  of  the  suit  till  the  realization  of  the 
decretal  amount,  once  again  the  trial  court  has  not 
given  any  basis  for  the  award  of  the  interest  and  its 
powers to do so.  No provision of law has been cited in 
support  of  the  award  of  the  interest  at  the  rate  of  7% 
RSA No.89  of 2004 
12 
 
 
per  annum  and  which 
too  was  unlawful  and 
unsustainable. 
15. 
In view of the above this appeal is without merit 
and is, therefore, dismissed.  The judgment and decree 
of  the  first  appellate  court/  Addl.  District  Judge  dated 
07.09.2004 is hereby upheld. 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID KARIM) 
 
 JUDGE 
Approved for reporting. 
      JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
  
  * 
Rafaqat Ali 
 
  
 
