 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
        Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. Writ Petition No. 11070 of 2014. 
  
 
 
 
Mrs. Farkhanda Farouq etc. 
Versus  Defence Housing Authority etc.  
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Hearing: 
05.10.2018. 
Petitioners by: 
M/s  Muhammad  Saleem  Chaudhry  and 
Iftikhar Ahmad Mian, Advocates. 
Respondents by:  Mr.  Altaf-ur-Rehman  Khan,  Advocate  for 
respondent No.1/DHA. 
Mr. Muhammad Hammad Khan Rai, Assistant 
Advocate General, Punjab. 
Ms.  Saira  Laique,  A.D.  Legal  for  respondent 
No.2. 
 
Shahid Jamil Khan, J:- Petitioners are resident owners of 
houses  around  a  park  known  as  “Jasmine  Garden”  in  Block-Z, 
Phase-III,  Defence  Housing  Authority  (“DHA”),  Lahore.  They 
are  aggrieved  of  change  in  Master  Plan  whereby  the  Jasmine 
Garden  has  been  converted  into  residential  plots  without  any 
consent or opportunity of being heard, which caused detriment to 
rights/interest appurtenant to the immovable properties purchased 
by them. 
In  written  reply  to  the  petition,  the  impugned  conversion 
was  not  denied,  however,  it  was  asserted  that  the  Jasmine 
Garden,  from  day  one,  was  designated  as  a  marriage 
lawn/community center, however, on receipt of some complaints 
of  inconvenience  from  the  some  residents  of  the  areas,  the 
impugned  decision  was  taken.  It  was  apprised  that  an  alternate 
park  has  been  established  for  the  inhabitants  which  is  just  120 
meters away from the plots/ houses of the petitioners.  
W. P. No. 11070 of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that price of the 
plots, owned by the petitioners, was determined keeping in view 
the  ambiance  and  amenities  sanctioned  through  Master  Plan  of 
the Housing Society. Comparatively higher price was paid by the 
petitioners owning houses/plots facing the park/Jasmine Garden. 
He  asserted  that  such  an  arbitrary  change  in  the  Master  Plan,  in 
absence  of  any  consent  from  the  petitioners  (Members  of  the 
Housing Society), is against the law and prejudicial to the interest 
and  rights  of  the  petitioners  and  other  owners.  He  has  placed 
reliance  on  judgment  New  Garden  Town  Welfare  Society 
(Registered) through President v. Lahore Development Authority 
and 2 others` (2001 CLC 1589).  
Learned  counsel  for  the  respondent/DHA  opposed  the 
submissions,  contending  that  the  change  in  Master  Plan  was  in 
accordance  with  law.  He  explained  that  Executive  Board  is 
competent  to  bring  any  change  in  the  Master  Plan  keeping  in 
view the requirements/convenience of the inhabitants/owners and 
in  interest  of  the  society.  On  Court’s  quarry,  it  was  not  denied 
that the powers of Executive Board are still unstructured as rules 
or regulations for exercising these powers were never framed. It 
is also an admitted position that resident owners in the vicinity of 
park/Jasmine Garden were not associated in the process, through 
notice or otherwise, before taking the impugned decision.  
3. 
4. 
Heard. Record perused.  
By  now  it  is  a  trite  law  that  an  interest/right  accrues  in 
favour  of  an  owner,  particularly  when  he  opts  to  purchase  the 
immovable property keeping in view the available amenities. 
This  right  was  first  recognized  by  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  in  Mian  Fazal  Din  v.  Lahore  Improvement  Trust, 
Lahore and another (PLD  1969  S.C.  223);  Sale  and  conversion 
of  a  plot,  from  market  to  a  mosque,  was  challenged.  Real  and 
substantial  interest  of  a  resident,  who  purchases  a  plot  on 
W. P. No. 11070 of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
representation  of  sanctioned  plane, was  recognized, holding  that 
constitutional  jurisdiction  of  High  Court  could  be  availed  for 
enforcement  of  such 
interest/right.  Relevant  excerpt 
is 
reproduced:- 
“In support of this contention learned counsel has also placed 
strong reliance upon the observations contained in a judgment 
of the High Court of West Pakistan in the case of Montgomery 
Flour and General Mills Ltd. v. Director, Food purchases (PLD 
1957 Lab. 914) by Kaikaus, J. (as he then was) :- 
an 
above.  Whenever 
"It  is  true,"  observed  the  learned  Judge,  "that  a 
petitioner  must  have  some  right  if  he  applies  to  the 
Court  for  a  direction  or  order  under  Article  170  (now 
Article 98 of the Constitution of Pakistan) but he need 
not have a right in that strict sense of the term which is 
mentioned 
enactment 
empowers  a  public  officer  to  pass  orders  that 
benefit  or  harm  a  citizen,  the  citizen  gets  a  right 
that in a matter in which he is concerned an order 
be passed in accordance with law. This too is a right 
that can be enforced by the Court in the exercise of its 
jurisdiction  under  Article  170  of  the  Constitution  of 
Pakistan.  If  the  officer  concerned,  passes an  order 
that  is  not  in  accordance  with  law,  any  person 
whose  interests  are  affected  by  the  order  can 
maintain  a  petition  for  a  writ  or  direction  under 
Article 170. All orders of executive officers are subject 
to  challenge  by  those  affected  by  the  orders,  and  a 
person  would  be  "affected"  even  if  he  loses  some 
benefit or advantage which he would have gained if the 
order  was  in  accordance  with  law.  A  public  officer 
passing  an  order  on  an  application  submitted  to  him 
does  not  grant  the  applicant  a  favour.  He  is  only 
granting the applicant his right in the sense that he has 
a  right  to  have  the  matter  determined  in  accordance 
with law and justice.  It  will  be  observed  that  even  a 
fundamental right may not be a "right" in the strict 
sense of the term. A right to acquire or hold property, 
a right to carry on a profession, a right to move about 
freely,  etc.  are  not  rights  in  the  strict  sense  because 
they  do  not  cast  any  corresponding  duties  on  any 
person.  They  are  what  writers  on  jurisprudence  call 
"liberties".  In  a  wider  sense  these  too  are  recognised 
as rights by jurisprudence and they can form the basis 
of a writ petition." 
This decision was approved by this Court in the case of Ikram 
Bus Service v: Board of Revenue (P L D 1963 S C 564) where 
this Court stated that; 
“Even  an  administrative  body  such  as  an  R.  T.  A.,  is 
under  a  legal  obligation  to  deal  with  all  applicants 
W. P. No. 11070 of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
before  it  fairly,  justly  and  equitably  and  an  applicant 
has  a  legal  right  to  demand  that  the  administrative 
body should determine the matter with whose decision 
it is charged, in accordance with the law.” 
It is clear from the above that the right considered sufficient for 
maintaining  a  proceeding  of  this  nature  is  not  necessarily  a 
right in the strict juristic sense but it is enough if the applicant 
discloses that he had a personal interest in the performance of 
the  legal  duty  which  if  not  performed  or  is  performed  in  a 
manner not permitted by law would result in the loss of some 
personal benefit or advantage or the curtailment of a privilege 
or liberty or franchise.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
In  support of  this  right,  Halsbury's  Laws  of  England  (Volume  25, 
Third Edition, p. 389) was referred to cite a judgment from English 
Jurisdiction. Relevant excerpt is reproduced:- 
 
“This principle was propounded by all the Judges in England in 
their  unanimous  opinion  on  the  Islington  Market  Bill  (L  R 
(1880) 14 Ch. D 458) referred to them by the House of Lords. 
They opined that if "after having once appropriated a particular 
site  for  the  use  of  the  public  as  a  market  place,  he  (the 
grantee)  afterwards  employs  or  permits  it  or  part  of  it,  to  be 
employed  for  other  purposes"  he  cannot  prevent  others  from 
selling  outside  the  market,  for,  he  owes  a  duty  towards  the 
members  of  the  public  to  provide  sufficient  space  for  the 
legitimate  purpose  of  selling  within  it.  This  is,  because,  "an 
obligation is cast upon him by his acceptance of the grant, to 
provide  convenient  accommodation  for  all  who  are  ready  to 
buy  and  sell  in  the  public  market."  Furthermore  that  a  failure 
on the part of the grantee to discharge this public duty would 
not only entail a forfeiture of the grant but also give  a right of 
action to any private individual who should have received any 
special injury thereby.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
Though the appeal was dismissed, on the basis of the provisions 
of  law  relevant  at  that  time,  yet  it  was  enunciated  that  the 
modification  in  master  plane,  if  completely  and  radically  alters 
the  sanctioned  plan,  would  amount  to  fraud.  The  enunciation  is 
reproduced:- 
“In addition to this I would like to add that if the modification is 
such that  it  completely  alters the  nature of  the  Scheme  or  so 
radically  changes  it  as  to  render  the  sanctioned  Scheme 
materially  different, 
the 
modification must be republished upon general principles, for, 
otherwise it would amount to a fraud upon the statute itself.” 
then  notwithstanding  section  43 
W. P. No. 11070 of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
5. 
In  New  Garden  Town  Welfare  Society’s  Case  (supra), 
relied  upon  by  petitioner’s  side,  learned  Single  Bench  of  this 
Court  went  a  step  ahead  to  enforce  this  interest/right  by 
declaring  the  conversion  of  plots,  earmarked  for  schools, 
welfare  center  and  public  hall,  as  illegal  being  contrary  to  the 
lay  out  plan.  The  conversion  was 
termed  as 
radical 
change/modification in the original scheme. The findings, based 
on law laid down by Apex Court, are reproduced:- 
“In  Abdul  Razzaq's  case  PLD  1994  SC  512  and  the  relevant 
observations are as follows:-- 
"We may point out that even under, the order, the K.D.A. is not 
authorised  to  change  the  use  of  any  amenity  plot  without 
inviting  objections  and  without  obtaining  the  order  of  the 
Government. 
It  may  be  stated  that  in  spite  of  presence  of  the  above 
unambiguous  Article  in  the  Order  the  successive  Provincial 
Governments  overlooked  the  above  Article  and  converted 
amenity plots into commercial or residential plots and thereby 
denied  to  the  residents  of  Karachi  inter  alia  parks  and 
playgrounds which contributed towards environmental pollution 
in the city. A tendency has also developed to convert the use 
of a residential plot into commercial or instead of constructing 
residential units in the form of bungalows to erect flats. 
the  above-quoted  passage 
From 
from  Encyclopaedia 
Britannica,  it  is  evident  that  the  concept  of  modern  city 
planning inter alia envisages the orderly arrangement of parts 
of  the  city  -  residential,  business  and  industrial  etc.  so  that 
each  part  could  perform  its  functions  with  minimum  cost  and 
conflict. The paramount object of modern city planning seems 
to be to ensure maximum comforts for the residents of the city 
by  providing  maximum  facilities  referred  to  hereinabove.  It 
must, therefore, follow that a public functionary entrusted with 
the  work  to  achieve  the  above  objective  cannot  act  in  a 
manner, which may defeat the above objective. Deviation from 
the  planned  scheme  will  naturally  result  in  discomfort  and 
inconvenience to others." 
In  Ardeshir  Cowasjee's  case  1999  SCMR  2883  and  the 
relevant observation is as follows:-- 
"We may point out that even under the Order, the K.D.A. is not 
authorised  to  change  the  use  of  any  amenity  plot  without 
inviting  objections  and  without  obtaining  the  order  of  the 
Government." 
By virtue of section 48 of Lahore Development Act provisions 
of  Lahore  Improvement  Trust  Act  are  applicable  unless  and 
until  the  same  are  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  the 
W. P. No. 11070 of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
to 
to 
In  arriving 
invite  objections. 
Lahore Development Act, 1975: Therefore, sections 13 and 14 
and  other  provisions  of  Lahore  Improvement  Trust  Act,  1992 
are  applicable.  The  aforesaid  provisions  cast  duty  upon  the 
respondent No.1 for the purpose of change in the Scheme the 
respondent  had 
this 
conclusion I  am  fortified  by  Sh.  Ahmad Din's  case 1984  CLC 
3304. It is admitted fact that in the present case no objections 
were  invited  in  terms  of  the  aforesaid  provisions.  Therefore, 
per  se  alleged  the  conversion  of  the  earmarked  plots  for 
school  and  welfare  centre  and  public  hall  for  residential 
purpose is illegal and contrary to the lay-out plan of the L.D.A. 
on  the  well-known  principle  when  a  thing  is  to  be  done  in  a 
particular  manner,  it  must  be  done  in  that  way  and  not 
otherwise.  In  arriving  to  this  conclusion  I  am  fortified  by  the 
judgments  of 
in  Atta 
Muhammad  Qureshi's  case  PLD  1971  SC  61  and  Dr.  Abdur 
Rauf  and  others'  case  1991  SCMR  483.  In  view  of  the 
aforesaid  discussion and  principles laid  down  by  the  superior 
Courts it is not a case of re-allocation of the scheme but it is a 
case of radical change/modification in the original schemes.” 
the  Honourable  Supreme  Court 
 
  
6. 
In recent past, similar proposition was dealt with by a Full 
[emphasis supplied] 
Bench  of  this  Court  in  Shehri-CBE  through  General  Secretary 
and  15  others  v.  Lahore  Development  Authority  through 
Chairman  and 6 others  (PLD 2012  Lahore 362). The  case was 
fixed on direction by Supreme Court through judgment  in Sheri-
CBE  and  others  v.  Lahore  Development  Authority  and  others 
(2006  SCMR  1202).  Conversion  of  a  playground,  commonly 
known  as  “Doongi  Ground”,  into  a  cinema  theater,  shopping 
arcade  and  bowling  alleys  was  in  question.  Relevant  part  from 
judgment 
in  Shehri-CBE’s  Case 
(supra) 
is 
reproduced 
hereunder:- 
“10. 
The  aforesaid  makes  it  clear  and  obvious  that  in  any 
development  scheme  at  its  inception  if  a  particular  area  is 
designated  as  a  park/playground,  and  upon  such 
representation,  the properties  in  the  vicinity are acquired 
by inhabitants, a vested right is created in their favour and 
the  public  at  large  in  respect  of  such  park/playground. 
This right in fact is a necessary appendage to the right to 
life as enshrined in Article 9 of the Constitution and right 
of  leisure  as  referred  to  in  Article  39  of  the  Constitution. 
Thus  in  the  original  plan  of  the  respondents  to  convert  the 
Doongi Ground to any other use would have offended against 
the rights of the petitioners.” 
W. P. No. 11070 of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
The  law  laid  down,  ibid, by  Superior  Courts,  shows  that 
the  interest  of  the  owners  of  immovable  property  in  amenity 
plots, reserved for convenience and comfort of the residents, is a 
right  enforceable  by  invoking  constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this 
Court.  A  sanctioned  Master  Plan,  showing  such  amenity  plots/ 
area, cannot  be  altered  without  inviting  objections  or  obtaining 
No  Objection  Certificates  (“NOC”)  from  the  residents.  Any 
modification  in  the  plan,  which  alters  or  radically  changes  the 
sanctioned  scheme,  to  take  away  the  comfort  or  convenience 
provided  through  amenity  plots/area,  is  a  fraud  upon  the 
residents,  who  purchased  the  immovable  properties  on  a 
representation through sanctioned plan. 
 
The impugned conversion is found to be in violation of the 
laid  down  law.  Admittedly,  petitioners  were  not  associated  by 
inviting  objection  or  seeking  NOC.  The  park/Jasmine  Garden 
was earmarked for public purpose in the sanctioned plan and the 
impugned conversion has radically altered the scheme, depriving 
the  petitioners  and  other  residents  in  the  vicinity  from  a  public 
amenity.  Names  of  the  inhabitants  complaining  inconvenience 
were  not  disclosed.  And  lastly,  no  rules  were  framed  for 
alteration in Master Plan or to structure the discretionary powers 
available to the  Executive  Board, as has been ordained  in  Aman 
Ullah Khan and others  v. The Federal Government of Pakistan 
through  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Finance  Islamabad  (PLD  1990 
S.C. 1092).   
7. 
Even  if  the  framed  rules,  regulations  or  law  authorizing 
such  alteration  would  be  ultra  vires,  being  in  conflict  with  the 
right  to  life  under  Article  9;  right  attached  with  immovable 
property  under  Articles  23  and  24  read  with  Article  26  of  the 
Constitution.  The  Article  26  ensures  right  to  access  to  places  of 
public entertainment.  
W. P. No. 11070 of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Places  earmarked,  in  an  urban  scheme,  for  public  utility 
are  meant  to  bring  comfort  and  ensure  healthy  life  for  the 
inhabitants,  which  lead  to  a  healthy  society  and  nation. 
Conversion  of  such  places  for  commercial  purpose  would 
certainly  defeat  this  object.  Provision  for  places  of  the  public 
utility  is  compulsory  on  this  premise  under  the  law  relates  to 
town  planning.  Taking  away  such  amenities 
to  achieve 
commercial benefits would certainly prejudice the quality of life, 
hence is against Article 9.    
 
A  citizen,  who  purchases  a  property  in  exercise  of  his 
fundamental  right  under  the  Article  23  has  been  ensured  under 
Article  24  that  he  shall  not  be  deprived  of  the  property 
unlawfully.  The  amenities  available  to  such  property  are 
necessarily  appurtenant  to  the  property,  because  value  of  a 
property  in  terms  of  its  purpose  would  diminish  if  those  are 
removed  through  alteration.  To  deprive  a  citizen  from  the 
purpose of property, for which it was purchased on representation 
through  sanctioned  plan,  would  amount  to  partial  deprivation  of 
the property. Safeguard to the purpose of property is inclusive in 
Article 24, to  ensure which, laws  like  The  Easements  Act,  1882 
and  condition,  under  town  planning  laws,  to  obtain  NOC  from 
the neighbouring owners before allowing commercialization of a 
residential  plot.  The  right  to  purpose  of  a  property  is  an 
incorporeal  right,  which  is  enforced  beyond  boundaries  of  the 
property, by restraining any act, which might remotely defeat the 
purpose of the property. If appurtenant amenities of a residential 
plot are removed, it shall remain a plot but not for the purpose of 
residence.  Hence,  removal  of  amenities  being  detrimental  to  the 
purpose  of  a  property  is  against  the  right  ensured  under               
Article 24.        
8. 
For  the  reasons  noted  above,  the  impugned  action  of 
converting the park/garden into residential plots is declared to be 
W. P. No. 11070 of 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
against  the  rights  of  petitioners  and  a  result  of  an  arbitrary 
exercise of power, therefore, is set aside.  
The  respondents  are  directed  to  restore  the  Jasmine 
Garden  to  its  original  position  and  in  accordance  with  the 
sanctioned plan of this area.  
Petition allowed. 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
 
           
                      
(Shahid Jamil Khan) 
    Judge 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
Tahir Noor* 
