 
 
 
      Stereo. HCJDA3                                                              
 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH  
 
MULTAN 
 
 
 
 
 (JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No.158 of 2014 
  Abdul Ghafoor      versus            The State, etc. 
 
         Murder Reference No.29 of 2014 
  The State 
       versus 
          Abdul Ghafoor alias Ahmed Ali. 
 
 
 
           29.05.2018   
           Mehroz Aziz Khan Niazi, Advocate.   
            Ch. Zafar Iqbal Chadhar, Advocate. 
 
 
Date of Hearing  
The Appellant by 
 
 
The Complainant by 
 
 
The State by 
 
 
 
 
                                 Syed Nadeem Haider Rizvi, Deputy  
 
====== 
  District Public Prosecutor. 
 
Asjad Javaid Ghural, J.:- Through the afore-titled criminal appeal 
 
 
 
under Section 410 Cr.P.C., appellant Abdul Ghafoor has assailed the legality of 
judgment  dated  24.03.2014  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 
Sahiwal  in  a  private  complaint  titled  “Abdul  Ghafoor    versus  Abdul  Ghafoor 
alias  Ahmed  Ali  &  another”,  in  respect  of  offences  under  Section  302  &  34 
PPC  arising  out  of  case  FIR  No.395  dated  25.07.2009  in  respect  of  offences 
under  Sections 302 &  34  PPC registered  at  Police  Station  Noor  Shah, District 
Sahiwal, whereby he was convicted and sentenced as under:- 
 
             Under Section 302(b) PPC 
Death  penalty  and  to  pay  the  compensation  of  Rs.100,000/-  under 
Section 544-A Cr.P.C. to be paid to the legal heirs of deceased Mst. 
Sarwar  Bibi  and  in  default  thereof  to  further  undergo  simple 
imprisonment for six months.  
 
    He is also extended benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. 
2.  
 
   Murder  Reference  No.29  of  2014  for  confirmation  or 
otherwise  of  the  death  sentence  of  appellant  Abdul  Ghafoor  alias  Ahmad 
Ali shall be decided through this single judgment. 
3.  
   Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that    complainant  Abdul  Ghafoor                      
(PW-1) made complaint to Station House Officer Police Station Noor Shah 
District  Sahiwal  stating  therein  that    about  12/13  years  earlier    his  sister 
Mst.  Sarwar  Bibi  (deceased)  was  married  with  Abdul  Ghafoor    alias 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
2 
Ahmed  Ali  (appellant)  but  they  were  issueless.  At  the  time  of  Nikkah, 
Abdul Ghafoor alias Ahmed Ali had mutated one acre agricultural land in 
favor of Mst. Sarwar Bibi. They led happy life in the early days but due to 
not  giving  birth  to  a  baby,  the  relations  between  the  spouses  became 
strained and Abdul Ghafoor had been  beating Mst. Sarwar Bibi off and on. 
He was restrained but he insisted to  contract second marriage and receive 
back his agricultural land from the complainant’s sister. Mst. Sarwar Bibi 
did not allow Abdul Ghafoor to contract second marriage and also refused 
to  return  the  aforesaid  piece  of  land  due  to  which  Abdul  Ghafoor  had 
nourished  grudge.  On  25.07.2009  at  about  12:00  a.m,  the  complainant 
went to see his sister Mst. Sarwar Bibi and when he entered into the house 
he  saw  that  Machhia  accused  was  holding  the  hands  of  Mst. Sarwar  Bibi 
while lying her on the cot, she was screaming that she would neither return 
the  piece  of  land  nor  would  she  permit  her  husband  to  contract  second 
marriage.  On  raising  hue  and  cry,  complainant  Muhammad  Riaz,  Abdul 
Jabbar  (PW-2),  Zawar  and  Maqbool,  a  brother  of  the  complainant 
alongwith other people of the vicinity attracted there. In their view Abdul 
Ghafoor inflicted Kassi blows under the throat and in front of chest of Mst. 
Sarwar  Bibi.  He  also  inflicted  repeated  Kassi  blows  at  her  chest.  The 
complainant  alongwith  the  witnesses  tried  to  hold  Abdul  Ghafoor  but  he 
succeeded to flee away while extending threats.  
 
 
The  motive  behind  the  occurrence  was  that  due  to  non-giving 
birth  of  a  child  by  Mst.  Sarwar  Bibi,  Abdul  Ghafoor  had  intended  to 
contract second marriage and insisted to get back the piece of land from his 
wife Mst. Sarwar Bibi (deceased). 
4.  
Upon aforesaid oral statement of the complainant before Siddique 
Sub-Inspector at Norang Chowk, a case FIR No.395 dated 25.07.2009 was 
registered at Police Station Noor Shah in respect of offences under Section 
302  &  34  PPC  (Ex.CW-5/A).    During  investigation  co-accused  Machia 
was  found  to  be  not  involved  in  this  occurrence.  Feeling  aggrieved  the 
complainant  filed  a  private  complaint  Ex.PB  wherein  learned  trial  Court 
after  recording  the  cursory  statement  of  the  witnesses  proceeded  to 
summon the accused persons to face the trial. 
4. 
Muhammad  Siddique, S.I  (CW-4)  recorded  the  complaint  (Ex.PA) 
of  the  complainant  on  25.07.2009  at  Norang  Chowk,  which  was  sent  to 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
3 
Police  Station  for  registration  of  formal  FIR.  He  had  visited  the  place  of 
occurrence  on  the  same  day,  inspected  the  dead  body,  prepared  injury 
statement  Ex.CW-3/B-1  and  inquest  report  Ex.CW-3/B  of  the  deceased 
lady  and  escorted  her  dead  body  to  the  mortuary.  He  prepared  rough  site 
plan  of  the  place  of  occurrence  Ex.CW-4/A  and  secured  blood-stained 
earth  vide  recovery  memo(  Ex.CW-4/B).  On  27.07.2009  draftsman,  took 
rough  notes  from  the  place  of  occurrence    and  prepared  scaled  site  plan 
Ex.CW-2/A  and  Ex.CW-2/B.  He  arrested  appellant  Abdul  Ghafoor  on 
06.08.2009,  who  led  to  the  recovery  of  weapon  of  offence  i.e.  a  blood-
stained  “Kassi”  (P-4),  which  was  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery 
memo  Ex.CW-4/C.  After  receipt  of  reports  of  Chemical  Examiner,  the 
same were presented before the Court. 
5. 
  Lady  Doctor  Saima  Aslam  (PW-3)  had  conducted  postmortem 
examination on the dead body of deceased Mst. Sarwar Bibi on 25.07.2009 
at 08:25 p.m., and observed the following injuries:- 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
Incised wound 13 cm x 4 cm deep going on lower left side 
of neck cutting left clavicle whole trachea oesophagus cut 
all major vessels cut and cutting six cervical vertebrae. 
Incised wound 5 cm  X  4 cm  deep  going about  2cm  apart 
to injury No.1 from left side. 
Multiple  abrasions  all  over  upper  part  of  chest  in  front 
side.   
Abrasion 6 cm X 1 cm on left side of neck. 
 
4. 
 
The  cause  of  death  was  due  to  injury  No.1  causing  injury  to 
   
trachea, oesophagus, major vessels and fracture/cutting of left clavicle and 
cutting of six cervical of vertebrae leading to hemorrhage and shock and 
death. The injuries were ante-mortem in nature and were caused by sharp-
edged  weapon.  Duration  between  injuries  and  death  was  immediate  and 
between death and post-mortem examination within 10- hours. 
 6. 
At the commencement of the trial, learned trial court had framed a 
charge against the appellant to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed to 
be tried. 
7. 
The prosecution had produced 02-witnesses besides the reports of 
Chemical Examiner (Ex.PC & Ex.PD),  and that of the Serologist (Ex.PE). 
Five  witnesses  had  been  examined  as  Court  witnesses  (CW-1  to  CW-5).  
The  appellant,  in  his  statement  recorded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  had 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
4 
denied and controverted all the allegations leveled against him, he did not 
opt  to  make  statement  under  Section  340(2)  Cr.P.C.,  however  he  had 
produced documents (Ex. DA to Ex. DF) in his defence.  
8. 
Learned  trial  Court,  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial  had  acquitted            
co-accused    Machhia  whereas  convicted  and  sentenced  the  appellant  as 
stated  above,  hence  the  aforementioned  criminal  appeal  as  well  as  the 
connected Murder Reference. 
9. 
 Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submits  that  the  appellant  is 
quite innocent and had been falsely implicated in the alleged occurrence; 
that it was a blind murder and the prosecution witnesses of ocular account 
were chance witnesses as they had no occasion to be present at the venue 
of  occurrence  at  the  relevant  time;  that  Abdul  Jabbar  (PW-2)  was 
introduced  as  a  witness  in  the  supplementary  statement,  whereas  he  had 
figured no where in the crime report as a witness; that the supplementary 
statement  was  made on  20.01.2010  after about six  months of the  alleged 
occurrence,  which  was  afterthought  and  has  no  evidentiary  value  in  the 
eyes of law; that though the occurrence had taken place in the house of the 
appellant but he could not  be held responsible for the said  murder in the 
absence of any other incriminating evidence produced by the prosecution; 
that the recovery of “Kassi” at the insistence of the appellant was planted 
against  him  just  to  strengthened  the  prosecution  version;  that  the 
prosecution remained fail to prove motive part of the occurrence through 
an  independent  source  of  evidence,  which  runs  against  the  sentence  of 
death;  that  it  is  a  case  of  no  evidence  against  the  appellant.  At  the  end, 
prayer  has  been  made  for  the  acquittal  of  the  appellant  from  the  said 
charge. 
10. 
Conversely, learned Deputy District Public Prosecutor assisted by 
the  learned  counsel  for the  complainant has vehemently  controverted  the 
arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  while 
submitting that it was a day-light occurrence, which had taken place in the 
confines of the house of the appellant and some part of the onus lies  upon 
him  to  explain  as  to  how  his  wife  met  with  an  unnatural  death;  that  the 
appellant  being  sole  perpetrator  could  not  escape  from  the  liability  of 
committing  the  murder  of  his  own  wife;  that  the  witnesses  of    ocular 
account being natural and straightforward have established their  presence 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
5 
at  the  venue  of  occurrence  at  the  relevant  time;  that  the  witnesses  of 
ocular account being real brother of the deceased had visited the place of 
occurrence, which was otherwise not unusual in our society to visit their 
sister’s  house  and  even  no  specific  purpose  was  required    for  their  visit; 
that the witnesses remained consistent, inter-se supported with the medical 
evidence; 
that 
the  appellant,  who  was  arrested  subsequently  on 
06.08.2009,  by  itself  indicates  his  guilty  conscious;  that  the  matter  was 
reported to the police within 45-minutes, which excludes every possibility 
of  deliberation  and  consultation  prior  to  the  lodging  of  FIR;  that  the 
recovery of weapon of offence and the motive part of the occurrence are 
fully established; that the gruesome act of appellant of murdering his wife 
in a callous manner does not permit to give him leniency in the matter of 
sentence. 
11.  We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant,  learned 
Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor  appearing  for  the  State  assisted by  the 
learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  and  have  perused  the  record  with 
their assistance. 
12. 
 This unfortunate incident had taken place on 25.07.2009 at 12:00 
noon,  which  was  reported  to  the  police  by  the  complainant    himself  and 
was  reduced  into  writing  at  12:45  p.m.,  within  the  shortest  span  of  time 
excluding  every  hypotheses  of  consultation,  deliberation  and  fabrication 
prior to the registration of the case. The promptness of lodging the crime 
report indicates that the natural incident had been brought on record in its 
true perspective. 
13. 
  The  mainstay  of  the  prosecution  case  is  on  the  testimony  of 
ocular account furnished by Abdul Ghafoor (PW-1), the complainant and 
Abdul  Jabbar  (PW-2),  both  real  brothers  of  the  deceased  Mst.  Sarwar 
Bibi, medical evidence, the motive and the recovery of weapon of offence 
from  the  appellant.  The  complainant  while  appearing  in  the  witness  box 
had  deposed  exactly  what  he  had  averred  at  the  time  of  reporting  the 
matter  to  the  police  stating  therein  that  about  12/13  years  prior  to  the 
occurrence  his  sister  Mst.  Sarwar  Bibi  was  married  to  Abdul  Ghafoor 
(appellant) and at the time of Nikah, he had mutated one acre agricultural 
land  in  the  name  of  his  wife  Mst.  Sarwar  Bibi.  Earlier    their  relations 
remained cordial but as no issue was born during wedlock, their relations 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
6 
became  strained  and  the  accused  used  to  demand  back  his  agricultural  
land already mutated in favor of the deceased and kept on pressurizing her 
for  getting  permission  for  second  marriage.  On  the  fateful  day,  the 
complainant went to see his sister and when he entered her house, he saw 
his    sister  was  forcibly  made  lying  on  the  cot,  accused    Machhia  was 
strongly holding her arms whereas the appellant while holding “Kassi” in 
his  hand  was  demanding  return  of  the  land  and  permission  for  second 
marriage. On hearing the cries of his sister Mst. Sarwar Bibi, his brother 
Maqbool, Zawar, Abdul Jabbar and Muhammad Riaz also reached at the 
spot  and  in  their  view  the  appellant  inflicted  several  blows  of  “Kassi”, 
which  hit  on  the  neck  and  chest  of  Mst.  Sarwar  Bibi,  upon  which  she 
succumbed to the injuries at the spot. They tried to apprehend the accused, 
who  extended  threats  of  dire  consequences.  Abdul  Jabbar  (PW-2)  had 
deposed  almost  identical  story  to  that  of  the  complainant.  They  were 
cross-examined by the defence wherein the complainant had admitted that 
in the first crime report he had cited Sarwar and Riaz as eye witnesses of 
the  occurrence  whereas  Abdul  Jabbar  and  Zawar,  who  had  been 
introduced as eye witnesses in the private complaint were not earlier cited 
as witnesses in the FIR. However, he clarified that his house was situated 
towards  the  northern  side  of  the  place  of  occurrence  with  interval  of  2/3 
houses and it took hardly five minutes to reach at the house of the accused 
from his house. Despite lengthy cross-examination, the defence remained 
fail  to  establish  that  the  witness  was  somewhere  else  and  he  could  not 
reach at the place of occurrence within 4/5 minutes, as the appellant and 
the complainant were residing in the same vicinity with a distance of 2/3 
houses  and,  thus,  he  had  well  established  his  presence  at  the  place  of 
occurrence  at  the  relevant  time.  Even  otherwise  he  remained  affirm  and 
consistent  on  all  material  aspects  of  the  case  and  nothing  could  be 
extracted from his mouth, which could be used in favor of the appellant. 
We could not find any reason to discard the evidence of the complainant 
and  even  there  was  no  occasion  for  the  complainant  to  falsely  implicate 
his  brother-in-law  (appellant)  while  letting  off  the  real  culprits  for  the 
murder of his real sister.  
 
   
Although, the evidence of Abdul Jabbar (PW-2) is in line with the 
evidence of the complainant yet he had not been cited as a witness in the 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
7 
first  crime  report  which creates  some  doubt in  respect  of  his presence in 
the  house  of  the  appellant  at  the  relevant  time  but  the  evidence  of  the 
complainant was quite natural, consistent, straight forward and confidence 
inspiring being supported by the medical evidence as well as the recovery 
of weapon of offence i.e. blood-stained kassi, hence sole evidence of the 
complainant  is  sufficient  to  establish  the  quilt  of  the  appellant  while 
excluding the evidence of Abdul   Jabbar (PW-2).    
14. 
It goes  without saying that the occurrence  had taken  place in the 
house  of  the  appellant,  where  the  access  of  anyone  else  was  hardly 
possible.  The  appellant  being  husband  of  the  deceased  was  under 
obligation to explain as to what happened and who had brutally butchered 
his  wife  who  was  residing  under  his  roof  and  protection.  The  appellant 
had  not  participated  in  the  funeral  ceremony  of  his  wife  and  he  was 
arrested  subsequently  on  06.08.2009,  which  clearly  depicts  his  guilty 
conscious. In the alleged occurrence the complainant had claimed to have 
seen  the  occurrence  with  his  own  eyes.  Even  otherwise,  the  appellant 
could  not  be  excluded  from  the  responsibility  of  the  murder  in  issue 
especially  when  his  vulnerable  dependent  has  been  done  to  death  inside 
the  confines  of  his  house,  particularly  in  a  broad  day-light  and  in  such 
situation some part of the onus lies upon the appellant to explain as to how 
his  deceased  wife  had  been  done  to  homicidal  death.    She  had  sustained 
four  injuries  including  completely  cut  of  throat  through  sharp  edged 
weapon  exactly  in  accordance  with  the  allegation  levelled  by  the 
prosecution against the appellant  and, thus, there was no occasion for the 
complainant  to  falsely  implicate  the  appellant  in  substitution  in  a 
gruesome murder of his sister.  
15. 
Learned counsel for the appellant has much emphasis that one of 
the co-accused namely Machhia has already been acquitted of the charge 
by  the  learned  trial  Court,  who  had  been  assigned  the  specific  role  of 
holding  arms  of  the  deceased  at  the  time  of  inflicting  injuries  by  the 
appellant  and,  thus,  the  appellant  also  deserves  the  same  treatment.  This 
argument  has  no  force  because  neither  co-accused  Machhia  had  caused 
any  injury  to  the deceased nor  was he  connected  with  the  motive part of 
the  occurrence  and  he  was  found  to  be  not  involved  in  the  alleged 
occurrence by the Investigating Officer and, thus, he was given benefit of 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
8 
doubt.  The  role  of  co-accused  Machhia  cannot  be  equated  with  the  role 
assigned  to  the  appellant  in  any  capacity  whatsoever  and,  thus,  his 
acquittal has no bearing upon the fate of the appellant’s case. 
16. 
  Lady Doctor Saima Aslam (CW-3) had conducted autopsy on the 
dead body of deceased Mst. Sarwar Bibi on 25.07.2009 at 08:25 p.m., and 
observed two incised wounds 13 cm x 4 cm and 5 cm x 4 cm respectively 
deep  going  on  lower  left  side  of  neck  cutting  left  clavicle  whole  trachea 
oesophagus,  cut of  all  major  vessels,  cutting  of six cervical vertebrae and 
multiple  abrasions  all  over  upper  part  of  chest  in  front  of  left  side  of  her 
neck.  The cause of death was due to injury to trachea, oesophagus, major 
vessels  and  fracture/cutting  of  left  clavicle  and  cutting  of  six  cervical  of 
vertebrae  leading  to  hemorrhage  and  shock  and  death.  The  injuries  were 
ante-mortem  in  nature  having  been  caused  by  sharp-edged  weapon.  The 
probable  duration  between  injuries  and  death  was  immediate  whereas 
between death and post-mortem examination within 10- hours. 
   
 The locale, size and seat of injuries and the kind of weapon used 
are  exactly  in  consonance  with  the  ocular  account  furnished  by  the 
prosecution  and,  thus,  the  medical  evidence  lends  full  support  to  the 
ocular version. 
17. 
The motive as set up by the prosecution in the crime report as well 
as  in  the  private  complaint  was  that  at  the  time  of  marriage  between  the 
appellant  and  the  deceased,  the  appellant  had  mutated  one  acre 
agricultural  land  in  favor  of  the  deceased  lady  but  when,  no  issue  was 
born during the wedlock, the appellant had demanded to take the said land 
back  and  was  intending  to  seek  permission  from  the  deceased  lady  for 
second  marriage,  which  she  had  refused.  Though  both  the  witnesses  of 
ocular  account  had  deposed  with  regard  to  the  motive  part  of  the 
occurrence  yet  they  had  neither  produced  any  mutation  regarding  the 
transfer  of  land  in  favor  of  the  deceased  as  claimed  for  nor  had  they 
adduced  any  independent  evidence  to  prove  the  plea  of  seeking 
permission by the appellant for second marriage from the deceased lady.   
In case any land was transferred by the appellant in favor of the deceased 
at  the  time  of  marriage  then  certainly  the  prosecution  had  an  ample 
opportunity 
to  bring  on  record  such  documentary  evidence  but 
unfortunately  nothing  could  be  brought  on  record.  So  far  as  the  plea  of 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
9 
seeking  permission  for  second  marriage  by  the  appellant  is  concerned, 
neither  any  independent  evidence  has  been  adduced  by  the  prosecution 
other  than  the  evidence  of  eye  witnesses  of  the  occurrence  nor  any 
documentary proof has been brought on record to substantiate their claim. 
We are of the firm view that the prosecution has badly failed to prove both 
the motives as asserted.  
18. 
The appellant was arrested in this case on 06.08.2009 and during 
investigation  he  led  to  the  recovery  of  a  blood-stained  “Kassi”  in 
pursuance of his disclosure which was subsequently sent into the office of  
Chemical  Examiner,  Lahore  and  the  reports  of  said  office  (Ex.PD  & 
Ex.PE) had been received with positive result regarding origin of blood i.e 
human blood, which further strengthens the prosecution version. 
19. 
In his statement recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C  the appellant 
had  taken  a  plea  that  the  prosecution  witnesses  had  deposed  against  him 
being closely related to the deceased and also in order to grab his property 
and  the  cattle-heads,  on  receiving  information  about  the  alleged 
occurrence  he  immediately  appeared before the police  and tried to  prove 
his  innocence  but  he  was  not  heard  properly  and  was  implicated  in  the 
aforesaid case. It is amazing, that the appellant, who  was husband of the 
deceased lady had not become the complainant and preferred to flee away 
from the place of occurrence. The non-participation of the appellant in the 
funeral  ceremony  of  his  wife,  instead  of  becoming  complainant  or 
reporting  the  matter  to  the  Police  with  regard  to  the  alleged  occurrence, 
shows his guilty conscious. He did not utter even a single word that who 
had  committed  the  murder  of  his  wife  and  took  a  plea  of  simple  denial, 
which does not solve the purpose and, thus, the statement of the appellant 
could not be given any weight. 
20. 
From  the  evidence  available  on  record,  we  have  reached  at  an 
irresistible  conclusion  that  the  prosecution  has  been  able  to  prove  the 
charge  of  homicidal  death  of  the  deceased  at  the  hands  of  the  appellant 
through cogent, reliable and confidence  inspiring evidence. The residence 
of the complainant was at the distance of two houses away from the place 
of  occurrence  and  his  deposition  is  quite  natural,  straightforward  and 
exactly in consonance with the medical evidence. We have no occasion to 
discard  the  evidence  of  the  complainant,  who  had  seen  the  occurrence 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
10 
with  his  own  eyes.  The  sole  evidence  of  a  material  witness  is  always 
sufficient  to  establish  the  guilt  of  an  accused,  if  the  same  is  confidence 
inspiring  and  trustworthy  supported  with  other  independent  source  of 
evidence  because  law  requires  quality  of  evidence  and  not  quantity  to 
prove the charge. We seek guidance from the case titled “NIAZ-UD-DIN 
and  another  versus  THE  STATE”  and  another”  (2011  SCMR  725) 
wherein it has been observed  at page 734 as:- 
 
 
is 
confidence 
inspiring,  which 
The  statement  of  Israeel  (PW-9)  the  eye-witnesses  of  the 
occurrence 
stand 
substantiated    from  the  circumstances  and  other  evidence. 
There  is  apt  observations  appearing  in  Allah  Bakhsh  v.  
Shammi  and  others  (PLD  1980  SC  225)  that  “even  in  a 
murder  case  conviction  can  be  based  on  the  testimony  of  a 
single  witness,  if  the  Court  is  satisfied  that  he  is  reliable.” 
The    reason  being  that  it  is  the  quality  of  evidence  and  not 
the  quantity  which  matters.  Therefore,  we  are  left  with  no 
doubt  whatsoever  that  conviction  of  Niaz-ud-Din  was  fully 
justified and has right been maintained by the High Court. 
The  deceased  lady  had  been  butchered  with  sharp  edged  weapon  in  a 
callous  and  barbaric  manner  by  her  husband,  who  remained  fail  to  give 
any explanation that who had committed the murder of his wife in his own 
confines.  The  recovery  of  blood  stained  Kassi  alongwith  the  positive 
report of Chemical Examiner and that of the Serologist further strengthen 
the  prosecution  version.  There  is  no  iota  of  doubt  in  our  mind  that  none 
else but the appellant has committed the murder of his wife.  We are fully 
convinced and in agreement with the conclusion arrived at by the learned 
trial Court qua the conviction of the appellant, but so far as the quantum 
of sentence is concerned, it is settled and longstanding principle of law by 
now  that  non-proving  the  motive  has  bearing  upon  the  question  of 
quantum  of  sentence.  Reliance  is  placed  on  case  titled  “NAVEED  alias 
NEEDU and others verus  The  STATE and others” (2014 SCMR 1464). 
The relevant dictum at page No.1468 reads as under:- 
 
“failure of the prosecution to prove the motive set up by it may have 
a bearing upon the question of sentence and in an appropriate case 
such failure may result in reduction of a sentence of death to that of 
imprisonment for life for safe administration of justice. 
 
This view has been further fortified in case titled “HAQ NAWAZ  versus  
The STATE” (2018 SCMR 21) wherein it has been observed as:- 
Crl. Appeal No.158 of 2014  
M.R. No.29 of 2014 
 
 
 
11 
“The law is settled by now that if the prosecution asserts a motive 
but  fails  to  prove  the  same  then  such  failure  on  the  part  of  the 
prosecution  may  react  against  a  sentence  of  death  passed  against  a 
convict on the charge of murder.” 
 
  It was further held in case titled “NADEEM RAMZAN vs. The STATE”   
(2018 SCMR 149). 
“It has been held by this court in many cases that if the prosecution 
asserts a motive but fails to prove the same then such failure on the 
part of the prosecution may react against a sentence of death passed 
against a convict on a capital charge.” 
 
Moreover  a  single  mitigating factor  would be  considered to  be  sufficient 
to  award  lesser  sentence.  When  a  case  qualifies  for  awarding  of  both 
sentences of imprisonment for life and that of the death, the proper course 
for  the  Court  is  to  give  preference  to    award  lesser  sentence.  We  seek 
guidance in this respect from the case titled “GHULAM MOHY-UD-DIN   
alias  HAJI  BABU  and  others    versus  The  STATE”  (2014  SCMR  1034) 
wherein it has been observed at page 1044 as:- 
 
“In  any  case,  if  a  single  doubt  or  ground  is  available,  creating 
reasonable doubt in the mind of Court/Judge to award death penalty 
or life imprisonment, it would be sufficient circumstances to adopt 
alternate  course  by  awarding  life  imprisonment  instead  of  death 
sentence.” 
 
21. 
In  view  of  what  has  been  discussed  above,  Criminal  Appeal 
No.158 of 2014 filed by appellant Abdul Ghafoor is without any merit, the 
same  stands  dismissed  by  maintaining  his  conviction,  however  the 
sentence of death in an offence under Section 302(b) PPC is modified to 
the  imprisonment  for  life.    The  amount  of  compensation  as  well  as  the 
sentence  in  lieu  thereof  shall  remain  intact.  The  benefit  of  Section              
382-B Cr.P.C is extended  to the appellant. 
22. 
 Murder  Reference  No.29  of  2014  for  confirmation  of  death 
sentence  of  Abdul  Ghafoor  is  answered  in  the  NEGATIVE  and  death 
sentence of the appellant is NOT CONFIRMED. 
(S.M.Kazim Raza Shamsi)         
  
Judge  
 
 
 (Asjad Javaid Ghural)  
              Judge 
Ramzan*  
Approved for Reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
