Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
 
 
 
  IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
                    Case No: W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
Noor LPG Co. (Pvt.) Limited.   Versus  Oil & Gas Development 
Company Limited, etc. 
 
JUDGMENT 
Dates of Hearing:  27.02.2018.      
Petitioner(s) by:  M/s Shahid Hamid, Azhar Siddique, 
Sardar  Qasim  Farooq,  Muhammad 
Umer  Qureshi,  Muhammad  Rizwan 
Gujjar,  Syed  Umair  Abbas,  Rana 
Zain Tahir, Muhammad Faisal Iqbal 
and S. Parveen Mughal, Advocates.  
Respondent(s) 
by: 
 
Barrister  Umair  Majeed  Malik, 
Advocate 
respondent  No.1/ 
for 
OGDCL 
in  W.P.Nos.112909, 
112913 & 112917 of 2017. 
Barrister  Haroon  Dugal,  Advocate 
for  respondent  No.2/OGRA  assisted 
by  Mrs.  Uzma  Adil  Khan, 
Chairperson,  OGRA,  Mr. 
Imran 
Ghazanfir SED, Mr. Rizwan-ul-Haq, 
ED (Legal), Mr. Imran Akhtar, JED, 
LPG,  Mr.  Aatif  Sajjad, 
JED 
(Finance) and Mr. Aziz Ullah, DED, 
OPG. 
Attiq-ur-Rehman 
Mr. 
Kiyani, 
Advocate  for  respondent  No.1  in 
W.P. No.166996 of 2018. 
Mr.  Jahanzaib  Inam,  Advocate  for 
respondent No.1. 
Mr.  Nasar  Ahmad  and  Mian  Irfan 
Akram,  Deputy  Attorney  Generals 
for  Federation  of  Pakistan  assisted 
by Mr. Nazir Malik, Director (Law), 
Petroleum Division. 
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
2 
Shahid  Jamil  Khan,  J:-    Petitioners  are  Licensed 
Marketing  Companies  of  Liquefied  Petroleum  Gas 
(“LPG”).  Common  grievance,  raised 
in 
this  and 
connected  petitions,  (Writ  Petitions  No.  95937,  112913, 
112917,  127693  of  2017  and  166996  of  2018),  is 
regarding “Signature Bonus” being charged by Producing 
Companies  of  LPG  like  Oil  &  Gas  Development 
Company Limited (“OGDCL”) for awarding contract of 
lifting LPG from different gas fields.  
2. 
The  petitioners’  side  argued  that  the  Signature 
Bonus  could  not  be  charged  by  respondents  Producing 
Companies,  being  over  and  above  the  Price  Notified  by 
the  Federal  Government  and  not  approved/regulated  by 
Oil  &  Gas  Regulatory  Authority  (“OGRA”)/respondent 
No.2.  To  support  this  contention,  Liquefied  Petroleum 
Gas (Production & Distribution) Policy, 2016 (“Policy of 
2016”)  was  read  with  Rule  18  (as  amended  in  August 
2017)  of  the  Liquefied  Petroleum  Gas  (Production  and 
Distribution) Rules, 2001 (“Rules of 2001”).  
 
It  was  submitted  that  auction  of  LPG  at  an 
exorbitant  price  was  assailed  earlier  also  through  Writ 
Petition  No.113  of  2017.  It  was  admitted  by  learned 
counsel  for  OGRA  that  Policy  of  2016  was  not  being 
implemented 
for 
the 
reason 
that  corresponding 
amendments in the Rule 18 of the Rules of 2001 had not 
been notified in the Official Gazette. However, case was 
referred  to  OGRA  on  its  undertaking  that  the  dispute 
would  be  looked  into  and  decided  by  it  in  exercise  of 
powers under the Rules of 2001. The Court took notice of 
the  fact  that  some  of  public  functionaries  were  not 
discharging  their  duties  as  required  under  the  relevant 
Statute, therefore, a direction was given to the Secretary, 
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
3 
Ministry  of  Energy  (Petroleum  Division)  for  fixing 
liability of not controlling the price of LPG. In pursuance 
of the directions, Rule 18 was substituted through S.R.O. 
68(KE)/2017 dated 07.08.2017 (“SRO 68”). 
3. 
These  petitions  were  opposed  by  Barrister  Umair 
Majeed  Malik,  Advocate  appearing  for  OGDCL  (the 
producing company), by submitting that issue of Signature 
Bonus  has  already  been  settled by  learned  Single  Bench 
of this Court in Tez Gas (Private) Limited etc. v Oil and 
Gas Regulatory Authority  etc. (PLD 2017 Lahore 111).  
It  is  argued  that  under  Section  3.1.1  of  the  Policy  of 
2016, 
the  Federal  Government  has  authorized  the 
Producers  to  evolve  their  own  procedure  for  transparent 
and  competitive  bidding  process.  Further  argued  that 
Signature  Bonus  is  not  a  component  of  LPG  price, 
therefore, is not required to be regulated by OGRA.           
4. 
Barrister  Haroon  Dugal,  Advocate  for  OGRA 
submitted that after insertion of existing Rule 18 through 
the  SRO  68,  some  letters  were  written  to  Federal 
Government for fixation of price but the notification was 
not  issued  by  respondent  No.3  (Secretary,  Ministry  of 
Energy (Petroleum Division).  Responding 
to 
the 
arguments  that  OGRA  was  not  regulating  the  affairs  of 
production  and  distribution  of  LPG,  learned  counsel 
submitted  that  regulation  of  petroleum  products  by 
OGRA is subject to guidelines from Federal Government 
as envisaged in the Policy of 2016 and existing Rule 18. 
He explained that for fixation of price, OGRA had to act 
on advice of Federal Government, which statedly was not 
issued.  However,  during  proceedings,  an  advice  dated 
30.01.2018  by  Federal  Government  and  a  notification 
dated  01.02.2018  by  OGRA  were  placed  on  record.  It 
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
4 
was not denied that Signature Bonus, being part of profit 
margin  of  the  Marketing  Company,  was  required  to  be 
regulated  by  OGRA.  However,  learned  counsel  sought 
some  time  to  seek  instructions  in  this  regard.  On 
subsequent  date,  Chairperson  OGRA  (Mrs.  Uzma  Adil 
Khan)  appeared  and  accepted  that  Signature  Bonus  was 
required to be regulated by OGRA and undertook that the 
dispute of charging Signature Bonus, as raised in this and 
connected petitions, would be looked into and decided.      
5. 
Sardar Qasim Farooq, Advocate for the petitioner, 
while  arguing  in  rebuttal,  produced  copy  of  letter  dated 
06.02.2018  issued  by  OGDCL,  addressed  to  one  of  the 
Marketing Companies wherein it is written that Signature 
Bonus  is over  and  above  the  prevailing  LPG  base  price. 
Issuance of this letter was not denied by learned counsel 
for the respondent/OGDCL. 
6.  Mr.  Shahid  Hamid,  Advocate,  represented  LPG 
consumers, after acceptance of application under Order I 
Rule 10 CPC, and argued that OGRA was not performing 
its  functions  as  required  under  the  Statute  and  Rules, 
therefore, burden of exorbitant price was being borne by 
consumers. He argued that a Committee was constituted, 
for  determination/fixation  of  LPG  price,  consisting  of 
members  from  producing  and  marketing  companies 
without  any  representation  of  consumers  to  protect  their 
interest. He endorsed the arguments that after substitution 
of  the  Rule  18  read  with  the  Policy  of  2016,  fixation  of 
LPG  price  and  profit  margins  of  Marketing  Companies 
etc. were to be approved/regulated by OGRA. 
7. 
Heard, record perused. 
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
5 
8. 
The  judgment  in  Tez  Gas  Case  (supra)  delivered 
by  a  learned  Single  Bench  of  this  Court  is  examined, 
whereby  charging  of  Signature  Bonus  was  held  as  legal 
for the reason that  Liquefied  Petroleum  Gas  (Production 
&  Distribution)  Policy  Guidelines,  2013  (“Policy  of 
2013”)  did  not  envisage  regulation  of  LPG  price,  which 
was  to  be  determined  by  marketing  force.  Relevant  part 
from the judgment is reproduced hereunder:-  
 
“15.  …. 
In  terms  thereof,  the  price  of  LPG  is  determined  by 
market  forces.  The  Government  has  no  role  to  play  in 
LPG  price  fixation.  Furthermore  OGRA  as  the  front  line 
regulator determines the reasonableness of the price so 
as to ensure that cartels are not formed or that high price 
of LPG is not charged from the consumer. They also do 
not fix or control the price of LPG. The counsels for the 
Petitioners  argued  their  case  essentially  on  the  ground 
that  Signature  Bonus  is  a  component  of  the  LPG  price 
and therefore has to be regulated by OGRA and cannot 
exceed  the  Aramco  Price.  A  bare  review  of  the  2013 
Policy  clarifies  that  LPG  price  is  deregulated  and  that 
neither the Government nor OGRA is required to fix the 
price  of  LPG.  In  fact  clause  3.4.1  of  the  2013  Policy 
reveals that the 2013 Policy Guidelines on LPG Pricing is 
in  continuation  of  the  Government’s  deregulation  policy 
which  has  been in force  since  2011.  It  also  clarifies  the 
role  of  OGRA  such  that  OGRA  will  only intervene  if  the 
LPG price becomes unreasonable. In such cases OGRA 
can  look  into  the  reasonableness  of  the  price  after 
accounting  for  certain  given  factors.  The  record  also 
shows  that  the  Aramco  Price  is  not  relevant  for  the 
purposes of fixing base stock price because price is fixed 
by  market  forces.  Pursuant  to  the  ECC  decision  dated 
1.1.2013,  the  2013  Policy  was  issued  which  requires 
price  to  be  fixed  by  market  forces  and  not  the  Aramco 
Price. Furthermore Clause 4(iii) of the 2013 Policy clearly 
provides  that  the  2013  Policy  supersedes  all  previous 
instructions,  orders  and  polices 
the 
Government  from  time  to  time.  Since  this  Policy  was 
approved  by 
letter  of 
6.12.2006  by  the  ECC  is  no  longer  relevant  on  this 
issue.”     
the  ECC  on  1.1.2013, 
issued  by 
         
the 
9. 
The  Policy  of  2016  is  also  examined,  which  has 
superseded  the  Policy  of  2013.  The  Policy  of  2016  was 
issued  with  approval  of  Council  of  Common  Interest 
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
6 
(“CCI”) through S.R.O. 800(I)/2017 dated 11.07.2017. It 
has  introduced  a  regulated  regime  for  Production  and 
Distribution of Liquefied Petroleum Gas. As noted in its 
preamble,  the  deregulation  policy  of  LPG  had  failed  to 
achieve its intended objective of enhancing availability of 
LPG at affordable prices.  
Under its  Section  3.1.1,  the  LPG  is  required to be 
disposed  of  “in  a 
transparent  manner 
through 
competitive  bid  process  to  the  licensed  LPG  marketing 
companies on terms and conditions to be settled between 
the Buyer and Seller, subject to LPG Pricing as provided 
in  Section  3.4  of  this  Policy”.  Its  Section  3.4.1  requires 
that  OGRA  will  regulate  and  notify  the  prices  of 
indigenous  LPG,  subject  to  policy  guidelines  of  the 
Federal  Government.  Producers’  Price,  Margins  of 
Marketing  and  Distribution  Companies  and  Consumer 
Prices,  are  also  required  to  be  notified  by  the  OGRA 
under 
this  Section.  Section  3.4.5  envisages 
that 
Maximum Price at all levels of the supply chain shall be 
regulated  by  OGRA.  Section  3.4.6  authorizes  OGRA  to 
intervene  in  case  of  deviation  from  the  above  notified 
price.  The  Section  3.4  is  reproduced  hereunder  for  ease 
of reference:- 
“3.4   LPG Pricing 
3.4.1  Subject to Policy Guidelines of the Federal 
Government,  the  Oil  and  Gas  Regulatory 
Authority will  regulate  and notify  the  prices 
of  indigenous  LPG  including  Producers’ 
Price, Margins of Marketing and Distribution 
Companies and Consumer Prices. 
3.4.2  The  Government  may  charge  a  Petroleum 
Levy from local LPG Producers as provided 
in the Petroleum Products (Petroleum Levy) 
Ordinance, 1961, as specified from time to 
time by the Federal Government.  
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
7 
stakeholders,  determine 
3.4.3  The  Federal  Government  will,  from  time  to 
in  consultation  with  OGRA  and 
time 
relevant 
the 
quantity of LPG to be imported to meet any 
gap  between  demand  and  supply;  this 
quantity  will  be  imported  by  Public  Sector 
companies. Petroleum Levy on LPG or Gas 
Infrastructure  Development  Cess  (GIDS) 
may  be  utilized  to  subsidize  the  LPG 
imported  by  Public  Sector  companies  for 
bringing  the  prices  equal  to  local  LPG 
prices for Domestic sector supplies.  
3.4.4  Tariff 
for  supply 
for  LPG  Air-Mix 
to 
Domestic  and  commercial  consumers  will 
be  as  determined  by 
the  Federal 
Government from time to time. 
3.4.5  LPG  prices  will  be 
regulated  with  a 
Maximum  Price  at  all  levels  of  the  supply 
chain.  However,  Producers,  Marketing 
Companies and Distributors may sell below 
the  Maximum  Price  determined  from  time 
to time.  
3.4.6  OGRA  will  intervene  in  case  of  deviation 
from  the  above  pricing  basis  and  would 
also  involve  the  local  administration  to 
ensure 
the 
defaulting  Marketing  Companies  and 
Distributors.” 
punitive 
against 
action 
10.  Earlier, charging of excess price, in presence of the 
Policy  of  2016,  was  assailed  through  Writ  Petition  No. 
113  of  2017.  OGRA  admitted  before  the  Court  that 
corresponding  amendments  were  not  brought  into  the 
Rules  of  2001,  however,  in  pursuance  of  direction, 
amendments  were  made  in  the  Rules  of  2001  through 
SRO  68  and  Rule  18  was  substituted.  The  substituted/ 
existing Rule 18 is reproduced hereunder for facility:- 
 
“18. 
Price  of  LPG  base-stock  and  LPG:-  (1) 
Subject  to  prevailing  Policy  Guidelines  of  the  Federal 
Government,  the  Oil  and  Gas  Regulatory  Authority 
shall  regulate  and  notify  the  prices  of  indigenous  LPG 
including  Producers’  Price,  Margins  of  Marketing  and 
Distribution  Companies  and  Consumer  Prices  as  may 
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
8 
be  revised  by  Ministry  of  Petroleum  &  Natural 
Resources from time to time. 
(2)  
A  licensee  shall  charge  from  another  licensee 
or  a  consumer,  price  of  LPG  base-stock  and  LPG  as 
notified by the Authority in pursuance of prevailing LPG 
policy  of  the  Federal  Government.  The  licensee  shall 
also  publicize such  prices in the  media  for  information 
of the public and shall also inform about such prices to 
the  Authority.  LPG  prices  shall  be  regulated  with  a 
maximum price as notified by OGRA at all levels of the 
supply 
chain.  However,  Producers,  marketing 
companies  and  distributors  may  sell  below 
the 
maximum notified price. In case licensee intends to sell 
below the notified prices, the same shall be intimated to 
the  authority  forthwith  and  licensee  shall  re-publicize 
such prices in the media without delay. 
(3) 
In case the prices of LPG base-stock or LPG so 
being  charged  by  a licensee  under  sub-rule  (1  &  2)  are 
over  and  above  the  notified  price  of  Authority,  the 
Authority in public interest shall intervene and shall also 
involve the local administration to ensure punitive action 
against the defaulting licensees.” 
 
11.  Perusal of the Rule 18 shows that policy guidelines 
given in the Section 3.4 of the Policy of 2016 have been 
translated into it. Now the law requires regulation of LPG 
Pricing at all levels of supply chain by OGRA, which is 
bound  to  notify  the  prices  of  indigenous  LPG  including 
Producers’ Price and Margins of Distribution Companies 
on  advice  by  the  Federal  Government,  which  means; 
Production  and  Distribution  of  LPG  has  been  subjected 
to regulated regime. 
 
The  judgment  and  verdict  given  in  Tez  Gas  Case 
(supra) is based on the Policy of 2013 and the then Rule 
18,  which  did  not  require  regulation  of  production  and 
distribution  of  LPG,  therefore,  the  judgment  has  lost  its 
binding force for the disputes and questions arising after 
issuance  of  the  Policy  of  2016  and  substitution  of  the 
Rule 18.  
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
9 
12.  The nature of Signature Bonus is apparent from the 
OGDCL’s 
letter,  dated  06.02.2018,  addressed 
to 
Marketing  Companies,  which  shows  that  the  amount  of 
Signature Bonus shall be over and above LPG base price. 
This  factual  position  was  not  denied  by  OGDCL’s 
counsel. Signature Bonus is a pre-condition for awarding 
contract  of  lifting  LPG  from  different  gas  fields. 
Admittedly, 
this  pre-condition 
is 
imposed  without 
approval and before fixation of price by OGRA. Learned 
counsel  for  OGDCL  himself  argued  that  the  amount 
under  Signature  Bonus  was  to  be  paid  by  the Marketing 
and  Distribution  Companies  from  their  margin.  Because 
the  margin  of  Marketing  and  Distribution  Companies  is 
now  required  to  be  regulated  by  OGRA,  therefore,  its 
approval by the OGRA is necessary.   
13.  The  Policy  of  2016  (S.R.O.  800(I)/2017)  was 
approved  by  CCI, which  is  created  under  Article  153  of 
the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973  (“Constitution”).  The  Council  consists  of  Prime 
Minister,  as  Chairman,  the  Chief  Ministers  of  all  the 
Provinces  and  three  members  nominated  by  the  Prime 
Minister.  The  Council  is  answerable/responsible  only  to 
Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament).  Under  Article  154  of  the 
Constitution,  the  Council  has  to  formulate  and  regulate 
policies  in  relation  to  matters  in  Part-II  of  the  Federal 
Legislative  List  and  is  required  to  exercise  supervision 
and control over related institutions. OGRA, being one of 
the institutions, falls under Entry 2 of the Part-II. 
 
In  backdrop  of  this  legal  position,  the  Policy  of 
2016,  being  approved  by  CCI,  has  constitutional  force. 
Any  policy  decision  by  CCI,  if  Federal  or  Provincial 
Government  feels  dissatisfied,  can  be  undone  only  by 
W. P. No. 112909 of 2017. 
10 
Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  in  a  joint  sitting  of  both 
Houses.  The  Ministry  and  OGDCL  were  bound  to 
implement this policy right from the date of its issuance. 
However,  necessary  amendments  in  the  Rules  were 
brought  on  a  direction  by  this  Court,  in  earlier  Writ 
Petition, and the prices are notified during proceedings in 
this  case.  Such  an  inaction  on  the  part  of  public 
functionaries 
against 
a 
constitutional 
command 
necessarily  requires  interference  by  Superior  Courts,  in 
exercise of their constitutional jurisdiction, to protect the 
Constitution and its commands. No direction is available 
to  any  public  office  holder,  except  to  implement  the 
policy,  approved  by  CCI,  promptly  and  in  letter  and 
spirit. 
14.  Under the circumstances, it is held that charging of 
Signature  Bonus  needs  to  be  regulated  by  OGRA, 
therefore,  these  petitions  are  transmitted  to  OGRA  for 
necessary action. 
15.  The Federal Government is directed to ensure that 
stakeholders/consumers 
are 
represented 
in 
the 
Committee,  constituted  under  the  Policy  of  2016,  for 
fixation of prices. The needful shall be done within thirty 
days  from  receipt  of  this  order.  Compliance  report  shall 
be  communicated  by  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Energy 
(Petroleum  Division)  to  Deputy  Registrar  (Judl.)  of  this 
Court within 45 days. 
 
This  and  connected  petitions  are  allowed  in  the 
manner and to the extent mentioned hereinabove.        
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
*A.W.*  
 
 
 
 
         Judge 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
(Shahid Jamil Khan) 
         Judge 
 
