 
 
Stereo. HCJDA 38 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Regular First Appeal No.1/2018 
 
Al-Raheem Rice Mills  v. Bank Alflah limited etc. 
JUDGMENT 
 
17.09.2018 
DATE OF 
HEARING 
Appellant by:  Mirza Muhammad Nadeem Asif, Advocate. 
Respondents 
by: 
Mr. Muhammad Farhan Masood, Advocate. 
 
 
 
JAWAD HASSAN, J. This is an Appeal, filed under Section 
22  of  the  Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance, 
2001  (the  “Ordinance”)  against 
judgment  and  decree  dated 
21.11.2017,  passed  by 
the 
learned  Judge  Banking  Court, 
Bahawalpur (the “Banking Court”). 
 
Submissions of the Appellant 
2. 
Learned counsel for the Appellants states that the Appellants 
filed  the  suit  for  rendition  of  accounts  and  declaration  before  the 
Banking  Court  under  Section  9  of  the  Ordinance  against  the 
Respondents Bank Alfalah Limited (the “Bank”). He states that the 
Bank  filed  petition  for  leave  to  defend  under  Section  10  of  the 
Ordinance (the “PLA”) and when the case was fixed for arguments 
on  the  said  petition,  the  Banking  Court  rejected  the  plaint  of  the 
Appellant.    He  states  that  the  Banking  Court  had  no  authority  to 
reject the plaint but to decide the  PLA first and then to decide the 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 2 - 
matter  accordingly.  He  further  states  that  the  Bank  has  also  filed 
recovery  suit  against  the  Appellant  which  was  pending  when  this 
judgment was passed, therefore, it ought to be consolidated.   
 
Submissions of the Respondents/Bank 
3. 
 On  the  other  hand,  counsel  for  the  Respondent  Bank 
appeared  and  stated  that  the  Banking  Court  has  rightly  passed  the 
judgment  as  the  plaint  is  liable  to  be  rejected  due  to  non-
compliance  of  the  provisions  of  Section  9(2)  and  (3)  of  the 
Ordinance  and  as  per  law  laid  down  by  the  superior  Courts  of 
Pakistan in Apollo Textile Mills Ltd. and others vs. Soneri Bank 
Ltd (PLD 2012 SC 268), Muhammad Azam vs. Askari Leasing 
Limited etc (CLD 2014 Lahore 1462), and Irfan Industries (Pvt) 
Limited vs. Standard Chartered Bank and another (2017 CLD 
223). 
 
4.  We have heard the arguments at length advanced by both the 
parties and perused the record available with the file. 
 
5. 
It 
is 
reflected 
from  perusal  of 
record 
that 
the 
Appellants/Plaintiffs  filed  a  suit  for  declaration  and  rendition  of 
accounts  (the  “Suit”)  in  which  they  alleged  that  they  availed 
finance facilities from the Bank and cleared the same in accordance 
with  the  agreement.  They  also  alleged  that  the  Bank  has  adjusted 
the repaid amount towards the markup instead of principal amount 
and  further  charged  illegal  markup.  They  further  alleged  that  the 
Bank in order to recover the illegal markup has issued fake finance 
facilities by forging finance documents.  
 
6.  
The  record  demonstrates  that  the  Appellants/Plaintiffs  did 
not  attach  any  document  with  the  Suit  to  prove  their  case,  rather 
merely  submitted  certificates  of  the  Bank  dated  12.2.2011, 
17.10.2011,  26.11.2013,  20.1.2014,  22.11.2014,  3.3.2015,  and 
seven  (7)  certificates  dated  19.2.2015.  In  all  these  certificates,  the 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 3 - 
Bank has certified that they have recovered markup of the amount 
mentioned therein for specific period. These all certificates are not 
addressed to any specific person and states that the certificates were 
issued on request of the customers without any obligation on part of 
the Bank. The Plaintiffs/Appellants have also attached letter of the 
Bank dated 12.2.2015 asking to adjust the outstanding principal and 
to pay the up to date markup.  
 
7. 
The  record  further  transpires  that  the  Bank  applied  for  the 
leave  to  defend  under  Section  10  of  the  Ordinance  on  the  ground 
that the Appellants/Plaintiffs have not fulfilled the requirements of 
Section 9(2) and (3) of the Ordinance and they are also defaulters. 
After  hearing  the  parties,  the  learned  Banking  Court  passed  an 
order  and  decree  dated  21.11.2017  and  dismissed  the  Suit  of  the 
Appellant/Plaintiff on ground that the same is not supported by the 
statement of accounts which is the violation of Section 9(2) of the 
Ordinance.  Thus,  the  Appellants/Plaintiffs  filed  the  Regular  First 
Appeal  challenging  the  Impugned  Order  and  Decree  before  this 
Court under Section 22 of the Ordinance.  
 
Nub of the Appeal 
8. 
The  moot  point  involved  in  this  Appeal  required  to  be 
decided  is  that;  whether  the  Appellant  while  filing  the  Suit  has 
complied  with  the  requirements  under  Section  9  of  the  Ordinance 
by  filing  Statement  of  Accounts  and  showing  the  default  of  an 
obligation.    Before  rendering  judgment  and  deciding  the  instant 
Appeal, it is essential to see the statutory requirements of Section 9, 
which is as follows: 
9.  Procedure of Banking Courts.- 
 
(1)  Where  a  customer  or  a  financial  institution 
commits a default in fulfillment of any obligation with 
regard  to any finance,  the  financial  institution  or,  as 
 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 4 - 
the case may be, the customer, may institute a suit in 
the  Banking  Court  by  presenting  a  „Plaint‟  which 
shall  be  verified  on  oath,  in  the  case  of  a  financial 
institution  by  the  Branch  Manager  or  such  other 
officer  of  the  financial  institution  as  may  be  duly 
authorized  in  this  behalf  by  power  of  attorney  or 
otherwise. 
 
(2) The plaint shall be supported by (1) a statement of 
account  which  in  the  case  of  a  financial  institution 
shall  be  duly  certified  under  the  Bankers  Books 
Evidence  Act,  1891  (XVII  of  1891), and all other  (2) 
relevant  documents  relating  to  the  grant  of  finance. 
Copies  of  the  plaint,  statement  of  account  and  other 
relevant  documents  shall  be  filed  with  the  Banking 
Court in sufficient numbers so that there is one set of 
copies for each defendant and one extra copy. 
 
(3)  The  plaint,  in  the  case  of  a  suit  for  recovery 
instituted  by  a  financial  institution,  shall  specifically 
state  
 
(a)    the  amount  of  finance  availed  by  the  defendant 
from the financial institution; 
  
(b)  the amounts paid by the defendant to the financial 
institution and the dates of payment; and 
  
(c)  the amount of finance and other amounts relating 
to  the  finance  payable  by  the  defendant  to  the 
financial institution upto the date of institution of the 
suit. … (emphasis added) 
 
 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
Determination. 
- 5 - 
It  transpires  from  Section  9  of  the  Ordinance  that  a  customer  or  a 
financial  institution  can  file  a  suit  under  Section  9(1)  of  the 
Ordinance  before  the  Banking  Court  with  respect  to  the  default  in 
fulfillment  of  obligations  with  regard  to  any  finance  which  has  to 
be  verified  on  oath.  The  basic  interpretation  of  subsections  of 
Section 9 of the Ordinance is that the words mentioned in Section 
9(1) have to be read altogether in which there must be a (i) default 
in  fulfillment  of  an  (ii)  obligation  regarding  any  representation, 
warranties  and  covenants  by  (iii)  Financial  Institution  or  (iv)  the 
Customer.  If  this  is  not  shown  in  the  plaint  alongwith  the 
documents  then  the  suit  cannot  be  filed.  This  Court  in  case  titled 
Amtex Limited through Director v. bank Islami Pakistan Ltd. and 
8 others (2016 CLD 2007) has held as under: 
“Default  in  fulfilment  of  any  obligation  with  regard 
to any finance is a sine qua non and confers a right on 
customer or financial institution to bring a suit under S. 
9  of  Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances) 
Ordinance, 2001.” 
 
  
This Court has further held which is as under: 
Intent  of  the  legislature  under  S.  9  of  the  Financial 
Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance,  2001 
was to file a suit on the ground of default in fulfilment 
of obligation  regarding any representation,  warranties 
and 
covenants  by 
financial 
institution.  Such 
construction lent credence to the scheme and policy of 
Financial 
Institutions 
(Recovery 
of  Finances) 
Ordinance, 2001, which had been enacted primarily to 
act  as  an  engine  of  recovery  of  defaulted  finance  by 
financial institution and not vice versa. Customer might 
have  a  cause of action but that was enforceable in the 
Court  of  general  jurisdiction  only.  Definition  of  term 
 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 6 - 
'obligation' had restricted meaning of the term within a 
certain  periphery.  High  Court  directed  the  plaintiff  to 
present 
the  suit 
for  declaration, 
injunction  and 
cancellation  of  document  in  proper  Court  as  the 
Banking Court lacked jurisdiction. Plaint was returned 
in circumstances.”   
 
Mandatory Requirement of the Statement of Accounts 
Section 9(2) of the Ordinance  further  requires  that  such  plaint/suit 
is  supported  by  a  statement  of  account  and  all  other  relevant 
documents  relating  to  the  grant  of  finance.  This  sub-section  also 
requires  a  Banking  institution  to  duly  certify  such  statement  of 
account  under 
the  Bankers  Books  Evidence  Act,  1891. 
Furthermore,  Section  9(3)  of  the  Ordinance  is  applicable  to  the 
financial  institutions  and  requires  it  to  specifically  state  in  the 
plaint/suit: (a) the amount of finance availed by the defendant from 
the  financial  institution;  (b)  the  amounts  paid  by  the  defendant  to 
the  financial  institution  and  the  dates  of  payment;  and  (c)  the 
amount  of  finance  and  other  amounts  relating  to  the  finance 
payable by the defendant to the financial institution upto the date of 
institution of the suit. These all are the mandatory requirements that 
have  to  be  fulfilled  by  the  customer  or  the  financial  institution 
under  Section  9  of 
the  Ordinance  for  filing  a  plaint/suit 
competently. 
 
9. 
Since the instant suit/plaint was filed by the customer of the 
Bank, and not the financial institution, they have to comply with the 
mandatory  requirements  of  Section  9(2)  of  the  Ordinance.  As  per 
the statutory requirement, the Appellants/Plaintiffs were required to 
support  their  statement  by  a  statement  of  account  and  all  other 
relevant documents relating to the grant of finance. The law in this 
regard has also been settled by this Court in Gulistan Textile Mills 
Ltd. vs. Askari Bank Ltd. (2013 CLD 2005 (Lahore)), in which 
the Court has made a distinction between requirements of filing the 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 7 - 
suit/plaint by a customer and the financial institution, and has held 
as follows: 
 
16.  …  A  plaint  under  section  9  must  disclose  a  cause  of 
action  which  spells  out  the  "default  in  fulfillment  of  any 
obligation  with  regard  to  any  finance."  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  section  9(2)  of  the  Ordinance  prescribes  that  the  plaint 
must  be  supported  by  statement  of  account,  which  is 
applicable to both the parties i.e., customer and the financial 
institution.  There  is  an  additional  requirement  for  the 
financial institution to get their statement of account certified 
under 
the  Bankers'  Books  Evidence  Act,  1891.  The 
requirement  of  the  Statement  of  Account  is  to  quantify  the 
default  complained  of  under  the  Finance  Agreement(s) 
entered  between  the  parties.  The  default  or  breach,  arising 
out  of  the  contract  between  the  parties  or  in  fulfillment  of 
any  obligation  with  regard 
to  any  finance,  must  be 
numerically quantified and reflected through the Statement of 
Account.  Section  9(2)  further  states  that  the  plaint  shall  be 
supported  by  all  other  relevant  documents  relating  to  the 
grant of finance. 
 
In this case, this Court rejected the plaint/suit under Order VII, Rule 
11 of the  Code of  Civil  Procedure  (“CPC”)  as  it  failed to disclose 
any cause of action and also held that in such cases there is no need 
for this Court to consider the applications for leave to defend filed 
by the defendants. 
 
10. 
It was also held in the case of Soneri Bank Ltd. vs. Classic 
Denim  Mills  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  and  others  (2011  CLD  408  Karachi), 
that fulfilment of the requirements of Section 9(2) of the Ordinance 
has to be checked at the first instant: 
  
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 8 - 
Whether the defendants have fulfilled requirements of 
subsections (3) and (4) of section 10 of the Ordinance, 
2001  or  not, 
this  could  only  be 
taken 
into 
consideration  provided  the  plaintiff  first  should  fulfil 
requirement  of  subsection  (2)  of  section  9  of  the 
Ordinance,  2001.  …  Though,  in  the  leave  to  defend 
application,  the  defendants  have  tried  to  show  the 
compliance of subsections (3) and (4) of section 10 of 
the  Ordinance,  2001,  however,  at  this  stage,  non 
fulfilment of requirement of subsections (3) and (4) of 
section  10  of  the  Ordinance,  2001  cannot  be  strictly 
enforced, unless the defendants are provided complete 
statement  of  account  and  suit 
is 
instituted 
in 
accordance with the subsection (2) of section 9 of the 
Ordinance,  2001.  ….  The  filing  of  complete  and 
accurate  statement  of  account  with  the  plaint  is  a 
mandatory  requirement  which  defect  cannot  be 
rectified  through  replication.  If  leave  to  defend 
application  is  dismissed  on  the  basis  of  incomplete 
statement of account, it will tantamount a violation of 
Ordinance,  2001  and  will  also  amount  an 
infringement  of  newly  secured  and  guaranteed 
fundamental  right  under  Article  10-A  of 
the 
Constitution of Pakistan …. (emphasis added) 
 
Section 9(1) Be Read With Section 9(2)  
11.  Section 9(1) of the Ordinance allows the parties to institute a 
Suit  by  presenting  a  “Plaint‟.  The  „Plaint‟  has  to  be  filed  after  its 
verification  on  oath  under  Section  9(2)  of  the  Ordinance  with  the 
mandatory  requirements  mentioned  therein  (a)  Statement  of 
Accounts,  (b)  relevant  documents  relating 
to  finance.  The 
emphasize  was  made  to  the  documents  relating  to  the  grant  of 
finance in Section 9(2) of the Ordinance. It is unequivocal that the 
requirement  of  a  Suit  is  the  relevance  of  the  documents  with  the 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 9 - 
Statement  of  Accounts.  However,  there  is  plethora  of  case  law 
available for a financial institution to file a plaint/suit under Section 
9(1)  and  fulfilling  the  mandatory  requirements  of  Section  9(2)  of 
the  Ordinance.  The  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  in  Apollo  Textile 
Mills Ltd. and others vs. Soneri Bank Ltd (PLD 2012 SC 268), 
has settled the law in this respect and has held that: 
Subsection  (2)  of  section  9  of 
the  Financial 
Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance,  2001 
makes  it  mandatory  for  a  Banking  institution  to 
support  its plaint in a  suit against  the  customer  by  a 
statement of account duly certified under the Bankers' 
Books  Evidence  Act,  1891  and  also  by  all  other 
relevant  documents  relating  to  grant  of  finance. 
Without such a 'Statement of Account' filed along with 
the  plaint,  a  customer  will  obviously  remain  totally 
unaware  of  the  amount  advanced,  mark  up  charged 
and the basis, break up, premise mode of calculation 
of account nature of default and the actual amount of 
Bank's claim against the defendant-customer. He will 
thus be unable to frame his defence within the limited 
period prescribed by law, to show reasonable, serious 
and  plausible  grounds  of  contest  to  be  able  to  seek 
and obtain leave to defend the suit. Absence of filing 
the  requisite  statements  of  account  along  with  the 
plaint, will essentially amount to absence of providing 
adequate,  proper  and  reasonable  opportunity  of 
defence  to  the  defending  customer.  …  Upon  the 
compliance  a  Banking  Company  with  the  provisions 
of section 9(2) of the Ordinance, depends the right of 
defence  of  a  defendant  in  the  summary  suits  as 
visualized under the Ordinance, wherefor, the filing of 
duly  certified  statements  of  account  by  a  Banking 
company along with its plaint, cannot be taken to be a 
 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 10 - 
mere  formality  or  a  technicality.  This  provision  can 
only  be  held 
to  be  mandatory.  Without  strict 
compliance  wherewith,  the  plaint  is  incomplete  and 
cannot become basis of a suit under this law. …. 
 
12.  The  Sindh  High  Court  has  recently  also  relied  on  the  above 
case law of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court to arrive at the same above 
conclusion in Meezan Bank Ltd. vs. A.H. International (Private) 
Limited  and  7  others  (2017  CLD  29  Sindh).  The  Sindh  High 
Court  has  also,  in  Pak  Oman  Investment  Company  Ltd.  vs. 
Chenab  Limited  and  others  (2016  CLD  1903  (Sindh),  has 
rejected  the  plaint  by  following  the  principle  of  Apollo  Textile 
supra, and has held as follows: 
 
 
21.  From  the  mandatory  obligations  imposed  by 
section  9  of  F.I.O.,  2001,  it  is  quite  clear  that  a 
Defendant in a suit filed by the 'Financial Institution' 
for  recovery  must  and,  of  course,  be  confronted  with 
the best possible re-structured/well framed case that a 
Plaintiff can put forward from the very inception. The 
foundation of a banking suit, which normally is a suit 
'on accounts' thus inter alia must be supported with a 
'certified  statement  of  account'  which  shall  be  duly 
'certified'  within  the  meaning  of  section  2(8)  of 
Bankers'  Books  of  Evidence  Act,  1891  [Act  XVIII  of 
1891].  The  production  of  a  'certified  'statement  of 
account'  in  'support'  of  the  'plaint'  is  thus  not  only 
'mandatory'  but also a  very necessary  'pre-condition' 
for  charging the Defendant(s)] with any liability[ies] 
in a suit for recovery filed by a 'Financial Institution'.  
…. 
13. 
In  another  case  titled  Elbow  Room  and  another  vs.  MCB 
Bank  Ltd.  (2014  CLD  985  (Sindh)),  the  Division  Bench  of  the 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 11 - 
Hon‟ble Sindh High Court has described the Statement of Accounts 
and has mentioned its mandatory requirements and rational: 
7.  ….  Therefore,  the  statement  of  account  is  a  basic 
document  that  is  filed  by  a  financial  institution  in 
discharge of its mandatory duty under section 9(2) of 
Ordinance,  2001.  If  such  statement  of  account  is  not 
filed  along with the plaint, a customer will obviously 
remain  totally  unaware  of  the  amount  advanced, 
mark-up  charged  and  the  mode  of  calculation  of 
account,  nature  of  default  and  the  actual  amount  of 
Bank's  claim  against  the  customer.  He  will  thus  be 
unable to frame his defence within the limited period 
prescribed  by  law  to  show  reasonable,  serious  and 
plausible grounds of contest to enable the customer to 
seek and obtain leave to defend the suit. 
  
8. It follows from the bare perusal of the provision of 
section 2(8) of the Banker's Books Evidence Act, 1891 
that  a  certificate,  which  is  to  be  given  at  the  foot  of 
the  copy  of  statement  of  account,  so  as  to  make  it 
certified copy of the statement of accounts, must state 
the following facts:-- 
  
(i) it is true copy of the such entry, 
  
(ii)  such  entry  is  contained  in  one  of  the 
ordinary's books of bank, 
  
(iii)  it  was  made  in  the  usual  and  ordinary 
course of business, 
  
(iv) such book is still in the custody of the bank, 
  
(v) it must be dated; and 
  
 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 12 - 
(vi)  subscribed  by  the  principal  accountant  or 
manager of the bank with his name and official 
title. 
 
14. 
In  Sheikh  Murshid  Ali  and  others  vs.  United  Bank 
Limited (2016 CLD 1471 (Lahore)), the Division Bench has also 
concluded 
that 
the  statement  of  accounts  must  show  all 
transactional  entries, debit  and  credit  entries, rate of  mark  up, rate 
of  excise duty  and  rate of  commitment  charges  etc, and one pager 
accounts  attached  by  the  plaintiff  can  be  categorized  as  the 
Certificates  of  Balances,  which  cannot  be  considered  as  true 
accounts. It was held as follows: 
11. The alleged statements of accounts above referred 
annexed  by  the  bank  with  the  plaint  do  not  show  all 
transactional entries, debit and credit entries, rate of 
mark  up,  rate  of  excise  duty  and  rate  of  commitment 
charges  etc.  The  plaintiff/respondent  bank  claimed 
these  documents  to  be  statement  of  accounts.  But  we 
are  not  convinced  with  this stance  of respondent due 
to the reasons that these documents can at maximum 
be  called respondent's  Certificate of  Balances.  These 
statements cannot be termed or defined as a Statement 
of Account which is required to show each and every 
entry as pertaining in the ledger or account book of a 
Banking  Company.  In  the  absence  of  Statement  of 
Account  showing  all  debits  and  credits  entries  and 
dates thereof as entered by the respondent-bank in the 
ledgers and books of accounts from the disbursement 
to the date of the suit, no presumption of admissibility 
in terms of Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 can be 
given  to  the  above-said  Certificate  of  Balances.  The 
above  mentioned  alleged  Statement  of  Accounts 
attached  by  the  Bank  with  the  plaint  can  only  be 
 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 13 - 
treated  as  certificate  regarding  alleged  balance 
amounts  but  the  same  cannot  be  treated  or  admitted 
as true statement of account prepared and certificated 
under the provisions of Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 
1891. 
Analysis  
15.  
It transpires from the above case laws that a plaint/suit under 
Section  9  of  the  Ordinance  must  disclose  a  cause  of  action 
identifying the "default in fulfillment of any obligation with regard 
to  any  finance"  and  the  plaint/suit  must  be  supported  by  the 
statement  of  accounts,  which  is  applicable  to  both  the  parties  i.e., 
customer  and  the  financial  institution.  The  word  „default‟  is  not 
defined  but  the  word  „willful  default‟  has  been  added  in  Section 
2(g)  through  amendment  in  the  year  2016  which  too  is  for  the 
Financial Institution. As the intention is to safeguard the Financial 
Institution.  „Willful  Default‟  means  (i)  „deliberate  or  intentional 
failure to repay‟ (ii) „utilization of finance‟ for which such finance 
had been obtained. However, under Section 3 of the Ordinance the 
duty of the „Customer‟ has been defined in the term that „it shall be 
the  duty  of  a  customer  to  fulfill  his  obligations  to  the  financial 
institution.    
16.  Further,  there  is  an  additional  requirement  for  the  financial 
institution  to  get  their  statement  of  account  certified  under  the 
Bankers'  Books  Evidence  Act,  1891.  Section  9(2)  further  requires 
that  the  plaint  must  be  supported  by  all  other  relevant  documents 
relating  to  the  grant  of  finance.  Although  Section  9  of  the 
Ordinance clearly states that if the customer or financial institution 
commits  default  in  fulfillment  of  his  obligation,  both  can  file  suit 
but  that  has  to  be  filed  with  the  proper  statement  of  account  by 
showing  the  obligation  and  its  non-fulfillment  results  into  default.  
The  statement  of  account  is  a  basic  document  and  it  is  quite  clear 
that a Defendant in a suit, filed by the Plaintiff, be confronted with 
the best possible re-structured/well framed case that a Plaintiff can 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 14 - 
put forward from the very inception. The foundation of a  Banking 
suit,  which  normally  is  a  suit  'on  accounts'  thus  inter  alia  must  be 
supported with the statement of account. These all conditions have 
to be checked at the first instant by the Banking Court to see if the 
plaint/suit fulfills the mandatory requirements of Section 9(2) of the 
Ordinance. The rationale behind this is to aware the other party of 
the  amount  advanced,  mark  up  charged  and  the  basis,  break  up, 
premise  mode  of  calculation  of  account  nature  of  default  and  the 
actual  amount of the  claim  so  that the  other party  is  able to frame 
its  defence  within  the  limited  period  prescribed  by  law,  to  show 
reasonable,  serious  and  plausible  grounds  of  contest  to  be  able  to 
seek  and  obtain  leave  to  defend  the  suit.  Absence  of  filing  the 
requisite  statements  of  account  along  with  the  plaint  amounts  to 
absence  of  providing  adequate,  proper  and  reasonable  opportunity 
of defence to the other party.  
 
17.  As  far  as  the  instant  appeal  is  concerned,  it  is  apparent  that 
the  plaint/suit  of  the  Appellants/Plaintiffs  is  not  supported  by  the 
statement  of  accounts  and  only  the  certificates  have  been  attached 
with  the  plaint/suit,  which  do  not  show  the  complete  picture, 
relationship between the parties and financial documents, and thus 
the plaint/suit has been filed in a slipshod and sketchy manner. The 
certificates  attached  with  the  plaint/suit  do  not  contain  the  entire 
transaction  and  do  not  qualify  as  the  statement  of  accounts.  The 
documents  attached  with  the  plaint/suit  have  failed  to  demonstrate 
the  obligations  and  duties  of  the  Bank  which  have  been  defaulted 
by  the  Bank,  and  have  not  attached  all  other  relevant  documents 
and  agreements  relating  to  the  grant  of  finance.  Thus,  the 
Appellants/Plaintiffs  have  not  complied  with  the  mandatory 
provisions of Section 9(2) of the Ordinance, therefore, the Banking 
Court 
has 
rightly 
dismissed 
the 
plaint/suit 
of 
the 
Appellants/Plaintiffs.   
 
 
RFA No.1 /2018 
- 15 - 
18.  On the touchstone of the above discussion, this Appeal being 
devoid and bereft of merit is dismissed.  No order as to costs. 
 
 
     (MUZAMIL AKHTAR SHABIR)          (JAWAD HASSAN) 
JUDGE 
 
            
            JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting  
JUDGE 
 
            
            JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
