     
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Civil Revision No.36715/2017 
(LDA v. Manzoor Hussain)  
 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of Hearing 
12.06.2018 
Petitioner by: 
Mian Tahir Maqsood, Advocate.  
Respondent by:  
Mr. Mohsin Mehmood Bhatti, Advocate.  
 
Atir Mahmood, J.: 
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the 
 
 
 
respondent  filed  a  suit  for  declaration  with  permanent  injunction 
against  the  petitioner  with  the  averments  that  he  purchased  a  plot 
measuring 18 marlas adjacent to Plot No.28, Industrial Area, Gulberg-
III, Lahore  from  the  petitioner-LDA  for  consideration of  Rs.40,000/- 
per marla vide allotment letter No.DEM.LDA/7044 dated 14.11.1995; 
that possession of the plot was handed over to the petitioner vide letter 
dated  28.11.1995  on  30.11.1995;  that  the  petitioner  filed  application 
for  approval  of  site  plan  in  the  year  1996  followed  by  application 
dated  10.07.1997  alongwith  proposed  plan;  that  requisite  fee  for 
approval  of  the  site  plant  was  also  deposited;  that  despite  repeated 
visits,  the  LDA  did  not  sanction  the  site  plant  which  constrained  the 
petitioner  to  start  the  construction;  that  the  petitioner  started 
construction over the suit plot; that the LDA instead of sanctioning the 
site  plan  started  to  threaten  the  respondent  of  demolition  of  the 
construction  without  any  lawful  authority;  that  the  respondent  first 
constructed the ground floor and then took in hand the construction on 
the first floor when the petitioner LDA issued notice dated 28.11.2011 
for demolition of the construction; that the respondent approached the 
Civil Revision No.36715/2017 
 
 
 
2 
petitioner  LDA  but  to  no  avail  which  constrained  him  to  file  the 
instant suit.  
2. 
The suit was contested by the petitioner LDA by filing written 
statement.  Issues  were  framed.  Evidence  led  by  the  parties  was 
recorded. Thereafter learned trial court proceeded to decree the suit of 
the  respondent  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated  30.01.2012.  Feeling 
dissatisfied,  the  petitioner  filed  appeal  which  was  dismissed  vide 
judgment  and  decree  dated  06.01.2017  passed  by  leaned  Additional 
District Judge, Lahore. Hence this civil revision has been preferred.  
3. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
4. 
The sole contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that 
since  the  plot  was  allotted  for  specific  purpose  of  industrial  setup, 
therefore, the site plan for residential building could not be sanctioned 
by the petitioner LDA, therefore, the building erected on the suit plot 
is illegal and unlawful.  
5. 
Admittedly,  the  suit  plot  was  allotted  to  the  respondent  vide 
allotment  letter  No.LDA/DEM/7044  dated  14.11.1995  (Exh.P1)  and 
possession of the same was handed over to the respondent vide letter 
No. LDA/DEM/7282 dated 28.11.1995 (Exh.P3) on 30.11.1995.  The 
allotment letter reads that:  
“…  LDA  has  decided  to  make  an  offer  of  sale  of  18  marla  of 
land  situated  in  Gulberg-III,  adjacent  to  plot  No.28-Industrial 
Block, to you at the rate of Rs.40,000/- per marla …” 
The above letter does not suggest that the suit plot is an industrial plot 
rather it says that it is a plot which is located adjacent to Plot No.28, 
Industrial  Block,  Gulberg-III,  Lahore.  Even,  there  is  no  clause  or 
condition in the allotment letter that the suit plot will not be used other 
than  for  industrial  purpose.  Same  is  the  position  with  the  possession 
letter  (Exh.P3)  whereby  the  possession  of  the  suit  plot  was  handed 
over  to  the  respondent.  There  is  no  other  document  on  record  which 
may  suggest  that  the  suit  plot  was  an  industrial  plot  meant  only  for 
Civil Revision No.36715/2017 
 
 
 
3 
industrial activity. In the circumstances, it cannot be said that the suit 
plot  was  an  industrial  plot.  Instead  thereof,  it  may  or  may  not  be  an 
industrial  plot  or  of  some  other  category  viz.  residential  etc.  In  this 
view of the matter, I am not in consonance with argument of learned 
counsel for the petitioner that the suit plot was meant for the industrial 
purposes only.  
6. 
There is no denial by learned counsel for the petitioner that the 
site plan was submitted by the respondent before the LDA authorities 
for  its  sanctioning  in  1996  but  it  could  neither  be  objected  to  nor 
sanctioned  by  the  LDA  till  date.  He  could  also  not  deny  that  the 
requisite  fee  for  approval  of  the  sit  plan  was  also  deposited  by  the 
respondent.  In  this  regard,  Regulation  7  of  Lahore  Development 
Authority  Building  Regulations,  2016  being  relevant  in  this  case  is 
reproduced below:  
 
“7.  Period of Approval 
(i)  Within  60  days  after  the  receipt  of  an  application 
for  permission  to  carry  out  Building  Works,  the 
Competent Authority shall:- 
(a) 
(b) 
pass  orders  granting  or  refusing  permission  to 
carry  out  such  Building  Works  and  in  the  case  of 
refusal  specify  the  provision  of  the  Regulations 
violated; or  
require  further  details  of  the  plans,  documents, 
plan  scrutiny  fees,  specifications  and  any  other 
particulars to be submitted to it.  
(ii) 
If  the  authority  does  not  pass  orders  granting  or 
refusing  permission  specifying  the  provision  of  the 
Regulations  violated  within  60  days  which  all  the 
necessary  information  asked  for  under  7(i)b  has  been 
furnished  and  all  documents,  plans,  specifications  and 
particulars  called  for  have  been  submitted  and  plan 
scrutiny  fee  has  been  paid;  or  if  such  additional 
particulars  have  not  been  called  for  within  the  required 
60  days  from  the  receipt  of  an  application,  it  shall  be 
deemed to have been sanctioned to the extent to which it 
Civil Revision No.36715/2017 
 
 
 
4 
does  scheme  provisions  if  any,  and  Controlled  Areas 
requirements as the case may be.” 
(Emphasis provided) 
It is unambiguously clear from the above regulation that if a site plan 
is submitted for its sanction before the LDA authorities alongwith the 
payment  of  requisite  fee  and  the  same  remains  pending  without  any 
objection  by  the  LDA  for  60  days,  it  will  automatically  stand 
approved.  In  this  perspective,  the  site  plan  submitted  by  the 
respondent  alongwith  payment  of  requisite  fee,  which  remained 
pending  without  any  objection  with  LDA  authorities  beyond  the 
period  would  be  deemed  to  be  approved  sanctioned  plan.  Since  the 
petitioner  LDA has not  objected  to  the site  plant  during  the period it 
remained pending with it, the LDA cannot object to it subsequently.  
7. 
There  are  concurrent  findings  of  law  and  fact  against  the 
petitioner  which  are  immune  from  interference  by  this  Court  in  its 
revisional 
jurisdiction  unless 
there 
is  some  gross 
illegality, 
jurisdictional  defect,  misreading  or  non-reading  of  evidence  therein. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to point out any 
such 
illegality 
in 
the 
impugned 
judgments  and  decrees.  No 
interference is called for.  
8. 
For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  this  civil  revision  has  no 
substance which is accordingly dismissed.   
 (ATIR MAHMOOD) 
Judge 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
     Judge 
Akram* 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.36715/2017 
 
 
 
 
5 
