Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT          
RAWALPINDI BENCH RAWALPINDI 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 
(Khalid Hameed v. The State) 
and 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
(The State v. Khalid Hameed) 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
           
 
Appellant  by:  M/S Muhammad Khaliq-uz-Zaman and Zohaib 
       Date of hearing:  05.11.2018 
Ashraf Mughal, Advocates. 
Complainant by:   Raja Fakhar Inayat, Advocate. 
State by: 
Mr. Umer Hayat Gondal, Additional Prosecutor 
General.  
 
----------------------------------- 
Ch.  Abdul  Aziz,  J.      Khalid  Hameed  (appellant),  involved  in 
case  FIR  No.685/2014  dated  13.11.2014  registered  under  sections 
302,376 & 364-A PPC at Police Station Pir Wadhai, Rawalpindi, was 
tried  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Rawalpindi.  The  learned 
trial  court  vide  judgment  dated  27.07.2015  proceeded  to  convict  and 
sentence the appellant in the following terms:- 
Under section 302 (b) PPC to suffer death sentence. He was also 
directed to pay compensation of Rs.500,000/- under section 544-A, 
Cr.P.C. to the legal heirs of Zainab Bibi (deceased) and in default 
whereof to undergo SI for six months. 
Under section 364-A PPC to suffer death sentence as Ta’zir. 
Under section 376 PPC to suffer death sentence as Ta’zir. 
 
 
Challenging  his  conviction  and  sentence,  Khalid  Hameed 
(appellant)  filed  Criminal  Appeal  No.328  of  2015,  whereas  trial 
court sent  reference under  section 374, Cr.P.C. which  was numbered 
as  Murder  Reference  No.26  of  2015  for  the  confirmation  or 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
2 
otherwise  of  death  sentence  awarded  to  Khalid  Hameed  (convict). 
Both these matters are being disposed of through this single judgment.   
2. 
Briefly stated the case of the prosecution as narrated by Munir 
Khan  complainant  (PW.4)  in  FIR  (Exh.PJ/2)  is  to  the  effect  that  he 
along  with  his  family  members  was  residing  at  Loharan  Street  Near 
Walaytan  Mosque  and  was  a  government  servant;  that  he  had  two 
daughters, namely, Iffat Bibi and Zainab Bibi and a son Kabeer Khan; 
that on 11.11.2014 at  about  3:00  p.m.  his daughter  Zainab  Bibi  aged 
about 6/7 years who was a student of 1st class went to a nearby shop 
for  purchasing  something  to  eat;  that  after  the  lapse  of  considerable 
time, when Zainab Bibi did not return, he got curious and went in the 
locality  for  search  of  his  daughter  and  asked  the  residents  about  her 
whereabouts;  that  when  he  found  no  traces,  he  went  to  the  police 
station  and  informed  regarding  missing  of  his  daughter;  that  he  also 
kept on searching his daughter by himself; that on 13.11.2014 at about 
1:00 a.m. he along with Malik Dilshad Khan and Jahangir Khan went 
near Mobilink Franchise in the search of his daughter where they saw 
Khalid Hameed (appellant) going towards the graveyard having a sack 
on  his  shoulder  and  from  search  of  which  dead  body  of  Zainab  Bibi 
was recovered. 
3. 
The law was set into motion on the written application (Exh.PJ) 
of  Munir  Khan  complainant  (PW.4)  presented  before  Mumtaz  SI 
(PW.15)  during  his  visit  to  the  spot.  Muhammad  Mumtaz  SI  sent 
Exh.PJ to the police station through Muhammad Sajjad Constable for 
the  registration  of  formal  F.I.R.  and  arrested  Khalid  Hameed 
(appellant)  from  the  said  place.  The  personal  search  of  Khalid 
Hameed  (appellant)  led  to  the  recovery  of  wallet  (P.3)  containing 
Rs.250/-, CNIC  (P.7), lock  (P.8)  along  with  key  (P.9),  mobile (P.10) 
which  were  taken  into  possession  vide  memo  Exh.PQ.  He  also 
secured  sack  (P.11)  along  with  rope  (P.12)  through  seizure  memo 
Exh.PR.  He  also  prepared  injury  statement  Exh.PF,  inquest  report 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
3 
Exh.PG  and  sent  the  dead  body  to  the  mortuary  for  the  postmortem 
examination through Mehmood Ahmad Constable.  Khalid Hameed at 
the  time  of  arrest  made  disclosure  and  in  pursuance  thereof  led  the 
police party to the baithak where he committed rape with Zainab Bibi 
and from the said place got recovered a pair of shoes of Zainab Bibi 
and  her  shawl/chaddar  which  were  taken  into  possession  vide  memo 
Exh.PS.  From  that  place,  Muhammad  Mumtaz  SI  also  took  into 
possession  two  stains  with  semen  pieces  of  cloth,  a  vest  and  a  dhoti 
vide  memo  Exh.PU.  He  also  secured  small  pillow  and  hair  of 
deceased  Zainab  Bibi  through  recovery  memo  Exh.PV  as  well  as 
blood  through  cotton  vide  memo  Exh.PW.  He  obtained  docket  by 
filing application to CPO for getting conducted the test of DNA of the 
accused.  Muhammad  Mumtaz  SI  also  arrested  Naik  Muhammad 
father  of  Khalid  Hameed  (appellant)  on  19.11.2014  but  during 
investigation  he  was  not  found  involved  in  this  case  and  resultantly 
discharge report to his extent was prepared. He after declaring Khalid 
Hameed guilty in his investigation got submitted report under section 
173, Cr.P.C. against him. 
4. 
The prosecution in order to prove its case against the appellant 
fifteen  PWs  including  Munir  Khan  complainant  (PW.4)  and 
Dilshad Khan (PW.7) who narrated about the recovery of dead body 
from  the  possession  of  the  appellant,  Muhammad  Younas  (PW.11) 
and Pervaiz Gul (PW.13) who deposed about the last seen evidence 
Dr.  Narjis  Zaidi  (PW.3)  and  Dr.  Azhar  Farooq  (PW.7)  who 
furnished  the  medical  evidence  and  Muhammad  Mumtaz  SI 
(PW.15)  who  investigated  the  matter.  The  remaining  PWs  more  or 
less were formal in nature.  
5. 
Lady  doctor  Narjis  Zaidi  (PW.3)  on  13.11.2014  at  about  3:00 
a.m.  conducted 
the  postmortem  examination  of  Zainab  Bibi 
(deceased) and gave the following observations:- 
“A  six  year  old  young  girl  with  fair  complexion  approximately 
three in height, wearing frak with flower print and black coloured 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
4 
 
 
tight.  Right  eye  was  semi  open  but  left  eye  was  closed  and 
conjuctive  contused,  left  face  contused,  forehead  contused  and 
oedematous.  Nose  and  mouth  clear  having  no  ear  bubble  and 
blood. Postmortem lividity was well marked on posterior aspect of 
the  body.  On  perennial  examination  hymen  was  ruptured 
introitious white and bleeding was seen around vagina and staining 
of inner thighs. Vaginal swabs taken. Strangulation marks present 
on right side of neck half inch long 5 cm below right lope of right 
ear. Mark on left  side of neck 5 cm  long 6 cm  below lobe of left 
ear. Mark was boat shape. 
DESCRIPTION OF INJURIES  
(1).  On neck half in inch mark on right side of neck 5 cm below 
(2). 
 
lobe of right ear. 
5 cm mark on left side of neck 6 cm below of lobe of left 
ear. 
On dissection hyoid bone was looking intact. Four  vagina 
swabs were taken for semen analysis and DNA testing. 
On dissection hyoid bone was looking intact.  
Four vaginal swabs were taken for semen analysis and DNA 
testing.  All the other organs were healthy and intact. 
Specimen  sent  for  expert  opinion  was  for  chemical  examination, 
Histopathological examination  and DNA testing. Samples were of 
small  intestine,  large  intestines,  liver,  spleen,  kidney,  heart  and 
lungs  for  detection  of  poison.  Hyoid  bone  and  trachea  for 
Histopathological  examination  and  four  vaginal  swabs  for  semen 
analysis, blood group and DNA testing.   
OPINION 
 “After  completion  of  postmortem  examination,  I  was  of  the 
opinion  that  there  was  clear  cut  evidence  of  sexually  assault  and 
strangulation.  Final  opinion  would  be  given  after  reports  from 
Forensic Science Agency Lahore. In case the poison is not detected 
in  the  viscera  of  the  deceased,  the  cause  of  death  in  my  opinion 
was asphyxia by strangulation coupled with the sexual assault.” 
 
 
Dr.  Azhar  Farooq  (PW.7)  on  13.11.2014  medically  examined 
Khalid  Hameed  (appellant)  and  found  him  potent  to  perform  sexual 
act. 
6. 
After  the  conclusion  of  prosecution  evidence,  the  learned  trial 
court examined Khalid Hameed (appellant) under section 342, Cr.P.C. 
who  in  response to question  “why  this  case  against  you  and  why  the 
PWs deposed against you” made the following reply:- 
“A  false  case  has  been  registered  against  me.  I  was  made  a 
scapegoat  in  this  case.  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  alleged 
offence.  The  PWs  are  interested  and  related  to  the  complainant 
party.” 
 
Neither appellant opted to appear as witness under section 340 
(2)  of  Cr.P.C.  nor  produced  any  evidence  in  his  defence.  On  the 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
5 
conclusion  of  trial,  the  appellant  was  convicted  and  sentenced,  as 
mentioned above, hence, the instant appeal and murder reference. 
7. 
It  is  contended  on  behalf  of  appellant  that  the  case  in  hand  is 
arising out of crime report which was registered with an unexplained 
delay  of  two  days;  that  admittedly,  the  murder  occurrence  remained 
un-witnessed  and  case  of  prosecution 
is  comprising  upon 
circumstantial  evidence; 
that 
the  main  component  of  such 
incriminating circumstances is the evidence of last seen and recovery 
of dead body from the possession of appellant; that so far as evidence 
of  last  seen  which  was  furnished by  PW.11 Muhammad  Younas  and 
PW.13  Pervaiz  Gul  is  concerned,  it  from  face  of  it  is  dubious    in 
nature;  that  both  the  witnesses  of  last  seen  remained  silent  till  the 
registration  of  FIR,  which  casts  reasonable  doubt  about  the  truth  of 
their claim; that PW.13 Pervaiz Gul while narrating the episode of last 
seen neither took the name of deceased nor gave her physical or facial 
features;  that  the  medical  evidence  put  forth  during  trial  is  also  not 
supporting  the  case  of  prosecution  as  it  runs  contrary  to  the 
accusation; that even the DNA report also negates the charge of rape 
as  no  seminal  material  taken  from  the  vaginal  swabs  of  deceased 
matched with the profile of appellant; that so far as, recovery of dead 
body  from  the  possession  of  appellant  is  concerned,  no  independent 
witness in its support was produced by prosecution, thus such charge 
remained  unproved  and  that  though  reasonable  doubt  emerges  from 
the  plain  reading  of  prosecution  case,  however,  its  benefit  was  not 
extended  to  the  appellant.  With  these  submissions,  it  was  urged  that 
the conviction awarded to the appellant is not sustainable. 
8. 
On the other hand, learned Deputy Prosecutor General assisted 
by  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  strongly  controverted  the 
arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  submitted  that 
though  the  FIR  was  registered  with  the  delay  of  two  days,  however, 
the  information  regarding  the  missing  of  deceased  Zainab  was 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
6 
provided  to  police  on  the  very  day  of  occurrence;  that  the  appellant 
was  apprehended  along  with  the  dead  body  of  deceased  which  is 
sufficient  proof  of  his  guilt;  that  on  the  disclosure  and  pointation  of 
appellant,  blood  stains  and  clothes  of  Zainab  Bibi  deceased  were 
recovered from his residential room; that during DNA examination it 
proved  beyond  hilt  that  blood  stains  secured  from  the  room  of 
appellant  matched  with  the  DNA  profile  of  deceased;  that  through 
cogent  and  confidence  inspiring  evidence,  the  appellant  was  linked 
with  the  room  from  where  blood  stains  of  deceased  were  collected; 
that the  evidence  of  last  seen  brought on  record through Muhammad 
Younas  and  Pervaiz  Gul  itself  is  sufficient  to  connect  the  appellant 
with  the  commission  of  crime;  that  the  belongings  of  deceased 
recovered at the instance of appellant provide sufficient corroboration 
to the case of prosecution; that it emerges from the medical evidence 
furnished  by  Lady  Doctor  Narjis  Zaidi  that  deceased  was  raped  and 
strangulated  to  death  and  such  aspect  can  be  taken  as  sufficient 
supporting  circumstance  and  that  since  the  guilt  of  appellant  stands 
proved  from  the  prosecution  evidence,  hence,  the  judgment  of 
conviction passed by the trial court needs no interference in appeal.  
9. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
10.  The  case  of  prosecution,  so  to  speak,  primarily  hinges  upon 
circumstantial  evidence  which  is  in  the  nature  of  last  seen  evidence 
furnished by Muhammad Younas and Pervaiz Gul (PW.11 & PW.13), 
the  recovery  of  dead  body  from  the  constructive  possession  of 
appellant  witnessed  by  Munir  Khan  and  Dilshad  Khan  (PW.4  & 
PW.9),  belongings  of  deceased  recovered  on  the  pointation  of 
appellant and the medical evidence.  
11.  A  wade  through  the  record  reveals  that  the  case  in  hand  is 
arising out of an incident in which a little girl, namely, Zainab (aged 
about 6/7 years) was raped and strangulated to death after abduction.  
The  little  angel  left  the  house  of  her  father,  which  was  nothing  less 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
7 
than  a  castle  for  her  on  11.11.2014  at  about  3:00  p.m.  and  went 
missing subsequent thereto.  Though it is obsessively argued that  FIR 
(Exh.PJ/2)  suffers  from  an  unexplained  delay  of  two  days,  however, 
the  scrutiny  of record  reveals that  this  argument did  not  find support 
from record. In fact, initially the ill-fated father, namely, Munir Khan 
(PW.4) made personal efforts to locate his missing daughter but upon 
failure he approached Station House Officer Pir Wadai Rawalpindi on 
12.11.2014  through  application  (Exh.PH)  which  was  recorded  in 
Station  Diary  through  entry  No.33.  Even  otherwise,  in  cases  of 
abduction,  such  delay  is  apt  to  happen  due  to  indifferent  attitude  of 
police and over optimistic approach of the families.  
12. 
It  alludes  from  in-depth  review  of  the  record  that  the  main 
occurrence  of  rape  and  murder  remained  un-witnessed.  The 
prosecution case is mainly resting upon circumstantial evidence. One 
of  the  components  of  such  incriminating  circumstances  is  the 
evidence of last seen narrated by Muhammad Younas and Pervaiz Gul 
(PW.11 & PW.13). Before proceeding any further, it appears to be in 
fitness of things to see that what in law means evidence of last seen. 
Such  evidence  stands  for  an  event  in  which  the  slain  person  is  seen 
last time alive in the company of an accused. Though the evidence of 
last  seen  in  itself  is  generally  regarded  as  a  weak  type  in  nature  but 
there is no legal impediment to make it basis for awarding conviction, 
if  it  is  corroborated  from  some  other  source  of  unimpeachable 
character.  The  evidence  of  last  seen  qualifies  for  acceptance  if  it  fits 
into the criteria of proximity of time and distance, according to which 
the  time  and  distance  between  the  event  of  last  seen  and  death  of 
deceased must not be too long. The lesser is the duration and distance 
between  the  event  of  last  seen  and  homicidal  death  of  the  victim, 
stronger is such evidence. The logic behind evaluating the evidence of 
last  seen  on  the  touchstone  of  proximity  of  time  and  distance  lies 
behind the theory that afflux of longer duration and distance between 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
8 
the two events gives rise to the hypotheses that after having been seen 
in  the  company  of  accused,  the  deceased  might  have  parted  his  way 
and  joined  the  company  of  some  other.  In  support  of  our  such  view, 
we consider it appropriate to refer the view of Hon’ble Supreme Court 
of  Pakistan  in  case  reported  as  Rehmat  alias  Rhaman  alias  Waryam 
alias Badshah v. The State (PLD 1977 SC 515) which is as under:- 
“On  a  balance  of  the  decided  cases,  it  appears  that  the 
circumstances  of  the  deceased  having  been  last  seen  in  the 
company  of  the  accused  is  not  by  itself  sufficient  to  sustain  the 
charge of murder. Further evidence is required to link the accused 
with  the  murder  of  his  companion.  Such  as  incriminating 
recoveries  at  the  instance  of  accused,  a  strong  motive  or  the 
proximity  of  the  time  when  they  were  last  seen  together  and  the 
time when the deceased was killed. Only then will the accused be 
called upon to give an explanation of the demise of the person who 
was last seen alive in his company”. 
 
 
The afore-mentioned view was further affirmed by the Hon’ble 
Apex  Court 
in  a  recently  pronounced 
judgment  reported  as 
Muhammad  Abid  v.  The  State  and  another  (PLD  2018  Supreme 
Court 813). 
In  the  wake  of  above  discussion,  we  consider  it  appropriate  to 
embark  upon  the  testimony  of  Pervaiz  Gul  (PW.13),  who  in  no 
manner was related to the deceased and instead was a pupil of Khalid 
Hameed  (appellant).  It  is  noteworthy  that  even  the  deceased  has  not 
denied  his  afore-mentioned  rapport  with  Pervaiz  Gul  (PW.13)  and 
even  went  on  to  admit  it  while  responding  to  question  No.17  in  his 
examination under section  342, Cr.P.C.  For  reference  sake, the  reply 
is being reproduced which is as under:- 
“I am Ustad of Pervaiz Gul but he did not arrange Baithak for me.” 
 
It is further observed that according to the deposition of Pervaiz 
Gul (PW.13) he went to the place of abode of appellant on 12.11.2014 
at about 9:00 p.m. and saw him in the company of a six years old girl. 
Admittedly, he neither mentioned the name of Zainab (deceased) nor 
gave  her  physical  or  facial  features  in  his  examination-in-chief. 
However, Pervaiz Gul (PW.13)  identified photograph (P.13) to be of 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
9 
Zainab (deceased) when confronted with it during cross-examination. 
Similarly,  Muhammad  Younas  (PW.11)  who  was  having  no  blood 
relation  with  the  deceased  but  hailed  from  the  same  vicinity  also 
appeared  in  the  dock  with  the  claim  of  having  witnessed  Zainab 
(deceased)  in  the  company  of  appellant  on  11.11.2014  at  about  5:00 
p.m. and stood firm with this stance. After subjecting the testimony of 
both the witnesses of last seen to meticulous examination, we have not 
come  across  any  circumstance  from  which  it  may  even  remotely 
insinuate  that  the  two  witnesses  had  any  axe  to  grind  with  the 
appellant through  falsely  implicating  him  in the  case.  In  reference to 
the principle of proximity of time and distance, it is noticed that on the 
one hand, Zainab (deceased) was seen by Pervaiz Gul (PW.13) in the 
room  of  Khalid  Hameed  (convict)  at  about  9:00  p.m.  of  12.11.2014 
and  on  other  hand  it  is  observed  that  her  corpse  arrived  in  Holy 
Family Hospital Rawalpindi on 13.11.2014 at about 3:00 a.m. In such 
state  of  affair,  we  have  all  the  good  reasons  to  believe  that  shortly 
after  having  been  seen  in  the  company  of  appellant,  Zainab  took  her 
last breath. It is of immense importance to mention here that appellant 
was  having  his  place  of  abode  within  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of 
Police Station Peer Wadai. The appellant was spotted by the PWs on 
the night falling amidst 12 & 13 November, 2014 in a locality situated 
in  the  area  of  same  police  station.    From  above  referred  facts,  it  can 
safely and legitimately be concluded that  the evidence of last seen is 
in  consonance  with  the  requirements  of  proximity  of  time  and 
distance.  
13.  Though  we have  clarity  of  mind  in holding that  the  deposition 
of Muhammad Younas and Pervaiz Gul (PW.11 & PW.13) rings true, 
however,  as  an  abundant  caution  have  peeped  through  the  record  to 
look  for  further  corroboration.  It is  noticed that  the  corpse of  Zainab 
was  recovered  in  a  manner  which  leans  every  prudent  legal  mind 
towards  the  guilt  of  appellant.  It  is  evincible  from  file  that  Khalid 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
10 
Hameed (appellant) was nabbed by Munir Khan and Dilshad (PW.4 & 
PW.9) in the thick of an event wherein he was carrying the corpse of 
Zainab  placed  in  a  sack  upon  his  shoulders.  Having  critically  gone 
through  the  evidence  of  both  witnesses,  we  have  not  been  able  to 
come  across  even  an  iota  of  suspicion  to  shatter  afore-mentioned 
claim  of  witnesses.  It  is  also  evident  from  the  police  proceedings 
mentioned  at  the  bottom  of  crime  report  (Exh.PJ/2)  as  well  as  from 
the  statement  of  Investigating  Officer  Muhammad  Mumtaz  SI 
(PW.15) that upon arrival of police at crime scene, the appellant was 
found  detained  by  Munir  Khan  (PW.4)  and  two  others  along  with 
dead body of Zainab in a sack. Since the recovery of dead body from 
the  possession  of  appellant  is  forming  part  of  a  transaction  in  which 
earlier  the  deceased  was  abducted,  raped  and  then  strangulated  to 
death,  hence  is  a  relevant  fact  as  res  gestae.  The  expression  “res 
gestae”  in  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  Tenth  Edition  is  defined  in 
following manner:- 
“The  res  gestae  embraces  not    only  the  actual  facts  of  the 
transaction  and  the  circumstances  surrounding  it,  but  the  matters 
immediately  antecedent  to  having  a  direct  casual  connection  with 
it,  as  well  as  acts  immediately  following  it  and  so  closely 
connected with it as to form in reality a part of the occurrence.”   
 
 
The concept of res gestae also stands embodies in Article 19 of 
Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  which 
for 
reference  sake 
is 
reproduced hereunder:- 
“Relevancy  of  facts  forming  part  of  same  transaction.  Facts 
which though not in issue are so connected with a fact in issue as 
to  form  part  of  the  same  transaction,  are  relevant,  whether  they 
occurred  at  the  same  time  and  place  or  at  different  time  and 
places.” 
 
 
In  order  to  treat  a  circumstance  admissible  and  relevant  as  res 
gestae,  the  prosecution  is  to  demonstrate  through  some  legally 
admissible  evidence  that  it  was  connected  with  the  fact  in  issue  so 
closely as to form part of one transaction.  Likewise, the fact in order 
to  attain  admissibility  as  res  gestae  should  not  have  occurred  with 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
11 
afflux of such time so as to give rise to the hypotheses of being part of 
a  different  transaction  rather  it  must  be  contemporaneous  with  the 
incident  in  issue.  The  term  “res  gestae”  and  Article  19  of  Qanun-e-
Shahadat  Order,  1984  came  under  discussion  before  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in case reported as Shabbir Hussain alias 
Sukku  v.  The  State  (PLD  2003  Supreme  Court  368)  and  met  with 
following observations:- 
“In  order  to  attract  the  application  of  Article  19  of  Qanun-e-
Shahdat  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  facts,  which  are 
connected with the fact in issue as “part of the transaction” under 
investigation are admissible as relevant facts. In order to apply the 
said  rule  the  point  for  decision  will  always  be  whether  the  said 
facts do form part or are too remote to be considered really part of 
the transaction before the court.” 
 
 
On the benchmark of above discussion, we have clarity of mind 
that the circumstance of appellant having been found in possession of 
Zainb’s  corpse  is  closely  connected  with  the  charge  of  murder  and 
rape,  hence  can  legitimately  be  considered  as  an  admissible 
incriminating circumstance, relevant to fact in issue.  
14.  This  is  also  an  integral  part  of  the  prosecution  case  that 
immediately  after  his  arrest  Khalid  Hameed  (appellant)  in  pursuance 
of  a  disclosure,  led  the  police  to  his  residential  room  and  got 
recovered  shoes  (P.3/1-2)  and  shawl/Chadar  (P.4)  belonging  to 
deceased.  From  the  floor  of  same  room,  blood  through  cotton  was 
secured  by  Muhammad  Mumtaz  SI  (PW.15)  vide  recovery  memo 
(Exh.PW),  which  as  per  DNA  report  (Exh.PZ)  was  proved  to  be  of 
deceased  Zainab.  This  circumstance  goes  long  way  in  proving  that 
Zainab met her homicidal death in the room where none other than the 
appellant was having his abode. Though it is vociferously argued that 
since  the  belongings  of  deceased  and  blood  from  the  floor  were 
secured without associating any resident of the vicinity, thus being in 
violation  of  section  103,  Cr.P.C.  no  explicit  reliance  can  be  placed 
thereupon.  Since  such  argument  runs  contrary  to  the  mandate  of 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
12 
Article 40 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, hence, holds no ground. 
It will not be out of context to mention here that  Articles 38 & 39 of 
Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  make  inadmissible  the  confession 
made before a police officer or in his custody. However, Article 40 of 
the Order ibid, is an exception to such rule and it is postulated therein 
that  if  a  fact  is  discovered  in  consequence  of  information  received 
from  an  accused,  may  he  be  in  police  custody,  it  can  be  brought  on 
record.  The  word  “discovery”  is  to  be  construed  in  literal  and 
restricted sense and means the lifting of veil from a fact relevant to the 
issue  in  question  which  must  not  be  in  conscious  knowledge  of  any 
other person. It is, in these circumstances, that the associating of two 
residents of the locality as required under section 103, Cr.P.C., can be 
dispensed  with.  Recoveries  effected  and  facts  discovered  under 
Article  40  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  gain  credence  if 
witnessed  by  any  two  persons, may  they  be  even  from  police.  In  the 
aftermath of above discussion recoveries in this case are found to have 
been effected on the disclosure and pointing out of the appellant from 
a  place  in  his  possession,  hence  are  credible  in  nature.  In  support  of 
our view, we are guided by chain of authorities from the jurisdiction 
of Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan reported as Hidayatullah and 7 
others v. The State and others (1994 P Cr.LJ 20), Gul Muhammad v. 
The  State    (2011  SCMR  670),  Mst.  Askar  Jan  and  others  v. 
Muhammad  Daud  and  others  (2010  SCMR  1604),  Sh.  Muhammad 
Amjad  v.  The  State  (2004  SCJ  33).  The  observation  of  Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  expressed  in  the  case  of  Sh.  Muhammad 
Amjad (supra) for reference sake is produced as under:-  
“Further, it is noted that as per Article 40, corresponding to section 
27 of the Evidence Act, when any fact is revealed in consequence 
of  information  received  from  any  accused  in  custody  of  a  police 
officer, such information whether it amounts to a confession or not 
as it relates directly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. 
The  information  supplied  by  the  appellant,  under  Article  40  ibid, 
relating to incriminatory articles is admissible.” 
 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
13 
15.  Since the belongings of deceased and her blood was  recovered 
from a room, hence its nexus is essentially required to be established 
with 
the  appellant.  For 
this  purpose,  prosecution  produced 
Mst.Hanifan Bibi (PW.12), the owner of house which comprises upon 
the  room  in  question.  In  the  absence  of  any  enmity  with  appellant, 
Hanifan Bibi (PW.12) deposed to have rented out the room/Baithak to 
Khalid  Hameed  (appellant)  on  monthly  rent  of  Rs.2700/-.  It  is 
intriguing  to  mention  here  that  during  his  examination  under  section 
342, Cr.P.C., appellant was asked about the obtaining of said room on 
rent from Hanifan Bibi to which he responded in following words:- 
“I was residing in a rented Baithak of Mst. Hanifan Bibi but I had 
not obtained it through Pervaiz Gul PW.” 
 
 
It can safely be derived from above that on one end this is the 
stance  of  prosecution  that  the  room  in  question  was  under  the 
exclusive  possession of  Khalid  Hameed  (appellant) and on  other  end 
there is an admission on his behalf in this regard. Such circumstance, 
besides  providing  strong  corroboration  to  the  evidence  of  last  seen, 
goes  long  way  in  establishing  that  Zainab  Bibi  met  her  death  in  the 
room which was under occupation of appellant.  
16.  We  have  also  attended  to  the  medical  evidence  brought  on 
record  through  Dr.  Narjis  Zaidi  (PW.3)  who  conducted  autopsy  of 
Zainab Bibi (deceased) on 13.11.2014 at 4:00 a.m. Besides explaining 
the  cause  of  death  as  asphyxia  by  strangulation,  she  described  the 
duration  between  the  death  and  postmortem  as  approximately  two  to 
three  hours.  The  most  painful  aspect  which  surfaced  from  the 
deposition  of  Dr.  Narjis  Zaidi  (PW.3)  is  to  the  effect  that  before 
strangulating Zainab to death, she was subjected to rape, an act bereft 
of any morality and at the ebb of extreme inhumanity. Though during 
DNA examination, seminal material taken from the vaginal swabs and 
clothes  of  Zainab  Bibi  did  not  match  with  the  appellant,  however  it 
cannot  be  resolved  adversely  to  the  case  of  prosecution.  While 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
14 
holding so, we have in our minds that the appellant must have resorted 
to safe sex  by adopting some precautionary  measures  for not leaving 
behind  stains  of  his  semen.  Even  otherwise,  since  the  cases  of 
sexually  ravishing  little  kids  have  increased  to  many  folds  in  the 
recent  past,  hence,  the  courts  are  required  to  have  resort  to  more 
pragmatic,  dynamic  and  realistic  approach  while  catering  with  them 
and  must  not  build  the  superstructure  of  acquittal  on  artificially 
stretched concept of doubt.    
17.  The  epitome  of  what  has  been  discussed  above  is  that 
prosecution successfully proved its case on the basis of circumstantial 
evidence comprising upon last seen, apprehending of appellant along 
with  dead  body  of  deceased,  nexus  between  the  appellant  and  the 
room  where  Zainab  met  her  death  as  well  as  medical  evidence. 
Having arrived at such conclusion, we also took pain to peep through 
the  defence  put  forth  by  the  appellant  in  order  to  see  that  whether 
there  is  some  circumstance,  the  legitimate  benefit  of  which  can  be 
extended  to  him  in  any  manner  but  have  come  across  none.    After 
pondering  in  detail  upon  the  peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 
case,  we  have  arrived  at  conclusion  that  the  case  of  appellant  even 
does  not  call  for  awarding  of  alternate  sentence  of  imprisonment  of 
life under section 302 (b) PPC or some lesser sentence under sections 
364-A  or  376,  PPC.  In  drawing  such  conclusion,  besides  not  having 
any ambivalence regarding the guilt of appellant, we have also taken 
note of the miseries of Zainab extractable from unfortunate saga. The 
little  angel  after  getting  some  money  from  her  father  proceeded  to  a 
nearby  shop  with  the  joyous  feelings  of  purchasing  some  sweets 
which ended when the little flower was plucked and mutilated by the 
appellant through encroaching upon her modesty by savage act of rape 
and murder. Unfortunately, we are living in an era wherein the sexual 
lust  of  persons  like  Khalid  Hameed  (convict)  has  gone  to  an  extent 
which  has  made  even  small  and  young  girls  vulnerable  to  such 
Criminal Appeal No.328 of 2015 & 
Murder Reference No.26 of 2015 
 
 
15 
assaults. Though the courts and judges are not the reformists but still 
heavy  duty  is  cast  upon  them  to  award  exemplary  punishments  in 
proved  cases  of  sexual  violence  to  make  it  a  bad  bargain  for  the 
likeminded  philanderers.  In  the  given  circumstances,  we  are  swayed 
to  uphold  the  conviction  of  death  awarded  to  Khalid  Hameed 
(appellant). Consequently, death sentence awarded to Khalid Hameed 
(appellant)  on  all  the  charges  is  maintained  and  Criminal  Appeal 
No.328  of  2015  filed  by  him  stands  dismissed.  Resultantly,  Murder 
Reference  No.26  of  2015  is  answered  in  the  AFFIRMATIVE  and 
death 
sentence  awarded 
to  Khalid  Hameed 
(convict) 
IS 
CONFIRMED. 
 
 
  
                              Judge                       
(Raja Shahid Mehmood Abbasi)          (Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
  
  Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
 
Judge 
Najum* 
 
