JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE.  
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
C.R.No.3644 of 2011.  
 
Muhammad Sarwar  
 Vs.          
Zile Huma and another  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
06.09.2018, 10.09.2018 and 
12.09.2018. 
Khawaja  Muhammad 
M/s 
Ashraf  Jan  and  Khawaja  Ahsan 
Ashraf, Advocates.  
M/s  Syed  Muhammad  Shah  and 
Qamar 
Haideri, 
Advocates.  
Abbas 
DATES OF HEARING:  
PETITIONER BY:   
RESPONDENTS BY:   
 
 
 
AMIN-UD-DIN  KHAN,  J.      Through  this  civil  revision 
the  petitioner  has  challenged  the  judgment  &  decree  dated 
14.09.2011  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge, 
Gujranwala  whereby  the  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner  was 
dismissed  and  the  judgment/order  dated  05.03.2011  passed  by 
the  learned  Civil  Judge/Executing  Court,  Gujranwala  whereby 
the objections filed by the petitioner were dismissed.  
2. 
 
 I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  at 
full length consisting upon three dates of hearing but the matter 
in issue as well as facts for determination of point in issue is not 
very lengthy. Admittedly an execution petition, subject matter of 
C.R.No.3644 of 2011.  
2 
instant  revision  petition  wherein  objections  were  filed  and 
concurrently  dismissed  by  two  courts  below,  is  a  decree  passed 
by the learned Rent Controller in an ejectment matter.  
3. 
 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  take  legal  point  so  that 
the whole factual position could be discussed in the light of law 
applicable.  I  take  light  from  the  judgment  of  august  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  reported  as  “MUHAMMAD  YASIN  versus 
Sheikh  GHULAM  MURTAZA  and  another”  (PLD  1988 
Supreme  Court  163).  I  quote  a  paragraph  from  the  said 
judgment, which is as follows:- 
“A  Controller has  no  power or  control  over  a  decree of  a 
Civil  Court  except  for  this  deeming  provision.  Where  a 
power to  execute an order  in the  manner of  a decree  of  a 
Civil  Court  is  conferred  then  on  the  ordinary  rule  of 
interpretation  all  the  powers  necessary  or  enjoyed  by  the 
executing  authority 
for  effectively  and  completely 
executing  a  decree  of  a  Civil  Court  shall  be  available  to 
the  Controller.  The  deeming  cannot  stop  short  or  boggle. 
To hold that the Controller will have the power to execute 
the  order  as  a  decree  of  the  Civil  Court  but  will  have  no 
power  to  decide  objections  to  the  order,  and  to  its 
executability, will amount to in fact denying the Controller 
the very power to execute the decree itself. Such cannot be 
the result or the effect of the deeming clause. It has to be 
given  full  effect  and  the  logical  consequence  of  the 
empowering provision must follow.” 
 
Similarly  light  can  also  be  taken  from  the  other  judgment  of 
august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  reported  as  “MUHAMMAD 
TARIQ  KHAN  versus  Khawaja  MUHAMMAD  JAWAD  ASAMI 
and others” (2007 S C M R 818). The relevant paragraph is as 
under”- 
“It is a settled law that decree is executable in the light of 
the terms  and  conditions  mentioned  in  the  decree  and  the 
C.R.No.3644 of 2011.  
3 
executing Court has to confine its deliberations within the 
purview  of  the  decree  and  not  beyond  that.  It  is  the  duty 
and  obligation  of  the  executing  Court  to  dispose  of  the 
objections  filed  by  the  objectors  in  the  light  of  terms  and 
conditions of a decree and the learned Rent Controller has 
no  authority  to  deviate  from  a  real  controversy  between 
the  parties  keeping  in  view  the  decree  secured  by  the 
petitioner in the case in hand. The learned Rent Controller 
has  only  authority  to  determine  the  questions  relating  to 
execution,  discharge  and  satisfaction  of  the  decree  under 
section  17  of 
the  Punjab  Urban  Rent  Restriction 
Ordinance, 1959. See S. Anwar Ali Shah’s case PLD 1978 
Lah.  1078.  It  is  also  settled  law  that  executing  Court 
cannot  go  behind  the  decree.  See  Mst.  Nasim  Akhtar’s 
case  1994  S  C  M  R  22.  It  is  also  a  settled  law  that 
preamble is key to understand the statute. See Syed Ikhlaq 
Hussain’s  case  PLD  1969  Lah.  563.  It  is  pertinent  to 
mention here that Rent Restriction ordinance is enacted by 
the Legislature in its wisdom to regulate the relationship of 
landlord and tenant to provide them remedy for resolution 
of any dispute arising between them to approach the Rent 
Controller  who  is  also  bound  to  pass  orders  within  the 
four-corners  of  the  provisions  of  the  said  Ordinance.  We 
have  examined  all  the  provisions  of  Rent  Restriction 
Ordinance  with  the  assistance  of  the  learned  counsel  for 
the  parties.  We  do  not  find  any  provision  on  the  basis  of 
which  the  Rent  Controller  has  possessed  any  power  to 
award damages to the objectors. It is also a settled law that 
executing  Court  has  to  decide  the  objections  keeping  in 
view the pleading of the parties in the rent matter and the 
decree  passed  by  the  Rent  Controller.  It  is  no  doubt  that 
the Rent Controller has power to restore the possession to 
the  respondents  which  was  taken  from  them  under  the 
orders  of  the  Rent  Controller  but  the  Rent  Controller  has 
no  power,  as  mentioned  above,  to  grant  damages  to  the 
respondents.  It  is  a  settled  law  that  our  Constitution  is 
based on trichotomy and Court has only power to interpret 
the  law  as  law  laid  down  by  this  court  in  various 
pronouncements.  See  Zia-ur-Rehman  Khan’s  case  PLD 
1973 SC 49. The learned Rent Controller has exceeded its 
jurisdiction  while 
the 
respondents in its order, dated 30-10-1997 while awarding 
damages and this fact was overlooked by the learned High 
Court  in  the  impugned  judgment.  It  is  a  settled  law  that 
Presiding Officer has to decide the objection petition after 
judicial application of mind keeping in view the provisions 
of  Rent  Restriction  Ordinance.  The 
learned  Rent 
Controller, as mentioned above, has decided the objection 
petition without judicial application of mind, therefore, his 
the  possession 
restoring 
to 
C.R.No.3644 of 2011.  
4 
order is without lawful authority to the extent of granting 
damages  to  the  objectors.  See  Gournga  Mohan  Sikdar’s 
case PLD 1970 SC 158 and Mollah Ejahar Ali’s case PLD 
1970  SC  173.  The  Rent  Controller  being  a  persona 
designata  has  no  lawful  authority  to  decide  the  objection 
petition  considering  himself  to  be  a  Civil  Court  and  was 
regulated  by  the  provisions  of  C.P.C.  The  principles  of 
C.P.C.  are  applicable,  therefore,  having  a  jurisdiction  to 
decide  the  matter  in  question  under  a  special  law, 
therefore,  Rent  Controller  is  bound  to  decide  the  matter 
within  the  parameters  prescribed  by  the  Legislature  in  its 
wisdom keeping in view provisions of special law and not 
beyond  that. The  learned  High  Court has also overlooked 
this aspect of the case to the extent of grant of damages to 
the  respondents by  the  Rent  Controller. It  is  a  settled law 
that when the basic order is without lawful authority then 
the  superstructure  shall  have  to  fall  on  the  ground 
automatically  as  law  laid  down  by  this  Court  in  Yousaf 
Ali’s case PLD 1958 SC 104.” 
 
Further relevant judgment of this Court on the point is  “ALLAH 
DITTA  versus  MUHAMMAD  UMAR  and  others”  (2009  YLR 
1811).  
4. 
 
The main weapon of attack of petitioner is that Mst. 
Nusrat  Bibi  filed  a  suit  against  the  petitioner  and  others  on 
24.12.1996 on the basis of an agreement to sell dated 08.11.1994 
by  their  mother  Mst.  Sughran  Bibi  and  the  suit  was  decreed  on 
the  basis  of  a  consent  statement  of  counsel  for  the  defendants 
whereby the petitioner was one of the defendants in the suit and 
ultimately  suit  was  decreed  vide  judgment  &  decree  dated 
08.01.1997 on the basis of compromise. Mst. Nusrat Bibi got the 
decree implemented in Register PT-I of the Excise and Taxation 
Department. On the basis of a power of attorney by Mst. Nusrat 
Bibi in favour of Syed Aftab Zaidi the property was sold through 
sale  deed  No.10779  attested  on  31.10.2006  in  favour  of  Mst. 
C.R.No.3644 of 2011.  
5 
Hameeda  Bibi  and  Zil-e-Huma  the  decree  holder.  Muhammad 
Ikram was a tenant on the property in dispute against whom Zil-
e-Huma  filed  an  application  for  eviction  on  07.02.2007. 
Muhammad  Sarwar  the  present  petitioner/objector  filed  an 
application  under  Order  I  Rule  10  of  the  CPC,  which  was 
dismissed  by  the  learned  Rent  Controller  on  03.04.2008  and 
ejectment  order  was  passed  on  07.04.2008.  Muhammad  Sarwar 
opted  to  file  an  appeal  before  the  learned  first  appellate  court, 
which  was  dismissed  on  19.08.2008.  He  filed  second  appeal 
bearing  SAO  No.102/2008,  which  too,  was  dismissed  vide 
judgment passed by this Court on 14.10.2008. Muhammad Ikram 
also  filed  first  appeal  and  after  its  dismissal  filed  second  appeal 
bearing  SAO  No.85/2008,  which  was  accepted  and  case  was 
remanded vide judgment dated 20.11.2008. It is stated that after 
remand the execution petition was accepted on 18.05.2009. The 
appeal  there  against  filed  by  Muhammad  Ikram  tenant  was 
dismissed  and  in  SAO  four  months’  time  was  granted  by  this 
Court.  On  18.05.2009  decree  holder  filed  an  execution  petition. 
The  objections  were  filed  on  18.07.2009.  The  reply  was  filed. 
Learned  executing  Court  dismissed  the  objection  petition  on 
05.03.2011.  Before  that  when  no  injunctive  order  could  be 
procured  by  the  petitioner,  warrant  of  possession  was  executed 
on  23.07.2009.  The  argument  of  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner/objector that the court while executing the decree in a 
rent  matter  has  also  full  powers  as  a  civil  court,  therefore,  his 
C.R.No.3644 of 2011.  
6 
objection  that  all  the  objections  raised  by  the  petitioner  be 
decided after full fledge trial as a separate civil suit is barred, is 
not a legal and valid argument. I am clear in my mind that if this 
argument is accepted and learned Rent Controller is bound down 
to determine the objections after full trial as a civil court, it will 
be  against  the  mandate  of  law  relating  to  the  rented  premises. 
When  a  Rent  Controller  has  limited  jurisdiction  with  regard  to 
determine  the  matter  relating  to  rented  premises  in  accordance 
with  law  applicable,  asking  him  to  determine  all  the  questions 
involved and objections raised with regard to execution of order 
as a full fledge civil court will be against the mandate of law as 
well  as  the  law  declared  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  in 
MUHAMMAD TARIQ KHAN’s case referred supra.  
5. 
 
Even otherwise, the judgment on the basis of which 
the property through a registered sale deed was transferred in the 
name of petitioner of eviction petition was challenged through an 
application  u/s  12  (2)  of  the  CPC.  Admittedly  said  application 
was  withdrawn  on  07.03.2006  and  even  petition  under  Order  I 
Rule  10  of  the  CPC was  filed  by  the  petitioner, which  too, was 
dismissed and even he filed first appeal as well as second appeal 
also as narrated by the learned counsel for the petitioner himself. 
In  these  circumstances,  determination  of  objections  by  the 
executing  Court  and  dismissal  whereof  is  in  accordance  with 
law.  No  case  for  interference  by  this  Court  while  exercising 
jurisdiction u/s 115 of the CPC is made out. Therefore, I have no 
C.R.No.3644 of 2011.  
7 
reason  to  disagree  with  the  concurrent  findings  of  two  courts 
below and as such the instant civil revision having no substance 
stands dismissed with costs throughout.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             (Amin-ud-Din Khan) 
 
                Judge 
 
Qurban* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for Reporting  
 
 
         Judge  
