 
Stereo.HCJDA-38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Civil Revision No.3047 of 2014 
Muhammad Nawaz……Vs………Muhammad Yousaf 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
Date of Hearing 
PETITIONER BY 
10.12.2018 
 
Ch. Amjad Hussain, Advocate. 
 
RESPONDENT BY  Hafiz Khalil Ahmad, Advocate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rasaal Hasan Syed, J.  
    This 
judgment 
deals  with  the  disposal  of  civil  revision  that 
impugns 
the 
judgments  and  decrees  dated 
02.5.2012 and 22.5.2014 of the learned Civil Judge 
and learned Addl. District Judge Gujrat respectively 
whereby petitioner’s suit for pre-emption as  well as 
appeal were dismissed. 
2. 
Land  measuring  08  kanals  16  marlas,  as 
described in para 1 of the plaint, was purchased by 
the  respondent  from  Rashida  Begum  daughter  of 
Inayatullah  through  mutation  No.  1823  dated 
08.6.2004. To pre-empt the sale, the petitioner filed 
a  suit  for  possession  through  pre-emption  claiming 
therein that the land was sold for Rs.400,000/- the 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount  which  was  allegedly  paid  and  was  also 
allegedly  the  market-value  and  that  the  amount  of 
Rs.600,000  was  notionally  fixed.  It  was  further 
alleged  that  the  factum  of  sale  was  allegedly 
communicated  at  5:00  p.m.  on  19.9.2004  by 
Muhammad Rafique son of Muhammad Shafi at the 
dera  of  petitioners  in  the  presence of  Ayyaz Ahmad 
son  of  Sultan  Ali  and  Tariq  Mehmood  son  of 
Muhammad  Hussain, 
in  whose  presence,  the 
petitioner  allegedly  made  Tabl-e-Muwathbibt,  which 
was followed by Talb-e-Ishhad vide registered notice 
dated  20.9.2004.  The  petitioner  claimed  superior 
right  of  pre-emption  on  the  plea  of  being  Shafi 
Sharik and Shafi Jar. 
3. 
The  respondent  resisted  the  suit,  inter  alia 
claiming  that  it  was  not  within  time,  the  petitioner 
had  not  made  the  mandatory  Talbs  as  required  by 
law,  he  had  no  superior  right  of  preemption  and 
that the petitioner was well-aware of the transaction 
from  the  very  beginning  and  that  a  story  was 
invented  about  the  information  which  was  nothing 
but an afterthought and had no nexus with reality. 
4. 
Issues  were 
framed  and  evidence  was 
recorded;  the  learned  Civil  Judge  on  consideration 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of evidence as also the respective submissions from 
both  sides,  concluded  that  the  petitioner  could  not 
prove the performance of requisite Talb-e-Muwathibt 
and  Talb-e-Ishhad  in  accordance  with  law  and  as 
such had no right to seek relief in the suit; however, 
the  issue  of  superior  right  was  decided  in  positive. 
In  so  far  as  the  price  at  which  the  sale  took  place, 
the issue was decided against the petitioner, and it 
was held that the petitioner could not establish that 
the  price  of  Rs.600,000/-  was  fictitiously  fixed  or 
that  it  was  not  paid.  In  result  of  the  findings,  the 
suit  of  petitioner  was  dismissed  vide  judgment  and 
decree dated 02.5.2012. 
5. 
Appeal 
filed  by  the  petitioner  ended 
in 
dismissal  vide  judgment  dated  22.5.2014  of  the 
learned  Addl.  District  Judge  Gujrat  which  is  now 
assailed in this revision petition. 
6. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contended 
that the petitioner had produced sufficient evidence 
to  prove  the  performance  of  Talbs  but  the  learned 
courts below dismissed the suit as also appeal only 
on  the  basis  of  minor  discrepancies 
in  the 
statement  of  PWs.  Elaborating  his  submissions, 
learned  counsel  stated  that  the  necessary  pre-
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requisites i.e. date, time and place of performance of 
Talbs  were  duly  incorporated  in  the  plaint  which 
were  also  proved  by  the  evidence  on  record  but 
notwithstanding  the  same,  the  relief  was  declined 
while  taking  note  of  inconsequential  contradictions 
in evidence. 
7. 
In response to the arguments, learned counsel 
for  the  respondent  submitted  that  the  two  courts 
below  had  minutely  examined  the  evidence,  pin-
pointed  the  contradictions,  recorded  valid  reasons 
to disbelieve the petitioner’s stance of alleged Talbs; 
and 
that 
in 
the 
revisional 
jurisdiction, 
re-
appreciation  of  the  evidence  or  formation  of  a 
different  view  of  the  same  evidence  on  re-appraisal 
thereof,  has  never  been  approved;  and  further  that 
the petitioner  cannot expect  the re-consideration  of 
the  entire  evidence  to  revisit  the  findings  recorded 
by courts below. 
8.  Having  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  parties 
at 
length  and  on 
in-depth  consideration  of 
judgments  of  the  courts  below  in  the  light  of 
evidence  on  record  respectively  produced  by  the 
parties,  it  is  observed  that  the  two  courts  below 
examined  the  entire  evidence  of  the  parties  in 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proper  perspective  and  recorded  reasons  with 
sufficient detail in support of their findings. 
9. 
The  mutation  of  sale  undeniably  was  attested 
on  08.6.2004  while 
the  petitioners  claimed 
knowledge  thereof  through  the  alleged  informer  on 
19.9.2004.  It  was  his  plea  that  at  5:00  p.m.  on 
19.9.2004  Muhammad  Rafique  came  to  his  dera 
and, in the presence of Ayyaz Ahmad son of Sultan 
Ali  as  well  as  Tariq  Mehmood  son  of  Muhammad 
Hussain  who  were  allegedly  present,  he  informed 
that  the  suit  property  had  been  disposed  of;  when 
the 
petitioner 
spontaneously  made 
Talb-e-
Muwathibt  whereafter  the  notice  of  Talb-e-Ishhad 
was allegedly sent.  
10.  Muhammad  Rafique  the  alleged 
informer 
appeared in the witness box as PW3 to support the 
petitioner’s plea but the important and notable part 
of  his  statement  is  in  cross-examination  where  on 
being  asked  as  to when  and from whom he  got the 
knowledge of sale, he responded that at 10:30 a.m. 
on  19.9.2004  he  had  gone  to  buy  some  articles 
when  2-3  persons  of  town  were  talking  with  each 
other and from which he gathered the knowledge of 
sale.  On  being  further  asked  about  the  names  of 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those  persons  he  deposed  that  he  did  not  recall  as 
to  who  were  those  persons  that  were  allegedly 
talking about the sale. Further deposed that he did 
not  come  to  know  of  the  date  of  mutation  at  the 
said alleged occasion nor he could recollect the time 
when  he  reached  the  dera  of  petitioner;  further 
added  that  at  4.30  p.m  the  plaintiff  came  at  the 
dera  and he saw him. In  his  cross-examination, he 
admitted that he did not know as to when mutation 
took place and that he came to know of the date of 
mutation on 20.9.2004 when he allegedly visited to 
the  office  of  lawyer  for  drafting  of  notice.  In  cross-
examination  he  also  admitted  having  not  seen  any 
copy  of  mutation  with  the  petitioner  nor  was  he 
aware  about  the  date  of  mutation.  He  further 
admitted that he did not recollect about the person 
who told him about the date of mutation nor did he 
ever see any paper with lawyer. 
11.  Petitioner  himself  appeared  as  PW2  and  in 
cross-examination  stated  that  Muhammad  Rafique 
came to his dera at 5:10 p.m. and informed that he 
had  gone  to  a  shop  where  some  persons  were 
talking  and  where  he  overheard  of  sale.  On  being 
asked  he  admitted  that  he  could  not  disclose  the 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
names  of  those  persons  nor  he  could  disclose  the 
name  of 
the  shop.  Further  admitted 
that 
Muhammad Rafique did not disclose as to when he 
came to know about the sale nor he disclosed about 
the date of mutation. Interestingly he admitted that 
he  did  not  have  any  copy  of  mutation  or  any  other 
paper  when  he  went  to  the  office  of  the  lawyer  for 
drafting  notice  and  he  only  told  his  lawyer  that  he 
had  verified  from  patwari  about  the  sale  but  the 
perusal  of  the notice  allegedly sent reveals  that  full 
particulars of sale were given which raises sufficient 
doubts  as  to  the  story  which  was  narrated.  The 
courts  below  also  noted  the  fact  that  Muhammad 
Rafique PW3, the alleged informer, did not know the 
names  of  the  persons  who  were  talking  about  the 
sale  at  the  shop  nor  he  could  disclose  the  date  of 
the mutation or the number of the mutation. 
12. 
It  is  a  settled  rule  that  non-performance  of 
Talb-e-Muwathibt  results  in  extinction  of  right  to 
enforce  pre-emption.  The  petitioners  were  required 
to prove that the alleged informer, who was claimed 
to  have  conveyed  about  the  sale,  did  possess  such 
information;  there  was  definite  basis  to  believe  his 
statement  and  his  statement  was  credible.  The 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
informer in this case did not claim to be present at 
the  time  of  mutation;  he  was  unaware  about  the 
names  of  the  persons 
from  whose  overheard 
conversation  he  alleged  the  knowledge  of  sale;  he 
admits  having  no  knowledge  of  particulars  of  sale; 
he was not a witness to the transaction; he did not 
claim  to  have  gone  to  the  patwari  or  at  site  to  find 
out the change of transfer of possession; and it was 
not claimed that the possession had not taken place 
at the time of sale.  
13. 
In  these  circumstances,  the  alleged  informer 
could  not  satisfy  that  his  statement  should  be 
believed. It was also necessary for the petitioner, in 
the circumstances, to produce those two persons as 
witnesses in support of the statement of PW3 and in 
the  absence  of  such  evidence  the  learned  courts 
below  rightly  declined  to  accept  the  statement  of 
informer  or  the  plea  of  alleged  information  on  the 
given date.  
14. 
It was also noteworthy that the sale was made 
in  June  2004,  the  mutation  was  attested  on 
08.6.2004  and  the  informer  claimed  knowledge  of 
sale on 19.9.2004 i.e. about three months later and 
during  this  time  nobody  noticed  the  change  of 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possession at  site  nor ever  bothered  to  learn where 
the previous owner had gone. Be that as it may, the 
most  material  evidence  has  been  withheld.  PW3 
could  not  establish  having  actually  received 
information of sale on the given date, therefore, the 
entire story of the petitioner collapsed.  
15.  Additionally, 
there  were  other  material 
contradictions in the statement of PWs, for instance 
PW3  i.e.  the  petitioner  claimed  that  PW3  came  to 
the dera at 5.10 p.m. and he was sitting at the dera 
when 
the  witness  came.  To 
the  contrary 
Muhammad Rafique stated that he came to the dera 
at  4.30  p.m  when  Tariq  and  Ayyaz  Ahmad  were 
present  and  that  in  his  presence,  the  petitioner 
reached the dera at 4.30 p.m when he saw him. It is 
also noticed that the second alleged witness of Talb-
e-Muwathibt,  Ayyaz  Ahmad  was  also  not  produced, 
which  was  a  material  omission.  The  cumulative 
effect of these facts noted herein above, leads to the 
conclusion that the petitioner could not prove Talb-
e-Muwathibt. The two courts on in-depth scrutiny of 
evidence  on  record,  noted  contradictions  and  all 
material  factors  and  omissions  in  the  evidence, 
concluded  that  the  petitioner  was  unable  to  prove 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No. 3047 of 2014 
 
 
        
        Page-10 
the  making  of  Talb-e-Muwathibt,  which  was  one  of 
the  necessary  pre-conditions  for  enforcement  of 
alleged  right  of  pre-emption  in  action.  According  to 
Islamic rule of preemption, the right of pre-emption 
becomes extinct if the requisite Talbs are not made. 
Talb-e-Muwathibt  having  not  been  proved,  the  suit 
was rightly dismissed. 
16.  For the reasons above, no case is made out for 
interference,  the  revision  petition  lacking  merit  is 
accordingly  dismissed.  Parties  to  bear  their  own 
costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  (RASAAL HASAN SYED) 
     JUDGE 
 Approved for reporting. 
Announced in open Court on 03.1.2019. 
   
   
 
 
 
  (RASAAL HASAN SYED) 
     JUDGE 
 
*Mian M. Rabbani*   
 
 
