Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.127600 of 2017 
 
Syed Hussain Haider 
Versus 
Government of the Punjab through Chief Secretary, Lahore 
 
Date of hearing:      
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 
& others 
J U D G M E N T 
 
10.05.2018. 
M/s  Dr.  A.  Basit  and  S.M.J.  Iqbal 
Jafree, Advocates.  
M/s  Khalid  Waheed,  Additional 
Advocate  General,  Muhammad  Ejaz, 
Assistant  Advocate  General,  Ata 
Muhammad Khan, Senior Law Officer 
and Mariyam Mustafa, Legal Expert.  
MUHAMMAD SAJID MEHMOOD SETHI, J.- Through 
instant  petition  under  Article  199  (i)(b)(ii)  of  the  Constitution  of 
the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (“the  Constitution”), 
petitioner  has  challenged  constitution  of 
the  Planning  & 
Development  Board  (“P&D  Board”)  and  sought  direction  from 
this  Court  requiring  respondents  No.4  &  5  to  show  under  what 
authority  of  law,  they  are  holding  the  posts  of  Chairman  and 
Member of P&D Board, with the following prayer:- 
“In view of the above, it is respectfully prayed 
that preliminary, permanent & perpetual Declarations 
and Directions be issued to the following effect: 
DECLARATIONS 
 
(i) 
Respondent-Government 
committed 
dereliction  of  statutory  duty  by  failing  to 
restrain 
from 
trespassing  into  the  domain  of  Proforma 
Respondent-Board 
has 
the 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
2 
Respondent  Planning  and  Development 
Department. 
(ii) 
No allocation of funds from Public Exchequer 
can  be  made  in  favour  of  the  Respondent-
Board  for  any  purpose  including  payment  of 
salaries and perks. 
DIRECTIONS 
(i) 
(ii) 
Respondent-Board  be  disbanded  forthwith 
and  Respondent-Government  be  required  to 
recover all amounts spent on it so far. 
Respondents  be  directed  to  ensure  that  the 
named  petitioner  is  enabled  to  perform  his 
functions  and  duties  as  the  Project  Director 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Planning  and 
Development  without  any  interference  from 
Respondent-Board. Threats have been made 
and  adverse  mala 
fide  misconduct;  and 
action is imminent.” 
 
2. 
Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  submits  that  the  work  to  be 
done by respondent-Government, which is called its business, can 
only be performed through its Departments, and that the Secretariat 
is the collective name of all the Departments, which are to function 
in  accordance  with  the  Punjab  Government  Rules  of  Business, 
2011  (“the  Rules  of  Business,  2011”).  He  submits  that  P&D 
Board is neither a Department nor an attached Department or even 
an  autonomous  body  /  company.  He  contends  that  no  work  or 
business  of  respondent-Government  can  be  entrusted  to  it  and  no 
funds  from  Public  Exchequer  can  be  allocated  to  it.  He  further 
submits  that  P&D  Board  along  with  its  office-holders  is  liable  to 
be  disbanded  forthwith  and  all  the  funds  spent  by  them  are  to  be 
reimbursed.  He  adds  that  as  per  entry  at  Sr.  No.30  of  First 
Schedule,  pertaining 
to  P&D  Department  and  Departments 
attached  therewith,  the  relevant  Department  is  the  proforma 
respondent-department  and  no  entry  exists  in  favour  of  P&D 
Board,  which  appears  to  be  a  redundant  body  existing  prior  to 
establishment  of  the  proper  Department.  He  adds  that  the  Chief 
Minister  has  the  power  to  constitute  a  new  Department,  even 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
3 
Section 3(7) inserted in the Rules of Business, 2011 on 09.05.2017, 
gives  no  legal  basis  for  any  person  appointed  in  the  respondent-
board  to  perform  any  Government  function.  He  further  submits 
that  in  Second  Schedule  of  the  Rules  of  Business,  2011,  the 
functions  of  each  Department  have  been  specified,  inter  alia,  the 
preparation of Annual Development Program (“ADP”) assigned to 
the P&D  Department. He  adds  that  no budgetary  allocation  could 
be  made  to  any  new  Projects  /  Programs  unless  same  are  part  of 
ADP  and  the  project  in  question,  where  the  petitioner  is  Project 
Director, can only be carried out under the supervision of the P&D 
Department,  not  the  P&D  Board.  He  contends  that  procedure  for 
appointment  of  project  staff  and  experts  having  specialized  skills 
has  been  provided  in  PC-I  and  necessary  staff  has  already  been 
recruited, thus, subsequent appointment of Chairman and Member 
will  affect  smooth  functioning  of  the  project,  which  is  even 
otherwise  unauthorized  and  has  been  made  to  advance  undue 
benefit to the incumbent respondents. He submits that P&D Board 
is  not  a  part  of  the  Secretariat  of  the  respondent-Government  and 
has  no  lawful  authority  to  perform  any  work  on  its  behalf,  rather 
the duty to monitor and supervise the execution of the Project vests 
in  the  proper  P&D  Department,  which  has  been  impleaded  as 
proforma respondent, as no relief is sought against it. He adds that 
the  P&D  Department  has  established  a  Multi-Sectoral  Nutrition 
Centre  (“the  Centre”),  PC-I  whereof  has  since  been  revised, 
which  is  to  be  completed  during  the  period  2016-2020.  He 
maintains that functions assigned to respondents No.4 & 5 have no 
legal  sanctity  /  authority.  He  next  maintains  that  appointment  of 
respondent  No.4  does  not  appeal  to  reason  rather  based  on  mala 
fide.  In  the  end,  he  submits  that  writ  may  be  issued  as  to  under 
what authority of law, the private respondents No.4 & 5 purport to 
hold the offices of Chairman and Member of a defunct Board. 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
4 
3. 
Conversely,  learned  Additional  Advocate  General,  duly 
assistant  by  learned  Assistant  Advocate  General,  Senior  Law 
Officer  and  Legal  Expert,  contends  that  under  Article  139  of  the 
Constitution,  the  Rules  of  Business,  2011  have  been  framed  and 
promulgated for running the official business of the Government of 
Punjab.  He  adds  that  the  rules  provide  that  business  of  the 
Government shall inter alia be run through its Departments and the 
P&D  Department  as  shown  in  Second  Schedule  of  the  Rules  of 
Business,  2011,  at  item  namely  “Planning  and  Development 
Department”.  He  further  submits  that  main  functions  of  P&D 
Department  are  described  in  Second  Schedule,  for  which  P&D 
Board  was  created  by  Government  of  Pakistan,  with  the  approval 
of  President  of  Pakistan,  vide  Order  dated  04.12.1967  and  said 
order  is  protected  under  Article  268  of  the  Constitution.  He  adds 
that prescribed period of one year in the said Order is for the post 
of  Chairman  and  not  for  the  Board  as  a  whole.  In  the  end,  he 
submits  that  petitioner  himself  revised  PC-I  of  the  Centre  and 
drafted its organogram, wherein supervisory position was assigned 
to  the  Member,  thus,  petitioner  is  estopped  to  challenge  the 
position of the Member.   
4. 
Arguments heard. Available record perused. 
5. 
Under Article 139 of the Constitution, the Rules of Business, 
2011  have  been  framed  and  promulgated  for  running  the  official 
business  of  the  Government  of the  Punjab. The  rules provide  that 
business  of  the  Government  shall  inter  alia  be  run  through  its 
Departments. The P&D Department is shown in Second Schedule 
of  the  Rules.  The  main  functions  of  the  P&D  Department,  as 
described in Second Schedule of the rules, are as under:- 
  Formulation of Provincial Government vision, 
policies and strategies for economic planning 
&  development 
in  consultation  with  all 
stakeholders in the light of NEC’s guidelines. 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
5 
  Annual  Development  Programme  (ADP)  / 
Medium  Term  Development  Framework 
(MTDF) 
(a)  Preparation 
in 
co-ordination  with 
all 
Departments of the Government.  
(b)  Monitoring implementation. 
(c)  Evaluation  of  development  projects  and 
programs. 
  Economic Issue(s):- 
(a)  Conducting research / surveys. 
(b)  Reviewing / analysis of socio-economic data. 
  Policy 
for 
schemes. 
the  approval  of  development 
  Catalyst for different departments / sectors to 
improve  the  pace  and  quality  of  economic 
development. 
  Resource  allocation, 
re-appropriation  of 
development funds, appropriations from block 
allocations 
of 
supplementary grants. 
disbursement 
and 
  Secretariat  for  the  Provincial  Development 
Working  Party  (PDWP)  and  clearing  house 
for  development 
the 
competence of CDWP and ECNEC. 
schemes  within 
  Policy  formulation  with  respect  to  private 
sector  development  and  promotion  of  Public 
Private Partnership(s) (PPP). 
 
Implementation, 
and 
administration in respect of foreign assisted / 
funded and mega ADP projects. 
development 
 
6. 
The  Governor  of  West  Pakistan,  vide  Order  dated 
04.12.1967, with approval of the President of Pakistan, sanctioned 
creation of the West Pakistan P&D Board, with Chairman and two 
members,  one  for  planning  and  the  other  for  development.  The 
“P&D Board” is headed by Chairman, P&D Board and supported 
by  Members.  It  is  the  stance  of  respondents  that  the  posts  have 
been created and are duly reflected in the Annual Budget approved 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
6 
by  the  Provincial  Cabinet  and  Provincial  Assembly;  that  P&D 
Board is not a separate entity like the other autonomous boards or 
entities  functioning  within  the  province;  and  that  it  is  an  internal 
specialized  body  of  the  P&D  Department.  The  aforesaid  Order  is 
reproduced hereunder:- 
“With  the  approval  of  the  President  of 
Pakistan,  the  Governor  of  West  Pakistan 
is 
pleased  to  sanctioned  creation  of  the  West 
Pakistan  Planning  &  Development  Board,  with 
Chairman,  two  members,  one  for  Planning  and 
the  other  for  Development.  The  Governor  of  the 
West Pakistan is further pleased to create the post of 
Chairman,  West  Pakistan,  Planning  &  Development 
Board and the appointment thereto (sic),SQA.,CSP., 
for a period of one year, with effect from the date, the 
post is filled. It will be temporary addition to the CSP 
Cadre and has been sanctioned in lieu of the post of 
Additional  Chief  Secretary  (Development),  Planning 
&  Development  Department,  which  will  remain  in 
abeyance  for  so  long  as  the  post  of  Chairman, 
Planning  &  Development  Board  exists.  The 
Chairman,  West  Pakistan  Planning  &  Development 
Board  will  be  Secretary 
to  Government,  West 
Pakistan, 
the  Planning  &  Development 
in 
Department.” 
 [emphasis supplied] 
 
7. 
The question arises whether constitution of P&D Board was 
for a period of one year or the said Board would continue to exist 
as per the stance of respondents and is protected under Article 268 
of  the  Constitution.  Undoubtedly,  the  highlighted  portion  of  the 
above Order shows creation of P&D Board with its Chairman and 
two  Members,  one  for  planning  and  the  other  for  Development. 
The italic underlined portion of the Order shows that tenure for the 
office  of  the  Chairman  was  for  a  period  of  one  year  with  effect 
from the date, the post is filled. The remaining portion of the Order 
shows that it was a temporary addition to the CSP Cadre and  was 
sanctioned  in  lieu  of  the  post  of  Additional  Chief  Secretary 
(Development),  Planning  &  Development  Department,  which 
would  remain  in  abeyance  for  so  long  as  the  post  of  Chairman, 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
7 
P&D  Board exists. Subsequently, the post  of Chairman  continued 
to exist till to date, whereas same was for a period of one year and 
Chairman  is  being  appointed  through  notifications  issued  from 
time  to  time  by  the authority.  As  per the Order  reproduced supra, 
the  post  of  Additional  Chief  Secretary  (Development),  P&D 
Department, had to remain in abeyance, whereas P&D Department 
is  headed  by  a  Secretary.  It  is  well  settled  principle  of 
interpretation  that  an  Order  or  any  other  instrument  having  the 
status  of  law  has  to  be  interpreted  according  to  the  words  used 
therein.  No  provision  of 
instrument 
is 
to  be  considered 
meaningless. Whole instrument is to be read in its context. No part 
or  word  thereof  can  be  omitted  from  consideration.  Intention 
behind the instrument has to be taken into consideration, which can 
be gathered from looking into the instrument / statute / Order as a 
whole,  not  in  bits  and  pieces,  or  by  picking  and  choosing  a 
particular  portion  thereof.  The  latter  part  of  the  Order  becomes 
redundant  if  the  upper  part  is  given  effect  to. Redundancy  cannot 
be  attributed  to  any  part  of  the  instrument.  Reference  is  made  to 
Allied Bank of Pakistan Ltd. v. Khalid Farooq (1991 SCMR 599), 
Anwarul  Haq  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary, 
Establishment  Division,  Islamabad  and  13  others  (1995  SCMR 
1505),  Ibrar  Hussain  and  other  v.  Government  of  N.-W.F.P. 
through  Secretary,  Board  of  Revenue  and  others  (2001  SCMR 
914)  and  Saudi-Pak  Industrial  and  Agricultural  Investment 
Company (Pvt.) Ltd., Islamabad v. Messrs Allied Bank of Pakistan 
and another  (2003  CLD  596),  Baz Muhammad Kakar  and others 
v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice, 
Islamabad and others (PLD 2012 Supreme Court 870), National 
Bank  of  Pakistan  and  117  others  v.  Saf  Textile  Mills  Ltd.  and 
another  (PLD  2014  Supreme  Court  283),  Salahuddin  Dharaj  v. 
Province  of  Sindh 
through  Secretary,  Local  Government 
Department and 4 others (PLD 2013 Sindh 236) and Muhammad 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
8 
Ismail  v.  District  Coordination  Officer  and  3  others  (2018  PLC 
(C.S.) Note 49).  
8. 
Even  otherwise,  the  Rules  of  Business,  2011  have  been 
promulgated  by  the  Provincial  Government  in  pursuance  of  the 
above  mandate  conferred  upon  it  by  the  Constitution  itself.  After 
enactment  of  the  Constitution  and  framing  of  the  Rules  of 
Business, the Board could not undertake projects which fall within 
the domain of P&D Department of the Government. The Rules of 
Business,  2011  have  not  designated  any  business  to  P&D  Board, 
which is merely a board in name or an empty shell, nonetheless it 
has embarked upon undertaking a number of projects and schemes 
for which it has absolutely no mandate, in fact,  which are outside 
its  domain.  By  such  methodology,  the  long  standing  and 
established  Government  departments,  which  are  designated  under 
the  Rules  of  Business  of  the  Provincial  Government  to  undertake 
such  projects  /  schemes,  were  bypassed.  When  the  regular 
department has no hand in either formulating or executing the said 
projects  /  schemes,  then  how  it  would  assume  the  entire 
responsibility  for  ensuring  that  it  is  operating  properly  and  being 
periodically  maintained.  The  Chief  Secretary  is  responsible  to  go 
by the Rules of Business. Any order or instrument is non-existent, 
if  it  is  passed  by  an  authority,  lacking  jurisdiction  or  is  made  in 
complete  disregard  of  mandatory  provisions  of  law.  Reference  is 
made to Suo Moto Case No.19 of 2016 (2017 SCMR 683) and Dr. 
Shehla  Waqar  and  another  v.  Azad  Government  of  the  State  of 
Jammu  and  Kashmir  through  Chief  Secretary  and  others  [2010 
PLC (C.S.) 416]. 
9. 
Further, as per the mandate of the Constitution, all executive 
actions  of  the  Provincial  Government  shall  be  expressed  to  be 
taken in the name of the Governor; the Provincial Government by 
rules  specify  the  manner  in  which  orders  and  other  instruments 
made  and  executed 
in 
the  name  of  Governor,  shall  be 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
9 
authenticated; and the Provincial Government shall also make rules 
of the allocation and transaction of its business. In view of Article 
138  of  the  Constitution, on  the  recommendation  of  the  Provincial 
Government,  the  Provincial  Assembly  may,  by  law,  confer 
functions upon officers or authorities subordinate to the Provincial 
Government.  The  Provincial  Government  does  not  have  the 
discretion to bypass the provisions of the Rules of Business, 2011. 
Following  the  Rules  of  Business,  2011  is  mandatory  and  binding 
on  the  Government  and  a  failure  to  follow  them  will  lead  to  an 
order  lacking  any  legal  validity.  Framer  of  rules  was  as  much 
bound by  the  contents  thereof as  anyone  else  was subject  thereto. 
Constitutionally  mandated  rules  such  as  the  Rules  of  Business, 
2011 are closely intertwined with the concept of good governance 
for  and  in  the  public  interest.  Allowing  a  departure  therefrom 
would be detrimental to open and transparent forms of governance. 
To allow the Executive to depart from the language of the Rules of 
Business,  2011  in  its  discretion,  would  amount  to  permit  and 
legitimize  unconstitutional  executive  actions.  The  executive 
authority  of 
the  Province,  as  exercised  by 
the  Provincial 
Government,  is  subordinated  to  the  constitutional  schema  in 
relation  to  conferment  of  constitutional  powers  and  responsibility 
on  the  three  organs  of  the  State.  The  Cabinet  is  a  composite 
concept  and  its  components  are  the  Chief  Minister  and  the 
Provincial Ministers, and in case of Federation, Prime Minister and 
the  Federal  Ministers.  Any  decision  taken  by  the  authority 
bypassing  the  Cabinet  is  ultra  vires  the  Constitution.  Even 
ordinance  making  power  can  only  be  exercised  after  a  prior 
consideration  by  the  Cabinet.  Ordinance  or  order  issued  without 
the prior approval of the Cabinet is not valid after enactment of the 
Constitution.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  Messrs  Mustafa  Impex, 
Karachi  and  others  v.  The  Government  of  Pakistan  through 
Secretary  Finance,  Islamabad  and  others  (PLD  2016  Supreme 
Court 808). 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
10 
10.  The P&D Department under the Rules of Business, 2011, is 
required to execute the works of development being undertaken by 
P&D Board, and budgetary allocation amounting to Rs.500 Million 
approximately,  has  been  made  to  P&D  Board.  Running  a  parallel 
Board  to  perform  the  functions  of  P&D  Department  leads  to  bad 
governance  and  lack  of  responsibility  and  accountability.  Under 
the constitutional scheme, administrative changes or allocation and 
reallocation of the business of the Province can be made under the 
Rules  of  Business,  which  is  not  the  case  here.  It  is  settled  that 
fundamental  rights  of  citizens  are  adversely  affected  when  scarce 
resources  are  wasted,  when  there  is  unnecessary  duplication  of 
work,  when  responsibility  is  shirked  by  those  executing  public 
works,  and  when  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  hold  anyone 
accountable  as  a  result  of  implementing  and  executing  projects  / 
schemes through an entity or body / Board, which the law did not 
sanction.  Under  Article  9  of  the  Constitution,  it  is  a  fundamental 
right  of  the  citizens  that  the  national  wealth  /  resources  must 
remain  fully  protected  whether  they  are  under  the  control  of  a 
board  or  autonomous  and  semi-autonomous  bodies.  It  is  also 
noticeable  that  illegal  /  unconstitutional  act  cannot  become 
constitutional by lapse of time nor can it vest anyone with any kind 
of  legal  right  to  benefit  from  such  an  unconstitutional  act. 
Reference  is  placed  upon  Muhammad  Mubeen-us-Salam  and 
others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary,  Ministry  of 
Defence  and  others  (PLD  2006  Supreme  Court  602)  and 
Khawaja  Muhammad  Asif  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others 
(2013  SCMR  1205),  Muhammad  Bachal  Memon  and  others  v. 
Syed  Tanveer  Hussain  Shah  and  others  [2015  PLC  (C.S.)  767], 
Suo  Moto  Case  No.19  of  2016’s  case  supra  and  Shahab  Usto  v. 
Government  of  Sindh  through  Chief  Secretary  and  others  (2017 
SCMR 732).  
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
11 
11.  Learned  Law  Officer  has argued that  the  aforesaid  Order is 
protected  under  Article  268  of  the  Constitution.  No  doubt  Article 
268  of  the  Constitution  protects  all  existing  laws,  subject  to  the 
Constitution,  so  far  as  applicable  and  with 
the  necessary 
adaptations,  until  altered,  repealed  or  amended  by  an  appropriate 
legislation.  As  submitted  above,  the  Constitution  was  enforced  in 
1973,  and  as  per  Article  139  of  the  Constitution,  the  Rules  of 
Business  have  been  framed  under  the  afore-referred  provisions  of 
the Constitution, which have been validly enacted and are binding 
on all. Hence, no protection  is  available to  the said  Order;  firstly, 
for the reason that it was a temporary legislation as clear intention 
is  present  on  the  part  of  authority  while  promulgating  the  Order, 
which  is  obvious  from  the  latter  part  of  the  Order  reproduced 
supra; secondly, temporary legislation cannot be given permanency 
in the absence of any sound legal principle or backing; and thirdly, 
after  enactment  of  the  Constitution,  the  Rules  of  Business  have 
been 
framed  under 
the  afore-referred  provisions  of 
the 
Constitution, wherein jurisdiction, scope and functions of the P&D 
Department have been defined.  
12.  Learned Law Officer, while referring to Dr. Akhtar Hassan 
Khan  and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (2012 
SCMR  455),  argued  that  creation  of  P&D  Board,  in  the  garb  of 
writ of quo warranto, has been challenged, whereas the petitioner 
himself  acted  as  Project  Director  of  the  Board,  therefore,  writ 
petition  being  outcome  of  resentment  of  petitioner,  is  not 
maintainable.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  as  per  Article  199  of  the 
Constitution,  any  aggrieved  person  can  approach  the  Court 
alleging  violation  of  the  Constitution  or  law.  In  the  instant  case, 
violation  of  the  Constitution  and  law  is  floating,  questions  of 
public interest are being raised, there is unnecessary duplication of 
work / duty and actions against law and the Constitution have been 
brought to the notice of the Court, therefore, as per law, the Court 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
 
12 
can  interfere  and  adjudicate  upon  the  matter  questioning  creation 
of the Board whether same was constituted in accordance with the 
Constitution and law. 
13.  Needless  to  say  that  if  any  legislative  instrument  /  Order  is 
found  to  be  in  derogation  of  any  provision  of  the  Constitution,  it 
would  not be  allowed to hold the  field  because of  the  mandate  of 
the  Constitution,  which  is  supreme  to  all  intents  and  purposes. 
Considering  the  vires  of  a  legislative  instrument  /  Order under its 
powers  of  judicial  review,  this  Court  can  consider  not  only  the 
substance  of  the  law  but  also  the  competence  of  the  authority. 
Article  8  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  any  law  inconsistent 
with  the  fundamental  rights  shall  be  void  “to  the  extent  of  such 
inconsistency”  and,  therefore,  the  same  becomes  ineffective  or 
inoperative  to  the  extent  of  such  inconsistency  with  fundamental 
rights.  When  Act  or  Order  is  unconstitutional  or  violative  of  the 
fundamental  /  constitutional  rights,  then  having  taken  oath  to 
preserve and defend the Constitution, it is the bounded duty of this 
Court  to  enforce  the  Constitution  with  its  full  might  and  majesty. 
Reliance  is  placed  upon  Muhammad  Mubeen-us-Salam’s  case 
supra, Baz Muhammad Kakar and others v. Federation of Pakistan 
through  Ministry  of  Law  and  Justice  and  others  (PLD  2012 
Supreme Court 923), Messrs Sui Southern Gas Company Ltd. and 
others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (2018  SCMR  802), 
Muhammad Idrees and 6 others v. Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary,  Ministry  of  Defence  and  4  others  [2015  PLC  (C.S.) 
183], The Federal Board of Revenue and others v. Messrs Chenone 
Stores  Ltd.  (2018  PTD  208)  and  Moazzam  Habib  and  others  v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others (2018 YLR 222).  
14. 
In view of the above discussion, it is declared that formation 
of  P&D  Board is  not  in  conformity  with the provisions  of  Article 
139 (3) of the Constitution and the Rules of Business, 2011 framed 
thereunder.  Consequently,  the  said  Board  shall  stand  dissolved 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. P. No.127600 of 2017 
13 
after lapse of three months and its business shall be transferred to 
P&D  Department  unless  necessary  legislative  measures  are 
introduced so as to bring it in accordance with the command of the 
Constitution  and  the  said  Rules.  Resultantly,  instant  petition  is 
allowed in the above terms.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Muhammad Sajid Mehmood Sethi) 
     
                Judge 
 
Announced in open Court on   29.06.2018. 
 
 
  Judge        
      
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
*A.H.S.* 
 
 
  Judge        
