Judgment Sheet 
    IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,LAHORE 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
 
    Writ Petition No.223057 /2018 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
Dr. Shahzad Niazi 
       Vs. 
The Election Appellate Tribunal and 3 others 
  
12.07.2018 
Mr. Mubeen Uddin Qazi, Advocate.   
 
Mr.  Azam  Nazir  Tarar,  Advocate  for 
the Respondent No.4. 
Mr.  Imran  Arif  Ranjha  and  Ch. 
Naeem  Sarwar  Advocates  for  the 
Election Commission of Pakistan 
Date of Decision:     
 
Petitioner by:  
 
Respondents by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J:-    Through  this  petition, 
filed  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (the “Constitution”),  the Petitioner 
has called in question the order dated 20.06.2018 passed by the 
learned Election  Appellate Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) whereby 
the Election Appeal filed by the Respondent No.4 was accepted 
and the order dated 13.06.2018 passed by the Returning Officer 
accepting the nomination papers of the Petitioner, was set aside. 
2. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  inter  alia 
contended that the impugned order is illegal and against the law 
and facts; that the learned Tribunal has not properly taken into 
consideration the fact that the Petitioner was not a Government 
servant and there is a difference between a consultant engaged 
by an authority on adhoc basis and a contract employee; that in 
W.P. No.223057/2018 
2 
the impugned order it has not been appreciated  that there is no 
relationship  of  employer  and  employee  existed  between  the 
Petitioner  and  the  Government, hence  her  term  of  engagement 
did not fall under the category of „Service of Pakistan‟; that  the 
impugned  order  also  infringed  her  fundamental  right  of 
contesting  elections  as  the  same  was  not  passed  in  accordance 
with  law;  that  the  Petitioner  was    appointed  as  Consultant 
Gynecologist  and  even  has  tendered  her  resignation  on 
30.09.2017 to the CEO/Medical Superintendent DHQ Hospital 
Bhakkar.     
3. 
On 
the  contrary, 
learned  counsel 
for 
the 
Respondent  No.4  vehemently  controverted  the  arguments 
advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  and  prayed 
for dismissal of  the petition on  the  ground that  the decision of 
the  learned  Tribunal  is  apt  as  the  case  of  the  Petitioner 
specifically falls within the definition of  disqualification under 
Article 63(1)(k) of the Constitution.  
4. 
Learned  Counsel  for  the  Election  Commission  of 
Pakistan also assisted the Court in the matter on their turn.          
5. 
We  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned 
counsel for the parties and have perused the record.   
6. 
 
From  the  perusal  of  record,  it  transpired  that  the 
Petitioner was appointed as Consultant Gynecologist in BPS-18 
on adhoc basis at DHQ, Bhakkar for initial period of one year 
w.e.f.  22.07.2014  and  lastly  her  adhoc  period  was  extended 
from  20.07.2017  for  one  year  i.e.  till  19.07.2018.  The  record 
W.P. No.223057/2018 
3 
further reveals that the Petitioner tendered her resignation from 
service on 30.09.2017. The appointment letter of the Petitioner 
explicitly reflects that the Petitioner shall be governed by Civil 
Servants  Act,  1974  (the  “Act”)  and  any  other  such  rules  and 
orders  relating 
to 
leave, 
travelling  allowances,  medical 
attendance, pay etc. as may be issued by the Government from 
time  to  time.  The  Petitioner  was  disqualified  as  her  case  falls 
within the domain of Article 63 (1)(k) of the Constitution. The 
language  of  said  Article  is  very  much  clear  which  reads  as 
follows: 
“(1)  A  person  shall  be  disqualified  from  being 
elected or chosen as, and from being, a member of 
the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), if— 
(k). he has been in the service of Pakistan or of any 
statutory  body  or  any  body  which  is  owned  or 
controlled  by  the  Government  or  in  which  the 
Government  has  a  controlling  share  or  interest, 
unless  a  period  of two  years  has  elapsed since  he 
ceased to be in such service; or”    
 
7. 
Furthermore, the „Service of Pakistan‟ has been defined 
in Article 240 of the Constitution which is reproduced below 
and is as follows: 
“Article: 240 Appointments to service of Pakistan 
and conditions of service” 
240.  Appointments  to  service  of  Pakistan  and 
conditions of service.-  Subject to the Constitution, 
the  appointments  to  and  the  conditions  of  service 
W.P. No.223057/2018 
4 
of  persons  in  the  service  of  Pakistan  shall  be 
determined- 
(a)  in  the  case  of  the  services  of  the 
Federation,  posts  in  connection  with  the 
affairs  of  the  Federation  and  All-Pakistan 
Services,  by  or  under  Act  of  [Majlis-e-
Shoora (Parliament)]; and 
(b) in the case of the services of a Province 
and posts in connection with the affairs of a 
Province, by or under Act of the Provincial 
Assembly. 
From  the  above,  it  is  crystal  clear  that  “All-Pakistan  Service” 
means  a  service  common  to  the  Federation  and  the  Provinces. 
The  appointment  letter  of  the  Petitioner  was  issued  by  the 
Government  of  the  Punjab,  Health  Department,  so  obviously 
the  Petitioner  was  serving  in  the  Provincial  Government.  In 
Article  260  of  the  Constitution  the  „Service  of  Pakistan‟  is 
clearly  defined  that  “Service  of Pakistan” means  any  service, 
post or office in connection with the affairs of the Federation or 
of a Province, and includes an All-Pakistan Service, service in 
the  Armed  Forces  and  any  other  service  declared  to  be  a 
service  of  Pakistan  by  or  under  Act  of [Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament)]  or  of  a  Provincial  Assembly.”.  In  view  of  the 
same,  as  in  the  appointment  letter  of  the  Petitioner  it  has 
specifically been mentioned that her services shall be governed 
by  the  Act,  and  that  too  was  issued  by  the  Provincial 
W.P. No.223057/2018 
5 
Government,  therefore,  we  feel  no  hesitation  to  hold  that  the 
Petitioner was in „Service of Pakistan‟.  
8.  We agree with the findings of the learned Tribunal which 
in the impugned judgment has observed that the post which was 
held by the Petitioner was although held by her on adhoc basis 
and  for  a  specified  period  of  time,  yet  the  said  post  was  a 
permanent post and the perks and privileges attached therewith 
were  enjoyed  by  the  Petitioner.  Since    the  service  of  the 
Petitioner was of Province of Punjab and as she worked  there 
for gain  hence,  it  will  be  construed  that  she has  been  enjoying 
office  of  profit,  therefore, in  spite  of  her  status  of  an  adhoc  or 
time  bound  employee,  disqualification  as  contemplated  in 
Article 63(1)(k) of the Constitution squarely applied on her and 
she  was  clearly  disqualified  from  contesting  elections  prior  to 
lapse  of  period  of  two  years  since  she  ceases  to  be  in  that 
service.    
9. 
Secondly,  it  is  further  noted  here  that  under  Article 
63(1)(k) of the Constitution, if a person has been in the service 
of  Pakistan  or  of  any  statutory  body  or  any  body  which  is 
owned  or  controlled  by  the  Government  or  in  which  the 
Government has a controlling share or interest,  unless a period 
of two years has elapsed since he ceased to be in such service. 
The  Petitioner  admittedly,  submitted  her  resignation  from 
service on 30.09.2017 and the General Elections 2018 are going 
to  be  held  on  25.07.2018,  therefore,  it  can  safely  be  held  that 
W.P. No.223057/2018 
6 
she  categorically  falls  within  the  definition  of  disqualification 
under  Article 63(1)(k)  of the  Constitution as the period  of two 
years  has  not  been  elapsed  since  she  ceased  to  be  in  such 
service.  As  such,  the  learned  Tribunal  has  rightly  held  in 
paragraph-9  of 
the 
judgment 
that  disqualification  as 
contemplated  in  Article  63(1)(k)  of  the  Constitution  squarely 
applied on the Petitioner and she was clearly disqualified from 
contesting  the  elections  prior  to  lapse    of  period  of  two  years 
since  she  ceases  to  be  in  that  service.  Guidance  in  this  regard 
can  be  sought  from  the  case  titled  Muhammad  Khursheed 
Khan  v.  Returning  Officer  and  4  others  (1998  SCMr  425), 
Syeda Abida Hussain v.  Trinunal for N.A. 69 Jhang-IV and 2 
others  (PLD  1994  SC  60)  and  Shahid  Nabi  Malik  and 
another  v.  Chief  Election  Commissioner,  Islamabad  and  7 
others (PLD 1987 SC  32). 
10.  We,  therefore,  agree  with  the  findings  of  the  learned 
Tribunal    which  rightly  accepted  the  Election  Appeal  filed  by 
the Respondent No.4 and do not see any illegality or perversity 
in  the  impugned  judgment  which  has  been  passed  strictly  in 
consonance with the spirit of law, as such does not warrant any 
interference  by  us.  Consequently,  the  petition  in  hand,  being 
devoid of any merit, is hereby dismissed.  
 
(Shams Mehmood Mirza)       
                 Judge                                           
 
  (Jawad Hassan) 
  Judge  
*M.NAVEED* 
 
