Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, BAHAWALPUR BENCH, 
BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Election Appeal No.61 of 2018  
 
Saima Sajid   
   Versus 
Returning Officer, PP-259, Rahim Yar Khan  
 
Sr. No. Of 
Order/ 
Proceeding 
 
Date of 
Order 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties of 
counsel, where necessary.  
26.06.2018 Mr.Shah Hussain, Advocate for appellant. 
 
 
Mr. Muhammad Iqbal Mehr, AAG. 
Hafiza  Mehnaz  Nadeem  Abbasi,  Legal  Advisor, 
Election   Commission of Pakistan.  
 
 
Aggrieved by the order dated 13.06.2018 passed by 
 
 
 
the  Returning  Officer,  PP-259,  Rahim  Yar  Khan  wherein 
the  appellant’s  nomination  papers  were  rejected  on  the 
ground that proposer and seconder of the appellant are not 
voters  from  the  constituency  from  where  the  appellant  is 
contesting  the  election,  the  appellant  has  filed  the  instant 
appeal under section 63 of the Elections Act, 2017 on the 
ground  that  on  realizing  the  bonafide  omission,  an 
application  was  moved  by  the  appellant  before  the 
Returning  Officer  requesting  therein  to  remedy  omission 
by presenting certificates of other two voters but the same 
was  also  rejected.  Hence,  the  appellant  is  entitled  to 
contest election as the defect is not of substantial nature.     
2. 
The learned counsel for the appellant mainly argues 
that  through  clerical  mistake,  names  of  proposer  and 
seconder were wrongly mentioned. However, the appellant 
filed  an  application  before  the  Returning  Officer  for 
Election Appeal No.61 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
2 
rectifying  the  defect  at  the  time  of  scrutiny,  which  was 
dismissed  on  13.06.2018.  Learned  counsel  for 
the 
appellant  argues  that  this  defect  is  curable  while  placing 
reliance on the case reported as Mudassar Qayyum Nahra 
Vs Election Tribunal, Punjab, Lahore and 10 others (2003 
PLD  (Lahore)  1089)  wherein  substitution  was  requested 
there  and  then,  on  being  pointed  out  before  Returning 
Officer  and  same  was  allowed  by  the  Returning  Officer.  
Prays that case of the appellant is on the same footings and 
the appellant can correct/rectify this defect by substituting 
proposer  and  seconder.  Hence, the  appellant is  entitled  to 
contest the election by rectifying  the defect. I have heard 
the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellant and 
perused the documents attached with this appeal. 
 
3. 
Against the decision of Returning Officer, based on 
summary inquiry, a candidate or the objector has a right to 
file  an  appeal  before  this  Appellate  Tribunal,  constituted 
for  this  purpose  under  section  63  of  Elections  Act  2017 
and Appellate Tribunal is empowered to summarily decide 
an appeal under subsection 2 of section 63 ibid, however, 
in,  short,  brief,  concise  and  immediate  manner  and  in 
contrast to a full fledge trial, especially  on the substantial 
and genuine controversy about the facts or the application 
of  law  which  is  dependent  upon  the  factual  resolution, 
within such time as may be notified by the commission, on 
Election Appeal No.61 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
3 
the  basis  of  admitted/easily  verifiable  material/record  to 
eminently  and  conclusively  establish  the  qualification/ 
disqualification of the candidate. There is no denial of the 
fact  that  the  appellant  has  filed  the  nomination  papers  on 
the last date of filing nomination papers i.e. 11.06.2018 by 
mentioning  the names of  Muhammad  Ahmad  as proposer 
and  Naveed  Abid  as  seconder.  During  scrutiny  of 
nomination  papers,  on  13.06.2018,  it  was  discovered  that 
names  of  proposer  and seconder  were not  in  the  electoral 
roll  of  the  electoral  area  from  where  the  appellant  was/is 
contesting  election  as  a  candidate  and  the  appellant  filed 
application for correction of defect on 13.06.2018 after the 
last date of filing nomination papers i.e. 11.06.2018. This 
defect is of a substantial nature. Returning Officer is only 
empowered  to  allow  a  defect  other  than  one  of  a 
substantial  nature  to  be  remedied,  such  as  particulars  of 
the  candidate  or  his  proposer  and  seconder,  signature  of 
proposer/seconder as to ensure that the same are accurate. 
But  if  the  name  of  candidate  and  his  particulars  are 
altogether  missing  and/or  same  is  the  position  of  the 
proposer/  seconder  the  Returning  Officer  cannot  be 
allowed to add these afresh. The same shall be the position 
with regard to substitution as the Retuning Officer has no 
lawful  authority  to  allow  an  altogether  new  person  to  be 
replaced  as  a  proposer  or  seconder  for  a  person  who  is 
absolutely  disqualified  or ineligible to propose or  second. 
Election Appeal No.61 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
4 
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  while  dealing 
with  an  identical  matter  reported  as  “Nadeem  Shafi  Vs 
Tariq  Shuja  Butt  and  others  (PLD  2016  Supreme  Court 
944), has held as under:  
“The Returning Officer and the Appellate Authority 
are barred from correcting a defect of a substantial 
nature; if the fact that the proposer and/or seconder 
is not a voter of the constituency is not a defect of  a 
substantial  nature,  then  what  is?    Therefore,  there 
can  be  no  valid  appellate  orders  allowing 
substitution  or 
rectification  of  a  defective 
nomination paper.” 
 
Defect  regarding  proposer  and  seconder  not  being 
4. 
from  the  constituency  from  where  a  candidate  files  his 
nomination  papers,  can  neither  be  left  unnoticed  nor 
remedied  because  it  is  an  endorsement  of  the  nominated 
candidate by voter(s) of same constituency  and in case, it 
is  discovered  that  the  proposer  and/or  seconder  are  not 
voters  of  the  said  constituency  it  would  be  tantamount  to 
no  nomination  at  all.  Hence,  the  Returning  Officer  was 
legally  justified  in  rejecting  the  appellant’s  nomination 
papers. Reliance is placed on judgments reported as   Rana 
Muhammad  Tajammal  Hussain  Vs.  Rana  Shaukat 
Mahmood  (PLD  2007  Supreme  Court  277), Barkhurdar 
Vs.  Appellate  Tribunal  /  Additional  District  and  Sessions 
Judge and 3 others (PLD 2016 Lahore 101), Muhammad 
Election Appeal No.61 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
5 
Ilyas Vs. Returning Officer and others (PLD 2016 Lahore 
179), Asif Khan Vs. Returning Officer (2003 MLD 230).  
5. 
In view of above, I find no infirmity or illegality in 
the 
impugned  order  of 
the  Returning  Officer  and 
consequently this appeal is dismissed.  
 
 
                                                        (MASUD ABID NAQVI) 
     Judge/Appellate Tribunal  
 
 
 
                      
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
Judge/Appellate Tribunal  
 
 
*rouf 
 
 
 
