Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN.  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
WRIT PETITION NO.11573 OF 2018.  
 
Muhammad Hassan Tahir   Vs.   Govt. of Punjab and others  
 
Sr. No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties 
proceeding 
 
 
 
 
proceeding 
 
 
 
or counsel, where necessary. 
15.08.2018  Mr.  M.  Sohail  Iqbal  Bhatti,  Advocate  for  the 
petitioner.  
Mr. Khalid Masood Ghani, AAG on Court’s Call.  
 
 
By  filing  instant  writ  petition  under  Article  199  of 
The  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973, the petitioner, Inspector, Punjab Police, has assailed 
the  legality  and  propriety  of  order  dated  06.08.2018 
passed by the respondent No.5/Addl. Inspector General 
of  Police,  Regional  Police  Officer,  Multan,  by  which  the 
petitioner has been compulsory retired from service with 
immediate effect.  
2. 
 The  main  ground  of  attack  taken  by  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioner  is  that  the  respondent  No.5 
(Competent Authority) was transferred vide notification 
dated 3rd August, 2018 with immediate effect and posted 
as  Addl.  Inspector  General  of  Police,  Investigation 
Branch, Lahore, whereas on 05.08.2018 the Authority has 
issued show cause notice against the petitioner to submit 
reply, within seven days, but before lapse of that period 
and  submission  of  reply  of  show  cause  notice  by 
petitioner,  vide  impugned  order  dated  06.08.2018,  the 
petitioner  stood  compulsory  retired  from  service.  It  has 
been  further  contended  that  the  impugned  order  has 
been  passed  in  violation  of  The  Punjab  Police  (E  &  D) 
W.P. No.11573 of 2018 
 
2 
Rules,  1975  and  as  such  the  same  is  liable  to  be  struck 
down. In support of this contention, learned counsel for 
the  petitioner  has  relied  on  case  “Suo  Motu  action 
regarding  Violation  of  Public  Procurement  Rules,  2004  in 
procurement loss of billions of Rupees of exchequer caused by 
National  Insurance  Company  Ltd.”  (2012  PLC  (C.S.)  394), 
“Faisal Sultan vs. E.D.O. (Education) and others” (2011 PLC 
(C.S.)  419)  &  “Messrs  Chenab  Cement  Product  (Pvt.)  Ltd. 
and  others  vs.  Banking  Tribunal,  Lahore  and  others”  (PLD 
1996 Lahore 672).  
3.  Heard.  
4. 
Part  VII  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan,  1973  provides  “System  of  Judicature”  in  the 
country,  headed  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  as 
ultimate  Court  of  appeal  with  other  Courts  and 
Tribunals 
constituting 
a 
principal 
forum 
for 
administrating justice by  applying law in the settlement 
of  disputes  and  controversies  that  are  brought  before 
them.  Function  of each Court  or Tribunal  has been well 
defined under the Constitution and the laws made under 
the  Constitution,  which  also  specify  the  subjects  with 
which those Courts or Tribunals have to deal with. This 
multiple  system  has  thus  created  certain  limitations  on 
their jurisdiction so that one Court or Tribunal could not 
encroach  upon  the  defined  field  or  subject  of  the  other 
and  each  court  or  Tribunal  is  required  to  exercise 
powers/authority  within  its  allotted  sphere  and  not 
beyond  that  unless  and  until  specifically  permitted. 
Needless  to  mention  that  under  Article  212  placed  in 
Chapter 4 of Part-VII supra Special Courts and Tribunals 
have  been  created.  At  this 
juncture 
it  would  be 
W.P. No.11573 of 2018 
 
3 
advantageous 
to 
reproduce  Article  212  of 
the 
Constitution which reads as under:- 
“212.  Administrative  Courts  and  Tribunals.  (1). 
Notwithstanding  anything  hereinbefore  contained, 
the  appropriate  Legislature  may  by  Act  provide  for 
the  establishment  of  one  or  more  Administrative 
Courts 
exclusive 
jurisdiction in respect of— 
or  Tribunals 
exercise 
to 
(a)  Matters  relating  to  the  terms  and 
conditions of persons who are or have been in 
the service of Pakistan, including disciplinary 
matters; 
(b)  ….. 
(c)  ….. 
anything 
(2)  Notwithstanding 
hereinbefore 
contained,  where  any  Administrative  Court  or 
Tribunal  is  established  under  clause  (1),  no  other 
Court shall grant an injunction, make any order or 
entertain any proceeding in respect of any matter to 
which the jurisdiction of such Administrative Court 
or Tribunal extends and all proceedings in respect of 
any such matter which may be pending before such 
other Court immediately before the establishment of 
the Administrative Court or Tribunal other than an 
appeal pending before the Supreme Court shall abate 
on such establishment.” 
5. 
The matter agitated before this Court relates to the 
terms and conditions of service and in view of bar under 
Article  212  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan,  1973,  does  not  fall  within  the  jurisdiction  and 
domain  of 
this  Court  under  Article  199  of 
the 
Constitution. In case “Ali Azhar Khan Baloch and others vs. 
Province of Sindh and others” (2015 SCMR 456), following 
principle has been laid down:- 
“…We, after perusal of the aforesaid record in suits 
and H.C.A, are of the considered view that the issue 
raised  by  the  parties  relates  to  their  terms  and 
conditions of service and cannot be entertained by a 
High Court either in its Constitutional jurisdiction 
W.P. No.11573 of 2018 
 
4 
or  in  its  Original  Civil  jurisdiction  or  in  High 
Court Appeal, being barred under Article 212 of the 
Constitution…” 
6.   Moreover,  the  petitioner  has  alternate  remedy  of 
filing  departmental  appeal  and  in  case  of  failure  to 
succeed  in  that  appeal,  by  approaching  the  Punjab 
Service  Tribunal.  Needless  to  mention  that  absence  of 
adequate  and  efficacious  remedy  is  condition  precedent 
for issuing a writ. In case “Indus Trading and Contracting 
Company  vs.  Collector  of  Customs  (Preventive)  Karachi  and 
others” (2016 SCMR 842), the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan has held as under:- 
“…Ordinarily,  the  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Courts 
under Article 199 of the Constitution should not be 
invoked  where  alternative  forum  under  a  special 
law,  duly  empowered  to  decide  the  controversy  is 
available  and  functioning.  Where  a  special  law 
provides legal remedy for the resolution of a dispute, 
the  intention  of  the  legislature  in  creating  such 
remedy is that the disputes falling within the ambit 
of such forum be taken only before it for resolution. 
The very purpose of creating a special forum is that 
disputes should reach expeditious resolution headed 
by  quasi  judicial  or  judicial  officers  who  with  their 
specific knowledge, expertise and experience are well 
equipped  to  decide  controversies  relating  to  a 
particular  subject  in  a  shortest  possible  time. 
Therefore,  in  spite  of  such  remedy  being  made 
available  under  the  law,  resorting  to  the  provisions 
of Article 199(1) of the Constitution, as a matter of 
course, would not only demonstrate mistrust on the 
functioning of the special forum but it is painful to 
know  that  High  Courts  have  been  over-burdened 
with a very large number of such cases. This in turn 
results in delays in the resolution of the dispute as a 
large  numbers  of  cases  get  decided  after  several 
years.  These  cases  ought  to  be  taken  to  forum 
provided  under  the  Special  law  instead  of  the  High 
Courts. Such bypass of the proper forum is contrary 
to the intention of the provisions of Article 199(1) of 
the  Constitution  which  confers  jurisdiction  on  the 
High Court only and only when there is no adequate 
remedy is available under any law. Where adequate 
W.P. No.11573 of 2018 
 
5 
forum  is  fully  functional,  the  High  Courts  must 
deprecate such tendency at the very initial stage and 
relegate the parties to seek remedy before the special 
forum  created  under  the  special  law  to  which  the 
controversy  relates…”  (emphasis  supplied  by 
me).  
Similar view has been taken in case “Rai Ashraf and 
others  versus  Muhammad  Saleem  Bhatti  and  others”  (PLD 
2010  Supreme  Court  691)  and  “Collector  of  Customs, 
Lahore and others vs. Universal Gateway Trading Corporation 
and another” (2005 SCMR 37).  
7. 
As  a  sequel  to  the  above  discussions,  the  instant 
writ  petition,  being  not  maintainable,  is  dismissed  in 
limine.    However,  the  petitioner  may  avail  alternate 
remedy before the competent forum, in accordance with 
law.  
 
 
 
(Mujahid Mustaqeem Ahmed) 
Judge 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
 
 Khalid 
Judge 
