Stereo. HCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
Khalida Idrees etc.  
Vs.  
Anas Farooq Chaudhary etc.  
------------------------------------------- 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of Hearing:  
Appellants by: 
Respondents No.1 to 
6 by: 
Respondents No.7 
and 8 by: 
14.05.2018. 
Sh.Naveed  Sheharyar 
Advocates. 
Mr.Ahmad Waheed Khan,Advocate 
and  Fatima  Malik, 
Mr.Ras Tariq Chaudhary, Advocate.  
 
 
 
 
 
CH.  MUHAMMAD  IQBAL,  J:-    Through  this  regular 
first  appeal  the  appellants  have  challenged  the  judgment 
and decree dated 23.11.2016 whereby the suit for partition 
filed by the appellants was dismissed.  
2. 
Brief facts of the case are that the appellants filed a 
suit for partition in respect of Bungalow No.26-C Gulberg-
II,  Ch.  Zahoor  Elahi  Road,  Lahore  having  an  area 
measuring 8 Kanals contending that the suit property was 
owned by Ch. Ghulam Ullah, father of the appellants and 
respondent  No.1.  Said  Ch.  Ghulam  Ullah  died  on 
08.01.1999  leaving  behind  two  daughters  Khalida  Idrees 
and  Saeeda  Mehmood/  the  appellants  and  one  son  Anas 
Farooq/respondent  No.1  as  his  legal  heirs  and  the 
appellants being the daughters of the deceased are entitled 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 2 
to inherit half share from the suit property. The appellants 
asked  the  respondent  No.1  for  partition  of  the  suit 
property,  but  he  refused 
to  do  so,  which  refusal 
necessitated 
the  filing  of 
the  partition  suit. 
  The 
respondent/defendant  contested  the  suit  through  filing 
written  statement  contending  that  the  predecessor  in 
interest of the parties to the lis executed a Will Deed dated 
06.04.1983  and  through  the  said  Will  Deed  the  suit 
property  was  given  to  the  respondents. Further  contended 
that the suit property was orally gifted by the father of the 
parties to respondent No.1 in the year 1991 and since then 
he  is  in  possession  of  the  same,  as  such  suit  of  the 
appellants is liable to be dismissed. The learned trial court 
framed the issues, recorded the evidence of the parties and 
vide judgment and decree dated 23.11.2016 dismissed the 
suit filed by the appellants, hence the present appeal.  
3. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  submits  that 
the parties to the list are Ahmadi by faith and  no oral gift 
can  be  made  under  the  said  Fiqah.  Further  submits  that 
admittedly  the  property  was  originally  owned  by  the 
predecessor  in  interest  of  the  parties  of  the  lis  and  the 
stance of the  respondent  in  his  written  statement  was that 
on  the  basis  of  oral  gift  allegedly  executed  in  1991,  he 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 3 
became an absolute owner of the property, however, in the 
written  statement,  he  did  not  disclose  the  date,  time  and 
place  and  names  of  the  witnesses  in  whose  presence  the 
said oral gift was made. Furthermore in the memorandum 
of gift deed it is not mentioned that offer of gift was made 
by  doner  and  same  was  accepted  by  or  on  behalf  of  the 
donee.  Learned  counsel  also  submits  that  in  the  evidence 
the respondents also failed to prove the ingredients of oral 
gift as prescribed by law; that the learned trial court passed 
the  impugned  judgment  and  decree  on  the  basis  of  mis-
reading  and  non-reading  of  evidence,  as  such  the  same  is 
not sustainable in the eyes of law.  
 
The learned counsel for the respondents on the other 
hand  submits 
that 
the  property  was  given 
to 
the 
respondent/defendant  No.1  through  a  Will  Deed  dated 
06.04.21983,  which  is  admitted  document  between  the 
parties. Further submits that his deceased father gifted the 
suit  property  to  the  respondent,  as  such  the  learned  trial 
court  has  rightly  passed  the  impugned  judgment  and 
decree and no illegality has been committed.  
4. 
5. 
Heard. Record perused. 
As 
the  plaintiff  specifically  asserted 
in 
their 
pleadings  that  neither  the  property  was  gifted  out  to  the 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 4 
respondent  by  their  deceased  father  nor  defendant  is 
exclusive  owner  of  the  same,  which  controversy  is 
centered  around  issued  No.3,  which  is  reproduced  as 
under:- 
“Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to the decree for 
partition  of  suit property?  If  so,  what  are  the legal 
share of the parties? OPP. 
 
Onus  to  prove  the  said  issue  was  place  upon  the 
appellants.  In  order  to  displace  above  onus  the  appellant 
No.1  Khalida  Idrees  appeared  in  the  witness  box  as  PW1 
and stated that the suit property was owned and possessed 
by  their  father  Ch.  Ghulam  Ullah,  who  died  in  January, 
1999  leaving  behind  his  two  daughters  (appellants)  and 
one  son  (defendant)  as  his  legal  heirs;  that  she  and  her 
sister  are  entitled  to  1/2  from  the  suit  property  and 
defendant  No.1  being  son  is  entitled  to  inherit  1/2  share. 
Further  stated  that  Ghulam  Ullah  has  not  gifted  the  suit 
property to the respondent during his life time; that all the 
legal heirs of the deceased are Ahmadi by faith; that they 
being  daughters  of  the  deceased  demanded  their  share  in 
the  suit  property  from  the  respondent.  During  cross 
examination,  she  stated  that  her  father  was  a  resourceful 
person,  who  was  owner  of  Petrol  Pump,  Service  Station 
near  Avari  Hotel  Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam  and  other 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 5 
properties  including the suit  property  measuring  8  Kanals 
Bungalow  as  well  as  many  bank  accounts.  She  admitted 
the filing of suit for partition of the petrol pump and also 
admitted  the  filing  of  application  (Ex.D1)  before  Dar  ul 
Qaza Rabwa. It is correct that the application (Ex.D1) was 
regarding  agreement  dated  06.04.1983;  it  is  correct  that 
Ch.  Ghulam  Ullah  signed  the  document  as  Ex.D3/1.  She 
further deposed that:- 
 مجھے  گرا 
با
 ن  کی
 
Ex.D3
  مہا
ن  رار
قا  جہرمند  دائیدجا  یہ ہے 
سرد  یہ
 
۔۔۔۔ ۔گی ںہور  بندا
 ن کی سا میں تو ئےجا مل حصہ امیر
 ٹ
پلا ۔ہے چکا ہو 
خور
ق رہولا
 گگلبرIII 
 
 کبلاB 
150/D
 لکنا ود
 روا ٹھیکو لکنا 
کیا رمکر لکنا ود میں رہولا نٗوا
ن لڈما قعاو ٹپلا لکنا چھ
 ۔ہے 
کند کر 
خور
ق  کو  رمنصو ضیقا
1 
 نمبر علیہ  عامدکر  بنا ٹپلا لکنا 
کیا
 نمبر علیہ عامد لکنا ود ۔ہے پر ما
ن کے قورفا روا ہے نہ ڈجسٹرر لکنا رچا بقیہ
 
۔۔۔۔
 ۔ہے بیچی نے
1 
 کہ  جو تھی  پر  ما
ن کے  ہلداو  ٹیپراپر 
  یمیر  لیاو
 کبلا
K 
 کہ ہے 
سرد  یہ
 
۔۔۔۔ ۔تھی کی منتقل میں گیندز پنیا ما
ن کے قورفا نے ںنہوا
 زمجا  کسی 
ی  جٓا  کو 
خور
ق  کی  ہرکومذ  دائیدجا  ںنوود  کہ  ہے 
سرد  یہ
 
 ۔ہے کیا نہ چیلنج میں 
لاعد
The  said  witness  again  appeared  in  rebuttal  evidence  and 
deposed that her father Ch. Ghulam Ullah remained owner 
of  Kothi  No.26-C  Gulberg  II  throughout  his  life;  but  he 
has  not  gifted  the  suit  property  during  his  life  time;  that 
neither  agreement 
(Ex.D3)  dated  06.04.1983  was 
implemented  nor  any  amount  was  given  to  appellants  as 
per  their  share.  She  also  stated  that  application  (Ex.D1) 
 
 
ت
ت
ت
 
ت
 
 
 
ا
ت
 
 
 
ت
 
 
ت
ت
 
 
ت
ت
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 6 
was  not  signed  by  her  father;  that  Ex.D1/1  and  Ex.D1/2 
are forged and fictitious documents. She also deposed that 
her  father  was  Ahmadi  by  faith  and  according  to  Firqa 
Ahmadia oral gift could not be made. She further deposed 
that:- 
 لڈما ۔ہیں نہ ر تیا کو نےکر مدٓارد عمل پر
 
Ex.D3
 مہا
ن  رار
قا با گلو ہم
 
 ۔ہے گیا ا
کند نہ حصہ ارپو بھی سے میں ٹپلا لےاو نٗوا
ن
 
During  cross  examination  she  admitted  it  correct  that 
property measuring 6 Kanals in K Block Model Town was 
owned by her mother, who transferred the same in her life 
time in favour of defendant No.1. She (PW1) admitted her 
signature  on  Ex.D3  as  Ex.D3/2;  she  also  admitted  it 
correct that except Kothi No.26-C, no suit for partition of 
the  other  properties  was  instituted  rather  agreement 
(Ex.D3) was not implemented. Dr.Sabahat Rizvi appeared 
as  PW2  and  stated  that  Kothi  No.26-C  Gulberg  II  was 
owned  by  her  maternal  grandfather  Ch.  Ghulam  Ullah, 
who had not gifted the same to anyone during his life time.  
She also stated that original gift deed dated 05.06.1991 is 
before  her  but  the  signature  of  his  grandfather    (Ex.D1/1 
and Ex.D1/2) are forged; that her grandfather was Ahmadi 
by faith, whose legal heirs are also Ahmadi and have been 
declared  Non-Muslims.  Ahmadis  cannot  make  oral  gift, 
 
 
ت
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 7 
rather  they  can  only  made  gift  deed  though  a  registered 
deed. Ch. Ghulam Ullah remained owner in possession of 
the  suit  property  during  his  life  time  till  his  death  on 
08.01.1999.  In  the  year  1998  the  deceased  many  a  times 
informed  her  that  he  had  never  gifted  the  property  and 
after his death the same should be distributed amongst his 
son  and  daughters;  that  agreement  dated  06.04.1983 
(Ex.D3)  was  not  implemented  because  as  per  the  said 
agreement  their  share  in  property  was  not  given  to  them. 
She further deposed that:- 
 حق کے ثراو بقمطا کے  یہحمدا فقہ تھی  کی صیتو حیثیت کی  مہا
ن  رار
قا
نے قورفا نسا بلکہ اہو نہ عمل کبھی پر مہا
 
ن رار
قا سا سکتی ہو نہیں صیتو میں
 سا بھی
3 
 گگلبر کبلا
 
150P
 نمبر ٹپلا
 
 نکہکیو 
کند کر عمل 
بقاا
ن سکوا
 لکنا
 قبہر6 
8-K 
 نمبر ٹپلا  روا ید  نہ  کو نعیامد قمر 
کند کر 
خور
ق نے
 
 ۔ا
کند نہ نکوا نے سا حصہ قیا
کند کو نعیامد نصف سے میں
 ن ا
In order to controvert the stance as well evidence of 
 
the  appellant  and  to  prove  issue  No.1  respondent  also 
produced  his  evidence.  Ch.  Javed  Mehmood  Bajwa 
appeared  as  DW1  and  stated  that  Ch.  Ghulam  Ullah  was 
his  maternal  uncle,  who  has  one  son  Ans  Farooq  Bajwa 
and two daughters namely Saeeda Mehmooda and Khalida 
Idrees. Saeeda Mehmooda wife of Dr.General Mehmoodul 
Hassan  has  died  and  the  other  daughter  Khalida  Idrees 
wife  of  Kunwar  Idrees  (Chief  Secretary)  is  residing  in 
 
 
ت
 
ت
ا
 
 
ا
ت
 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 8 
Karachi. That Ch. Ghulam Ullah gifted the suit property to 
Anas Farooq in his life time. During cross examination he 
deposed that:- 
 پہلے 
کمر  کا  ںیوحمدا  ۔تھے  یحمدا
  للہا  مغلا  یرہدچو  کہ  ہے 
سرد  یہ
 کی للہا مغلا یرہدچو کہ ہے 
سرد یہ ۔ہے ہبور 
کمر با روا ۔تھا نا
کندقا
 پنیا نے للہا مغلا یرہدچو کہ ہے نہ میں علم ےمیر یہ ۔ہے یحمدا بھی دلاوا
 سے للہا مغلا یرہدچو ۔
نہیں 
کن تھی ید کر تقسیم نگیخا میں دلاوا پنیا دائیدجا
 تھی ئیہو تا
 ن یہ میں فترد کے نا تھی ئیہو میں
1994 
 ت
قاملا یمیر جو
 نسا کہ تھا چھاپو  نہ  یہ سے للہا  مغلا  یرہدچو نے میں  )متعلق سے تقسیم(
کنٓا کہ  تھا چھاپو
  نہ بھی  یہ نے میں
 
  ۔
ہے 
 گئی  ید  حطر کس ٹھیکو  کو  قورفا
 میں ۔تھا چھاپو نہ کچھ سے نا نے میں ۔نہیں ا
کن ہے ئیہو ر
کیتحر کی ینےد ٹھیکو
 
 ۔ہے گئی ید کو قورفا نسا ٹھیکو میں سن کس کہ تھا چھاپو نہ بھی یہ نے
 
Abdul Hameed appeared as DW2 and stated that he knew 
Ch.  Ghulam  Ullah  for  about  20  years  as  he  was  an 
employee to him since last 20/25 years and after his death 
he is employee of his son Anas Farooq; that suit property 
was owned by Ch. Ghulam Ullah who died in 1999 and he 
produced  document  Ex.D1.  During  cross  examination  he 
stated  that  his  qualification  is  under  matric  and  has  not 
signed  document  Ex.D1.  Anas  Farooq  Chaudhary, 
defendant  himself  appeared  as  DW3  and  stated  that  his 
father Ch. Ghulam Ullah in his life time wrote a Will Deed 
which  has  been  produced  on  record  as  Ex.D3  and 
according  to  said  Will  Deed  Kothi  situated  at  26-C 
 
ت
ر
 
ت
ر
 
ا
ا
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 9 
Gulberg  II  Lahore  was  given  to  him  whereas  two  kanals 
plot  situated  at  150-P  Gulberg  III  Lahore    and    6  Kanals 
Plot  situated  at  8-K  Model  Town  were  given  to  his  both 
sisters.  He  also  stated  that  Bungalow  No.26-C  was 
transferred  by  his  father  in  his  favour.  He  produced 
memorandum of oral gift as  Ex.D1 which has never been 
challenged  by  his  sister  despite  having  the  knowledge  of 
the existence of said Will Deed and memorandum of oral 
gift. During cross examination he stated that his father was 
Ahmadi  by  faith  who  (Ahmadis)  were  declared  as  non-
Muslims in 1974. He showed his ignorance as to whether 
according to Fiqa Ahmadia a Will Deed could be executed 
in favour of a legal heir or otherwise. He further responded 
to following questions as under:- 
 میں  حق  کے  ثراو  بقمطا  کے  یہحمدا  فقہ  کہ  ہے 
سرد  یہ  کیا  ۔لاسو
 
۔ سکتی ہو نہیں صیتو
 
۔ہے نہ علم  مجھے ۔ باجو
 کا بیٹی جبکہ 
بڈ حصہ کا بیٹے بقمطا کے یحمدا فقہ کہ ہے 
سرد یہ ۔ لاسو
 
 ۔ہے 
نہو ھادٓا سے سا حصہ
 
 ۔ہے 
سرد ۔باجو
 
It  is  incorrect  that  agreement  dated  06.04.1982  (Ex.D3) 
was  not  implemented.  He  admitted  that  property  No.8K  
measuring  6  Kanals  situated  in  Model  Town  was  got 
registered 
in 
the  name  of  Qazi  Manzoor  against 
 
ت
 
ت
ا
ت
ت
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 10 
consideration  of  Rs.40,00,000/-  and  the  amount  received 
from  Qazi  Manzoor  was  not  given  to  appellants.  Further 
deposed that:- 
 دامر سے فیصلہ لوا ئیںجا ہو  ئمقا  راد حصہ  متما  پر سا تھا  اہو فیصلہ لوا  جو
 نہ کرذ ئیکو کا
 
 
1991
 مہا
ن ہبہ میں خط سا ۔
ہے مہا
ن رار
قا کا
 
6.4.1983
۔ہے 
He  also  admitted  that  plot  No.150-P  was  sold  by  his 
 
 ۔ہے 
سرد تا
 ن یہ ۔باجو
father. Further stated that:- 
 للہا مغلا یرہدچو کہ ہے 
کیتحر میں
 
6.4.1983 
 مہا
ن رار
قا
11 
 نمبر اپیر
 دائیدجا  ہندما  قیا
 ن  روا ہیں 
سکت  کر 
خور
ق ہیںچا  دائیدجا  جو میں  گیندز پنیا
 ۔گی  ہو نصف  کی  یسردا  ہلدخا  روا  دمحمو  ہسعید  روا نصف  کی  قورفا  نسا
 گیندز پنیا نے للہا  مغلا  یرہدچو
 
 گگلبرIII
 
150P
 ٹپلا  لاا
و گگلبر
 کا سا کہ ہے 
سرد  یہ  کیا  ۔ہے 
سرد تا
 ن  یہ۔  تھا 
کندکر 
خور
ق میں
 ہندما قیا
 ن روا ۔گیا ہو خمنسو
6.4.1983 
 خہرمو مہا
ن رار
قا کہ نکلا یہ نتیجہ
 صیتو نے 
 خصا لداو ۔باجو ۔گی ہو تقسیم بقمطا کے یعتشر دائیدجا
 ید  ےد  کو  ںبہنو  قمر  کی  پےور  کھلا
۹۱ 
  روا  بیچا  کو  سا
 
بقمطا  کے
 
۔۔۔۔۔۔تھی
 گگلبر
26-C 
 نمبر ٹھیکو نے میں میں 
ٰ یعود باجو کہ ہے 
سرد یہ کیا
 روا ہے  کیا  پر
 
5.6.1991
  خہرمو  مہا
ن  ہبہ  رنحصاا  کا ملکیت  کی  رہولا
II
 
۔ہے کیا نہ رنحصاا پر
6.4.1983
 
 مہا
ن رار
قا
 
 ۔ہے کیا نہ رنحصاا پر
6.4.1983
 
 مہا
ن رار
قا نے میں کہ ہے غلط یہ ۔باجو
 
 Abdul  Rehman  Anwar  appeared  as  DW4  and  supported 
the stance of the respondent. 
6. 
From the perusal of plaint the appellants alleged that 
the  signature  of  their  father  Ghulam  Ullah  on  the 
memorandum of oral gift deed (Ex.D1) are forged whereas 
 
 
ت
 
ت
 
ت
ر
ت
ت
 
 
ت
ت
ا
ت
 
 
 
ت
ت
 
 
ت
 
ت
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 11 
signatures of the deceased on Ex.D3 are admitted one. But 
the  respondent/defendant  being  beneficiary  of  gift  deed 
(Ex.D1)  did  not  file  any  application  to  rebut  the  said 
version  of  the  appellants  in  respect  of  comparison  of 
signatures  of 
the  deceased  on 
the  aforesaid 
two 
documents. Further neither the name of any witness of the 
oral  gift  was  mentioned  in  pleadings  (written  statement) 
nor  the  same  was  produced  in  evidence.  As  regards  the 
Will  Deed  dated  06.04.1983,  suffice  it  to  say  that  as  per 
clause 11 of Deed the property left by Ghulam Ullah  was 
to  be  distributed  among  his  legal  heirs  i.e.  Anas  Farooq  
(son  )  1/2share  and  Saeeda  and  Khalida    (daughters)  1/2 
share in the estate. Admittedly according to the document 
of Will  Deed  the  appellants  would  be  eligible  to get their 
shares in the inheritance of their father as settled between 
the parties and the respondent is not the sole owner of the 
suit  property,  rather  the  said  property  fell  in  the  joint 
ownership of the appellants as well as the respondent.  
Respondent asserted in his written statement that he 
is  owner  of  the  impugned  property  through  an  oral  gift 
allegedly  executed by  his  father  Ch.  Ghulam  Ullah in the 
year 
1991 
which 
was 
accepted 
by 
the  
respondent/defendant, but in this regard the respondent has 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 12 
neither  mentioned  date,  time,  place  and  names  of  the 
witnesses  in  the  contents  of  the  written  statement  nor 
produced  any  marginal  witness  in  the  evidence  to 
substantiate his stance, which are sine qua non and the act 
of  deliberate  avoidance  of  imparting  above  information 
vitiate the veracity of the stance. Admittedly, parties of the 
lis  are  Qadiani  and  as  per  Article  260(3)  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  they 
were declared non-Muslim, as such, Muhammadan Law is 
not  applicable  upon  the  parties  of  the  lis,  however, 
principle  of  natural  justice  as  well  as  principle  laid  down 
in  respect  of  oral  gift  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  is  applicable  for  just  decision.  The  Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  a  recent  judgment  reported 
as Mrs. Khalida Azhar Vs Viqar Rustam Bakhshi & Others 
(2018  SCMR  30)  has  observed  that  it  is  pre-requisite  of 
the oral gift to specifically be described in plaint regarding 
the  date,  time  and  place  of  making  offer  of  the  gift  by 
doner,  acceptance  of  the  same  by  donee.  However,  the 
respondent in this appeal has neither divulged such details 
in  written  statement  nor  produced  any  person  who 
witnessed  the  transaction  of  oral  gift,  which  legal  flaw 
dismantle  the  foundation  of  respondent’s  claim  .  Another 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 13 
reliance  is  also  placed  on  Allah  Ditta  and  others  Vs. 
Manak  alias  Muhammad  Siddique  and  others  (2017 
SCMR  402).Further  in  a  case  reported  as  Fareed  and 
others  Vs.  Muhammad  Tufail  and  another  (2018  SCMR 
139)    in  which  the  Hon’ble  Apex  Court  has  held  that  a 
donee claiming right under a gift excluding other heir, was 
required by law to establish the original transaction of gift 
irrespective of whether such transaction was evidenced by 
a  registered  deed  and  that  the  gift  deed  must  justify  the 
cause of disinheritance of another heirs. In the instant case 
the respondent claimed the ownership of the suit property 
on the basis of an oral gift but has failed to prove the same 
through  production  of  pertinent  and  specific  evidence  in 
this  regard.  Further  as  per  Article  260(3)  of 
the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  the 
followers  of  Ahamadia  Faith  have  been  declared  as  non-
Muslims  and  they  could  not  be  governed  by  the  Muslim 
Personal  Law,  rather  they  have  to  follow  their  own 
personal  law  of  inheritance  and  are  debarred  to  take 
benefit  of  Muslim  Personal  Laws  whereas  admittedly  no 
such  Personal  Law  relating  to  the  gift,  Tamleek  and  Will 
Deed are available in Fiqa Ahmadia and in absence of any 
such personal law relating to gift, Will Deed and Tamleek 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 14 
under  the  Ahmadi  Faith,  the  codified  law  of  Transfer  of 
Property Act would be applicable to cater such issue until 
their  fiqah  or  jurisprudence  formulate  any  consensus 
opinion on the subject. 
As provisions of Transfer of Property Act, 1882 are made 
applicable to the issue of gift/Tamleek as well as the Will 
Deed  on  the  followers  of  Fiqah  Ahmadia  and  the  dispute 
between the adverse parties is also relating to Will Deed as 
well  as  the  oral  gift  same  would  be  adjudicated  and 
decided  according  to  the  said  enactment.    In  Section  122 
of  the  Transfer  of  Property  Act  the  definition  of  gift  is 
given as under:- 
“122. “Gift”  defined.  “Gift”  is  the  transfer  of 
certain  existing  moveable  or  immovable  property 
made voluntarily and without consideration, by one 
person  called  the  donor,  to  another  called  the 
donee, and accepted by or on behalf of the donee.  
 
to  be  made.  Such 
acceptance must be made during the lifetime of the 
donor and while he is still capable of giving.  
 
void.”  
 
If the donor dies before acceptance, the gift is 
Acceptance  when 
From  the  bare  reading  of  Section  122  of  the  Transfer  of 
Property  Act,  1882,  the  gift  will  be  completed  when  the 
donor makes offer of the gift and donee accepts the same, 
but  in  the  instant  case  from  the  perusal  of  the  alleged 
memorandum  of  oral  gift  (Ex.D1),  only  the  signature  of 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 15 
the alleged donor are available, but express acceptance of 
the  gift  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  donee  is  missing  and  the 
alleged  gift  deed  is  a  kind  of  unilateral  document  which 
even does not bear the signature of any marginal witness, 
as such, gift deed (Ex.D1) does not convey any title to the 
respondent  as  the  impugned  transaction    does  not  fulfill 
the criteria as provided in supra Section of the Transfer of 
Property Act. Further, according to the above provision of 
law two important prerequisites  of  a  valid  gift  are that  an 
offer  be  made  by  the  doner  without  any  consideration, 
coercion,  duress  and  said  offer  is  accepted  by  the  donee 
himself or by his authorized attorney, during the life time 
of the donor, which are mandatory in nature and any non-
compliance  would  invite  the  legal  consequences,  whereas 
in  this  case  the  above  said  ingredients  have  neither  been 
asserted  in  written  statement  nor  proved  as  per  law. 
Further Section 123 of the Act, 1882 describes the modus 
operandi  of  transfer  of  possession  in  the  following 
manner:- 
“123. Transfer  how  effected.  For  the  purpose  of 
making  a  gift  of  immovable  property,  the  transfer 
must  be  effected  by  a  registered  instrument  signed 
by or on behalf of the donor, and attested by at least 
two witnesses. 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 16 
For  the  purpose  of  making  a  gift  of  moveable 
property,  the  transfer  may  be  effected  either  by  a 
registered  instrument  signed  as  aforesaid  or  by 
delivery. 
 
Such  delivery  may  be  made  in  the  same  way 
as goods sold may be delivered.  
The  conjunctive  readings  of  Section  122  and  123  of  the 
Transfer  Of  Property  Act,  it  evinces  that  making  of  an 
offer  of  gift  by  the  doner,  acceptance  of  the  gift  by  the 
donee and delivery of possession are main constituent of a 
valid gift under the Act and it is made obligatory that such 
gift transaction shall bear signature of at least two attesting 
witnesses.  Admittedly  respondent  No.1  claimed  his  title 
over  the  suit  property  on  the  basis  of  a  gift  made  by  his 
father  Ghulam  Ullah  but  the  said  gift  did  not  fulfill  the 
criteria  as  prescribed  under  Section  122  and  123  of  the 
Transfer of  Property  Act, 1882, as  the  making of offer of 
gift and acceptance of the same on behalf of the donee are 
not proved on record and also the document of gift was not 
attested by two witnesses as required by law. Furthermore 
the alleged gift deed under Section 123 of the Transfer of 
Property  Act  as  well  as  under  Section  17(a)  of  the 
Registration  Act,  1908  is  compulsorily  required  to  be 
registered,  failing  which  provisions  of  Section  49  of  the 
 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 17 
Registration  Act  would  come 
into  play  with 
the 
consequence  that  the  document  would  be  considered  as 
devoid  of  creating  any  legal  right,  title  or  interest,  either 
vested  or  contingent  in  the  property.  Reliance  in  this 
regard can be placed on Muhammad Ejaz and 2  others Vs. 
Mst.Khalida  Awan  and  another  (2010  SCMR  342)  and 
Allah Diwaya Vs. Ghulam Fatima (PLD 2008 SC 73).  
Even  otherwise  under  Article  79  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order,  1984  a  disputed  document  is  required  to  be  proved  by 
producing at least two  attesting witnesses whereas neither any 
marginal  witnesses  are  mentioned  in  the  alleged  gift  deed  nor 
produced  in  evidence  to  substantiate  the  transaction,  as  such, 
alleged gift deed (Exh.D-1) does not fulfill the requirement of 
Article  79  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  The  object  of 
establishing  of  the  marginal  witnesses  of  a  document  is  to 
identify the genuineness of executant as well as his signature or 
thumb  impression  and  also  to  give  legal  sanctity  to  such 
transaction and they (the marginal witnesses) are produced 
in  evidence  to  prove  that  the  executant  had  put  the 
signature  within  their  view.  Further  the  respondent  being 
beneficiary  of  the  document  was  under  unalienable 
obligation  to  prove  the  execution  of  document  of  gift  as 
well  as  to  prove  the  actual  factum  of  gift  by  falling  back  
 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 18 
on  three  ingredients  of  offer,  acceptance  and  delivery 
possession.  Reliance  in  this  regard  can  be  placed  on  Mst. 
Kulsoom Bibi and another Vs. Muhammad Arif and others 
(2005 SCMR 135). 
7.  Moreover  there  is  another  significant  aspect  of  the 
matter  that  the  respondent  has  taken  two  stances  in  his 
pleading,  firstly  he  claimed  to  be  owner  of  the  suit  land 
under  the  Will  Deed  allegedly  executed  in  1983  and 
secondly  laid  foundation  of  his  case  on  the  basis  of  oral 
gift  allegedly  made  in  his  favour  in  the  year  1991  which 
are self destructive in nature. Respondent invented a novel 
stance  of  oral  gift  which  altogether  repudiates  his  earlier 
stance  of  Will  Deed  as  described  in  his  written  statement 
as  well  as  in  the  deposition  made  under  oath  before  the 
trial  court  which  are  hit  by  principle  of  approbate  and 
reprobate.  The  learned  trial  court  mainly  swayed  by  the 
document  of  Will  Deed  dated  06.04.1983  which  shows 
that  the  appellant,  had  received  their  shares  whereas  the 
said Will Deed stands repudiated by the subsequent acts of 
testator,  who  himself  alienated  the  property  fallen  in  the 
shares  of  the  appellants  and  even  the  respondent  himself 
also  sold  certain  chunks  of  the  properties  and  received 
consideration  of  the  same  without  paying  a  penny  to  the 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 19 
appellant  which  extinguished  the  sanctity  of  Will  Deed 
whereas  the  very  making  of  alleged  gift  deed  in  itself 
frustrate the earlier family settlement type Will Deed. The 
learned  trial  court  has  committed  mis-reading  and  non-
reading of the evidence and has mis-construed the law on 
the subject holding the gift deed is made in continuation of 
the  family  settlement  whereas  the  rule  of  prove  and  legal 
parlance of both the transactions are entirely distinguished 
to each other as such the above findings of the learned trial 
court  on  issues  No.1  and  3  are  perverse  which  deserve 
reversal.  
Next  the  learned  trial  judge  mainly  non-suited  the 
appellant on the point of limitation holding that Will Deed 
was executed in the year 1983 and the impugned gift was 
made  in  the  year  1991  and  even  by  reckoning  the 
limitation  from  both  the  terminus  date,  the  suit  is  time 
barred which findings are absolutely incorrect and devoid 
of  any  valid  reasons  as  on  the  death  of  prepositus  of  the 
parties  the  entire  estate  of  the  deceased  automatically 
devolved upon the legal heirs who became co-sharer in the 
estate.  Moreover  the  object  of  execution  of  the  alleged 
Will Deed as well as the gift as evinced from the pleading 
as well as the available evidence,  seems to be tainted with 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 20 
fashioned  malafide  design  of  respondent  to  deprive  the 
women  folk  from  their  due  share  in  the  property  through 
newly  conceived  or  invented  grotesque  devices  such  as 
Will Deed, gift/Tamleek deed or under the garb of custom, 
family  honour,  regional  culture  as  well  as  under  coercion 
just  to  grab  the  legal  shares  of  women  and  in  such 
transaction 
the  court  are  saddled  with  unalienable 
obligation to show extraordinary circumspection, care and 
caution while dealing and deciding the matter of alienation 
of shares or right of the women folk. Reliance is placed on 
Ghulam  Ali  and  2  others  vs.  Mst.  Ghulam  Sarwar  Naqvi 
(PLD 1990 SC 1).  
Further  the  appellants  are  admittedly  owner  of  ½ 
share  in  the  suit  property  after  the  death  of  their  father 
Ghulam Ullah and they hold a valid cause of action to file 
the instant suit whereas the learned trial judge has illegally 
held  that  the  suit  of  the  appellants  lacks  the  cause  of 
action. Moreover learned trial Judge has mainly non suited 
the  appellant  declaring  the  suit  being  out  of  limitation, 
suffice  it  to  say  that  admittedly,  the  appellants  are 
daughters  of  Ch.  Ghulam  Ullah  and  after  his  death  they 
became co-shares in the property and it is settled law that 
limitation  does  not  operate  against  the  co-sharer  in 
 
RFA No.1225 of 2016. 
 
 
 
Page 21 
inheritance  matter.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  cases  of 
Mahmood  Shah  Vs.  Syed  Khalid  Hussain  Shah  (2015 
SCMR  869),  Mst.  Gohar  Khanum  &  Others  Vs.  Mst. 
Jamila Jan  & Others  (2014  SCMR  801), Rehmatullah  & 
Others  Vs.  Saleh  Khan  &  Others  (2007  SCMR  729), 
Arshad  Khan  Vs.  Mst.  Resham  Jan  &  Others  (2005 
SCMR 1859), as such, finding of the learned trial court on 
issue  No.2  are  also  not  sustainable  as  same  suffers  from 
the voice of mis-reading, non-reading of evidence as well 
as misapplication of law which is liable to be reversed.   
7. 
In  view  of  the  above,  this  appeal  is  allowed,  the 
judgment  and  decree  dated  23.11.2016  passed  by  the 
leaned  trial  court  is  set  aside,  appellants  are  declared 
entitled  to  receive  their  1/2  share  in  the  suit  property. 
Hence  the  suit  for  partition  filed  by  the  appellants  is 
decreed as prayed for.   
(Shahid Karim) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ch. Muhammad Iqbal)    
 
      Judge 
Announced in open Court on 07.06.2018. 
JUDGE 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
                                          Judge 
A.Rehman. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
