Stereo H C J D A 38. 
   Judgment Sheet 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
 JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
            Criminal Appeal No.78 of  2014 
Latif Masih versus The State, etc.                                
    Criminal Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 
  Saleem Masih versus Yasir Masih etc.                                     
     Criminal Revision No.202 of 2014 
     Saleem Masih  versus Latif Masih etc. 
    Murder Reference No.178 of 2015                                      
 
State versus Latif Masih                               
 
 
 
 
 
    
       JUDGMENT 
of 
Date of hearing 
 
Appellant  (Latif  Masih)  in  Crl. 
Appeal 
No.78 
2014  
represented by:     
 
The State represented by:  
 
 
Appellant/Petitioner 
(Saleem  
Masih)  in Crl. Appeal  No.388  of 
2014  and Crl. Revision No. 202 
of 2014 represented by:     
 
 
18.04.2018 
Zubair 
Ahmad 
 
Barrister  Moman  Malik  and 
Javaid Gill, Advocates 
 
Ch. 
Additional Prosecutor General 
 
Mr.  Zafar  Mahmood  Chaudhary,  
Advocate 
 
 
 
Farooq 
            SARDAR AHMED NAEEM, J.- Latif Masih appellant 
alongwith  Natin  Masih  and  Yasir  Masih  (co-accused)  were  tried 
by the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Lahore in case FIR No.856 
dated  10.8.2010,  for  offences  under  sections  302/34  PPC, 
registered  at  Police  Station  South  Cantt.  District  Lahore,  lodged 
by  Saleem  Masih  complainant,  for  committing    murder  of  Akbar 
Masih  deceased.    At  the  conclusion  of  the  trial,  vide  judgment 
dated  04.01.2014,  the  learned  trial  Court  acquitted  Natin  Masih 
and  Yasir  Masih  co-accused  and  convicted  and  sentenced  the 
appellant Latif Masih as under:- 
“Under  Section  302(b)  PPC  and  sentenced  to  death  with 
a  direction  to  pay  a  sum  of  Rs.2,00,000/-  as 
compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of  the  deceased  under 
section  544-A,  Cr.P.C,  in  default  thereof,  to  further 
undergo  six  months  Simple  Imprisonment.    In  case  of 
non-payment  of  the  compensation,  the  amount  was 
ordered to be recovered as arrears of land revenue.” 
2. 
 
The  appellant  filed  Criminal  Appeal  No.78  of  2014, 
challenging  his  conviction  and  sentence  awarded  by  the  learned 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
2 
trial  Court.  Saleem  Masih  appellant/complainant  filed  Criminal 
Appeal  No.388  of  2014  challenging  acquittal  of  Yasir  Masih  and 
Natin Masih, respondents and also filed Criminal Revision No.202 
of 2014 for enhancement  of compensation   from Rs.2,00,000/-  to 
Rs.10,00,000/-. Murder Reference  No.178 of 2015 is  also before 
us for confirmation or otherwise of the death sentence awarded to 
Latif Masih, appellant.  Through this single judgment, we propose 
to decide all the above mentioned matters.  
3. 
The  epitome  of  the  prosecution  story  as  mentioned  in  FIR 
Exh.PA/2    was  that  on  10.8.2010,      the  complainant  along-with 
his family members was present in  his home. Meanwhile,  some 
one  knocked  at  the  main  door  of  the  house  and  Akbar  Masih 
(deceased)  went  out.  On  hearing  the  hue  and  cry,  complainant 
along-with  Akram  Masih  (son)  and  Pervaiz  Masih  (brother)  went 
in the street and saw Natin Masih and Yasir Masih   armed with 
pistols  encircled  Akbar  Masih  (deceased).  Complainant  along-
with PWs moved forward to save him but threatened that if some 
one tried to move forward  would be done to death.  Natin Masih 
raised  lalkara  to  teach    a  lesson  to  Akbar  Masih  (deceased)  for 
forbidding  them  to  sell  the  narcotics,  on  which  Latif  Masih 
(appellant)  took  out    Churri  from  ‘naifa’  of  his  shalwar  and 
inflicted  churri  blow  at  the  neck  of  Akbar  Masih  (deceased)  who 
fell down  in   injured condition. Accused   while brandishing  their 
weapons  fled  away  from  the  crime  scene.  Akbar  Masih 
(deceased)  was  taken  to  hospital  where  he  succumbed  to  the 
injuries.    
4. 
After  usual 
investigation, 
the  appellant  along-with 
acquitted co-accused   was sent to the Court for trial.  They  were 
charge sheeted. They pleaded not guilty and claimed trial, hence 
the prosecution evidence was summoned. 
5.  
In  order  to  prove  its  case,  the  prosecution  examined  as 
many as twelve witnesses in all.  
6. 
Saleem  Masih 
complainant 
(PW-1)  supported 
the 
prosecution story as mentioned in the FIR.  Pervaiz Masih (PW-2) 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
3 
being  eye  witness  of  the  occurrence  also  corroborated  the 
statement of  PW.1. 
7.        Dr.  Ahmad  Raza  Khan  (PW-5)  conducted  post-mortem 
examination  of  the  deceased  Akbar  Masih  and  observed 
following injury on his person: 
   “An  open  gapping  incised  wound  3  x  1  cm 
with  clean  cut  margins  and  well  defined 
angles,  crescentic  in  shape.    On  the  lower 
part  of  front  aspect  of  right  side  neck,  4  cm 
right  of  midline  and  1  cm  above  the  medial 
end of clavicle.” 
 
            According  to  his  opinion,  said  injury  was  ante-mortem  in 
nature  and  caused  by  sharp  edge  weapon.  The  death  of  the 
deceased  occurred  due  to  the  damage  of  major  blood  vessels  of 
the  right  side  of  the  neck  under  injury  No.1  leading  to 
hemorrhage,  shock  and  death  and  sufficient  to  cause  death  in 
ordinary course of nature.   Probable time between the injury and 
death was within few minutes and time between death and post 
mortem  was 15 to 24 hours. Copy of the postmortem report  was 
Exh.PE  and  diagrams  Exh.PE/1  and  Exh.PE/2  showing  the 
locale of injuries were in his hand and signed by him.  
8.      Faqeer Muhammad S.I. (PW-9) conducted the investigation 
of  the  instant  case.    On  10.8.2010,  after  learning  about  the 
occurrence,  he  proceeded  to  the  hospital  where  dead  body  of 
Akbar  Masih  was  lying.    He  prepared  injury  statement  Ex.PM 
and inquest report Ex.PO of the deceased  and then handed over 
the  dead  body  to  the  medical  officer  for  post-mortem.  On  the 
same  day  at  night,  he  went  to  the place  of  occurrence,  prepared 
rough site plan Ex.PN and recorded statements of the PWs under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. 
9.   
  On  14.1.2010,  he 
inspected 
the  spot  alongwith 
Draftsman.    On  16.08.2010,  he  obtained  non  bailable  warrants 
of  arrest  of  Latif  Masih  Ex.PF,  Natin  Masih  Ex.PG  and  Yasir 
Masih Ex.PH. On 22.08.2010, he arrested Latif Masih  appellant. 
On  29.08.2010,  he  interrogated  Latif  Masih  appellant  and 
recovered  churri  P-1  which  he  took  into  possession  vide  Memo 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
4 
Ex.PC.    On  30.08.2010,  he  sent  Latif  Masih  appellant  to  the 
Judicial Lock up. 
10.      Muhammad  Imran  Haider  Inspector  (PW-10)  partially 
investigated the case.  On 16.10.2010, he arrested accused Yasir 
Masih and Natin Masih and sent both the accused to the judicial 
lock  up  and  prepared  report  under  Section  173  Cr.P.C.    Rest  of 
the PWs are of formal nature, therefore, need not to be discussed. 
11. 
The  prosecution  while  tendering  in  evidence  report  of 
Chemical  Examiner  Ex.PP  and  report  of  Serologist  as  Ex.PQ, 
closed its case. 
12. 
 After close of the prosecution evidence, the appellant was 
examined  under  section  342,  Cr.P.C.  He  denied  the  prosecution 
allegations  and  pleaded  innocence.      Responding  to  a  question 
“why  this  case  against  him  and  why  the  PWs  deposed 
against  him”,  the  accused/appellant  Latif  Masih  replied  as 
under:-  
“The  deceased  was  a  drug  addict.    On  10.08.2010  at 
about 7.00 p.m. a quarrel took place between my children 
and the deceased upon mobile prior to the occurrence.  On 
the same night I was playing snooker in the Snooker Club 
at about 8.30 p.m. Akbar deceased called me.  I came out 
from Snooker Club and the deceased used filthy language 
against  my  mother  and  we  entered  into  a  scuffle  with 
each  other.    Akbar  deceased  wanted  to  take  revenge  of 
the  evening  quarrel  and  had  brought  churri  from  his 
house.  During this scuffle the deceased suffered a churri 
blow.  The deceased attacked upon me.  He was aggressor 
person.    I  have  intention  to  kill  the  deceased  at  the  time 
of  occurrence.    I  did  not  give  a  churri  blow  to  Akbar 
deceased.    I  have  no  motive  to  kill  the  deceased  at  the 
time  of  occurrence.    Motive  set  up  in  the  FIR  was 
concocted  and  afterthought.    The  complainant  was  not 
present  at  the  spot  and  was  called  from  his  house  after 
the  occurrence.    The  other  PWs  of  the  FIR  were  also  not 
present  at  the  spot.    They  are  also  related  to  the 
deceased.  My  first  version  was  not  properly  recorded  by 
the  I.O.  in  league  with  the  complainant  party.    I  am 
innocent and pray for justice.” 
 
 
          The  appellant  appeared  as  his  own  witness  in  his 
statement  under  Section  340(2)  Cr.P.C.,  in  disproof  of  the 
prosecution evidence and stated as under:- 
“On  10.08.2010,  I  had  a  quarrel  with  the  deceased  Papa 
over a trivial matter relating to mobile phone.  The matter 
thereafter, was  resolved.  Thereafter, after  some time, the 
deceased  again  came  back  to  snooker  club  where  I  was 
playing the game, dragged me and we had a scuffle there.  
During  scuffle  the  deceased  put  out  a  knife  (churri)  and 
wanted  to  assault  upon  me,  accidently  slipped  there  and 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
5 
inflicted  himself  with  the  said  churri,  was  done  to  death 
due  to  said  injury.    I  did  nothing  nor  assaulted  upon  the 
deceased. 
It  was  his  mistake  as  he  was  under 
intoxication,  due  to  which  he  succumbed  to  his  wound.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        The  appellant,  however,  did  not  produce  any    witness  in 
his defence. 
 
It  was  observed  that  Criminal  Appeal  No.78  of  2014  did 
not  reach  the  Court  after  its  institution,  however,  learned 
Additional  Prosecutor  General  assisted  by  the  learned  counsel 
for  the  complainant  accepted  the  notice  and  the  case  was  
decided as  ‘Pucca’ matter.  
13.  Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submitted  that  no 
independent  witness  was  cited  by  the  prosecution;  that  there 
were  contradictions  between  the  medical  and  the  ocular 
account;    that  the  postmortem  examination  in  this  case  was 
held  on  the  following  day  of  the  occurrence;  that  prosecution 
failed to prove  the motive; that blood stained churri  allegedly  
recovered  from  the  appellant  was  dispatched  to  the  office  of 
public  analyst  after  the  lapse  of  4  ½  months  and  was    found  
blood stained, improbable and unusual; that co-accused  of the 
appellant  were acquitted on the same set  of evidence  and no 
corroboration was forthcoming; that place of occurrence was at 
a distance of 7/8 kilometers from the Lahore General  Hospital 
and  the  witnesses  shifted  the  deceased  to  hospital      by  a 
rickshaw but neither their clothes were stained  with blood nor 
produced during the  investigation; that the case of prosecution 
was  riddled  with  doubts  and  the  doubt  even  slightest    is  
always  resolved  in  favour  of  the  accused.  Concluding  the 
arguments,  learned  counsel  submitted  that  the  prosecution 
miserably  failed  to  prove  its  case,  thus,  the  appellant  was 
entitled to acquittal.   
14.  Learned  Additional  Prosecutor  General  assisted  by  the 
learned  counsel  for  the    complainant  submitted  that  the 
witnesses  had  no  grudge  or  grouse  to  falsely  implicate  the 
appellant; that the learned trial Court held the  appellant guilty 
after  fair  appraisal  of  the  evidence;  that  case  of  prosecution 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
6 
was corroborated by the medical evidence  as well as recovery 
of  churri;  that  the  motive  was  proved;  that  the  minor 
discrepancies  hinted  at  by  the 
learned  counsel  for  the 
appellant  do  creep  up  with  the  passage  of  time;  that  the 
prosecution  has  proved  its  case  against  the  appellant  beyond 
reasonable  doubt.  Learned  counsel  supported  the  judgment 
rendered by the learned trial Court.    
15.  We  have  considered    the  arguments        advanced  by  the 
learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.  
16.  The gist of the prosecution’s case was that on 10.8.2010 
at  9.00  p.m  some  one  knocked  at  complainant’s  door  
whereupon  the  deceased  went  outside  his  home.  The  alarm 
then being raised in the street attracted the complainant along-
with Akram Masih and  Pervaiz Masih. They went outside and 
saw  that the appellant  along-with his co-accused   intercepted 
the  deceased  in  front  of  Gugo  Snooker  Club.  The  co-accused, 
namely,  Natin  and  Yasir  Masih  stood  at  guard  and  that  Latif 
Masih  appellant    stabbed  the  deceased  with  churri  hitting  on 
front  side  of  his  neck.  The  complainant  along-with  the  eye 
witnesses  shifted  the  injured  to  Lahore  General  Hospital  in  a 
rickshaw but the deceased expired in the hospital.      
17.  The  place    of  occurrence  was    surrounded  by  different 
shops and houses. It was in the evidence that may others were 
attracted to the spot but no independent  witness was cited by 
the  prosecution.  The  complainant  being  father  and  Akram 
Masih and  Pervaiz Masih being close relatives of the deceased 
did  not  make    even  an  abortive  attempt  to  save  the  deceased 
from  the  clutches  of  the  accused.  Their  conduct  was,  thus, 
unnatural  as  no  father  or  real  uncle  would  let  anybody  to 
commit murder of their son in their presence.  The complainant 
claimed to have gone to Lahore General Hospital sitting besides 
rickshaw  driver,  whereas,  Akram  Masih  and    Pervaiz  Masih 
were  sitting  on  both  sides  of  the  deceased,  was  bleeding 
profusely but neither their clothes were stained  with blood nor 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
7 
secured/taken  into  possession  during  the  investigation.  The  
production    and  securing  of  their  clothes  would  have  been  a 
very  important  circumstance  to  establish  the  presence  of  the 
witnesses  inside  the  rickshaw  and  with  the  injured  as  stated 
by the eye-witnesses.  
The  place  of  occurrence  was  at  a  distance  of  7/8 
kilometers  from  the  Lahore  General  Hospital  and  it  takes  
about  15  to  20  minutes  to  get  from  Gugo  Snooker  Club  to 
hospital.  It  is  also  hard  to  believe  that  the  clothes  of  the  eye-
witnesses  would  not  have  been  stained  with  blood  if  they 
actually carried the injured. The absence of blood stains on the 
clothes of eye-witnesses clearly indicate that none of them was 
sitting beside the injured or shifted him to hospital.   
18.  The  ocular  account  was  furnished  by  the  complainant 
and  Pervaiz  Masih,  real  Chacha  of  the  deceased,  whereas, 
Akram  Masih  was  given  up  being  unnecessary.  The 
complainant  reported  the  incident  in  clear  terms  that  the 
appellant  brought  out  churri from  the fold  of  his  shalwar    and 
stabbed  his  son.  He  also  levelled  the  same  allegation  during 
trial that appellant (                                                          ) but 
the  Medical  Officer  observed  incised  wound  against  the 
allegation of stabbing.  
19. 
 A  stab    wound  is  produced  when  force    is    delivered 
along  the  long  axis  of  a    narrow  or  pointed  object,  such  as  
knife,  dagger,  spear,  arrow,  screw  driver    etc.  in  the  depth  of 
the body. It is deeper than its length and width  on skin.  This 
can occur by driving the object  into the body or from the body’s 
pressing  or  falling  against  the  object.  They  are  called 
penetrating stab wound,  when they enter in a cavity of body.   
 
 
 
The factors that  determine how much force is needed for 
penetration to occur are:- 
(i) 
The sharpness of the tip of the weapon: the sharper the 
tip, the easier it is to penetrate the skin. 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
8 
(ii) 
The  speed  of  the  contact:  the  faster  the  contact,  the 
greater the force applied and the easier it is to penetrate 
the skin. 
(iii)  Whether  clothing  has  been  penetrated:  clothing 
increases the resistance to penetration. 
(iv)  Whether bone or cartilage has been  injured: skin offers 
very  little  resistance  to  a  stabling  action  by  a  sharp 
knife,  but  penetration  of  these  denser  tissues  will 
require greater force. 
 
When  the  weapon  enters  into  the  body  one  side    and 
comes out from the other side, perforating through and through 
puncture  wounds  are  produced    The  entry  is  larger  with 
inverted edges, and the exit is smaller with everted edges, due 
to tapering of blade. Whereas, the incised wounds are wounds 
caused by  a clean  sharp  object  such  as  a knife,   broken piece 
of glass or  razor. There  are different  types  of incised   wounds 
including cuts to the skin during shaving, cutting of skin from a 
broken  glass,  accidently  cutting  one-self  with  a  knife,  surgical 
incisions,  etc.  Since  these  wounds  are  result  of  clean  sharp 
object  cutting  into  the  skin,  these  are  usually  pretty  straight 
without  any  jagged  edges  to  the  wound.  The  autopsy  in  this 
case was held by Dr. Ahmed Raza Khan (PW.5), who observed 
incised wound of Churri 3 X 01 c.m with clean cut margins and 
well   defined  angles,   crescentraic  in   shape  and  on  the lower 
part of front aspect of right side  neck, 04 c.m right of mid line 
and  01  c.m  above  medial    end  of  clavical,  thus,  said  injury 
does  not  appear    to  be  result  of  stabbing  as  stated  by  the 
complainant.  
The medical evidence produced by the prosecution in this 
case  could  not  provide  much  support  to  the  ocular  account.  It 
can  only  provide  support  to  the  ocular  evidence  regarding 
various  details.  However,  medical  evidence  has  no  supportive 
value  where  the  eye-witnesses  themselves  do  not  inspire 
confidence and, thus, there is nothing left  to be suppored.   
20.  The  eye  witnesses  reached  at  the  crime  scene  on  the 
alarm  raised  in  the  street  and  after  the  occurrence,  the 
deceased  then  injured  was  shifted  by  them  on  a  rickshaw  to  
hospital.  He  expired  in  the  hospital  at  10.25  p.m  The 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
9 
Investigating  Officer  having  information  of  the  occurrence  also 
reached  in  the  hospital.  The  complainant  got  recorded  his 
statement  Exh.PA  and  the FIR  was  registered  at  11.15  p.m.  It 
was  also  in  the  evidence  that  the  dead  body  was  shifted  to 
hospital  at  12.10  a.m    but  the  postmortem  was  conducted  on 
11.08.2010 at 01.15 p.m. The time which elapsed between the 
postmortem  and  the death  was  15  to  24    hours,  mentioned  in 
the  statement  of  PW.5,  who  further  claimed  that  the  police 
papers  were  not  provided  to  him  and  being  handicapped    for 
that  reason,  he    could  not  conduct  the  postmortem  which 
reflects that  the police  papers  were not  prepared  till  the next 
day and suggests deliberation  and consultation. 
21.  The  reasons  for  the  outbreak  of    this  episode  was  that 
Latif Masih was a drug  seller and the deceased was an addict  
who  quite  often    refrained  the  appellant    from  selling  the 
narcotics  in  the  area.    The  complainant  has  admitted  in  cross 
examination  that  his  son  i.e.    the  deceased  was  an  addict, 
though occasionally,  thus,  story of   shunning    a  drug  peddler 
by  an  addict  does  not  appeal 
to  prudent  mind.  The 
Investigating  Officer  also  admitted  during  his  cross-
examination  that  no  evidence  was  produced  during  the 
investigation to support the motive and there  was no record of 
the appellant being the drug peddler, thus, the  evidence about 
the  motive  was  virtually  next  to  nothing  and  the  prosecution 
failed to substantiate the allegation.  
 
22.  After  the  occurrence,  the  appellant  fled  away  from  the  
crime  scene  and  was  arrested  after  twelve  days  of  the 
occurrence  and  led  to  the    recovery  of  churri  P-1  from  a  place 
not exclusively in his  possession rather it was state land. The 
recovered Churri (P.1) was blood stained, however, dispatched 
to  the  office  of  Public  Analyst    after  4½    months  of  the 
occurrence. The report of the chemical examiner reveals  that  it 
was stained with blood. The last worn clothes of the deceased 
were also found to be blood stained and taken into possession 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
10 
vide memo Exh.PD but no  report of serologist was available on 
the file regarding blood grouping, thus, the recovery of churri P-
1  would not help the prosecution in  any  manner.  The Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court    in  another  identical  case  titled  “Muhammad 
Asif    Versus  The  State”  (2017  SCMR  486)      observed  as 
under: 
“17. 
It  is,  normal    practice  and  conduct  of  culprits  that  
when  they  select  night  time  for  commission  of  such  crime, 
their  first  anxiety  is  to  conceal  their  identity  so  that  they 
may  go  scot-free  unidentified  and  in  that    course  they  try 
their  level  best  to  conceal  or  destroy  each  piece  of  evidence 
incriminating  in  nature  which,  might  be  used  against  them 
in  the  future  thus,  human  faculty  of  prudence  would  not 
accept the present story rather, after committing crime with 
the  dagger,  the  appellant  could  throw  it  away  anywhere  in 
any  field,  water  canals,  well  or    other  place  and  no 
circumstances  would  have  chosen  to  preserve  it  in  his  own 
shop if believed so because that was susceptible to recovery 
by the police.  
18. 
Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  we  deem  it 
essential to point out that, mere sending the crime weapons, 
blood  stained  to  the  chemical  examiner  and  serologist 
would  not  serve  the  purpose  of  the  prosecution  nor  it  will 
provide any evidence to inter link different articles.  
19.  We  have  noticed  that  the  Punjab  Police  invariably 
indulge in such a practice which is highly improper because 
unless  the  blood  stained  earth  or  cotton  and  blood  stained 
clothes of the victim are not sent with the same for opinion 
of  serologist  to  the  effect  that  it  was  human  blood  on  the 
crime  weapons  and  was  of  the  same  group  which  was 
available on the clothes of the victim and the blood stained 
was  available  on  the  clothes  of  the  victim  and  the  blood 
stained  earth/cotton,    such  inconclusive  opinion  cannot  be 
used  as  a  piece  of  corroboratory  evidence.  Therefore,  copy  
of  his  judgment    be  sent  to  the  Prosecutor  General,  Punjab, 
and Chief Incharge of Investigation, Punjab Provincial Police 
to  issue  instructions  to  the  investigating  agencies  in  this 
regard.  
 
 
23. 
It  may  also  be  mentioned  that  the  learned  trial  Court 
tried  all  the  accused  and  acquitted  Natin  Masih  and  Yasir 
Masih on the same set of evidence.  It is settled law that if the 
co-accused  of  the  appellant  are  acquitted  on  the  same  set  of 
evidence,  then,  conviction  on  a  capital  charge  can  only  be 
sustained on strong corroboration of the material available on 
record  which  is  not  forthcoming  in  this  case.  Reliance  in  this 
context,  can  be  placed  on  “Muhammad  Akram  V.  The  State” 
(2012  SCMR  440)    and  “Ulfat  Hussain  V.    State”  (2018 
SCMR 313). 
24. 
It  is    necessary  for  the  prosecution  to  prove  its  case 
against  the  accused  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt  and  in 
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
11 
absence of any direct or circumstantial evidence, conviction of 
a person cannot be sustained merely on account of his failure 
to  explain  the  circumstances  appearing  in  the  evidence 
against  him.  In  this  respect,  reliance  may  be  placed  on  the 
case  titled    “ABDUL  MAJEED  V.  THE  STATE”  (2011  SCMR 
941). It is by now settled that benefit of doubt, if found in the 
prosecution’s  case,  the  accused  shall  be  held  entitled  to  the 
benefit,  thereof.  It  is  also  settled  principle  of  criminal 
administration of justice that if there is element of doubt, as to 
the  guilt  of  accused,  it  must  be  resolved  in  his  favour.  The 
golden  rule  of  benefit  is  initially  a  rule  of  prudence  which 
cannot  be  ignored,  while  dispensing  justice  in  accordance 
with  law.  It  is  based  on  maxim  that  it  is  better  to  acquit  ten 
guilty persons rather than to convict one innocent person. For 
acquittal of accused in an offence,  how-so heinous  it may be,  
only a single doubt in the prosecution evidence is sufficient. In 
this  respect,  reference  may  be  made  to  case  titled  “Ayub 
Masih v. The State” (PLD 2002 SC 1048) and “G.M. Niaz  V. 
The State”(2018 SCMR 506). 
 
The  instant  case  as  discussed  above  is  replete  with 
serious  doubts  and  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  the  benefit, 
thereof.  
25.  The  overall  effect  of  the  discussion  of  above  facts  and 
circumstances 
is 
that 
the  eye-witnesses,  whose  very 
presence  at  the  time  and  place  of  occurrence,  is  highly 
doubtful,  does  not  find  ample  corroboration  from  the  other 
available  evidence/material.  The  medical  evidence  did  not 
furnish  requisite  corroboration  to  the  eye-witnesses.  No 
evidence 
regarding  motive  was 
produced 
during 
investigation  or  at  trial.  This  case  is  replete  with  doubts, 
which leads us to hold that the prosecution failed to prove its 
case  against  the  appellant  beyond  any  reasonable  shadow 
of doubt.  
 Crl. Appeal No.78 of 2014                                                                      
Crl. Appeal No.388 of 2014 
 Crl. Revision No.202 of 2014 
Murder Reference No.178 of 2015 
 
      
 
12 
26. 
In  view  of    above,  the  Criminal  Appeal  No.78  of  2014  
is  accepted.  The  conviction/sentence  awarded 
to 
the 
appellant  is  hereby  set  aside.    He  is  in  custody  and  be 
released forthwith if not required in any other criminal case.  
27. 
In  sequel  of  the  above  discussion,  Criminal  Appeal 
No.388 of 2014  against the acquittal of co-accused  namely 
Yasir Masih and Natin Masih  and  Criminal Revision No.202 
of  2014 
 
  for  enhancement  of  compensation 
  from 
Rs.2,00,000/- 
to 
Rs.10,00,000/-  moved 
by 
the 
appellant/petitioner are hereby dismissed.  
28.      The  death  sentence  is  not  confirmed  and  the  Murder 
Reference No.178 of 2015 is answered in the negative.   
   The  record    of  the  learned  trial  Court  be  remitted 
immediately and the case property be dealt with as  directed 
by the learned trial Court.  
 
 
(CH. ABDUL AZIZ)    (SARDAR AHMED NAEEM) 
Irfan         JUDGE                          JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
               
      
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
irfan* 
 
