Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH 
MULTAN 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
 
Case No.  Crl. Misc. No.1253-B/2018 
 
Kishwar Abbas Shah alias Kashi  Versus  
The State etc. 
 
 
 
Sr. No. of order/ 
Proceedings 
Date of order/ 
Proceedings 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, 
where necessary. 
 
16.05.2018  M/s  Sardar  Mehboob  and  Malik  Faiz  Ahmad  Khakh, 
 
Advocate for the petitioner. 
Mr. Abdul Rauf, Advocate for the complainant.  
Mr.  Ishfaq  Ahmad  Malik,  Deputy  Prosecutor  General 
alongwith Javed Inspector/SHO.  
===== 
Through  this  petition  under  Section  497 
Cr.P.C., petitioner Kishwar Abbas Shah alias Kashi 
has sought post arrest bail in case FIR No.425 dated 
25.10.2017,  in  respect  of  offences  under  Sections 
324  &  34  PPC,  registered  at  Police  Station,  Daira 
Deen Panah District Muzaffargarh.  
2. 
The  allegation  against  the  petitioner,  as 
contained in the crime report, is that on 25.10.2017 
at  about  2:30  p.m.,  he  alongwith  his  co-accused, 
while  armed  with  pistols,  in  furtherance  of  their 
common intention, had launched murderous assault 
upon Khadim Hussain, brother of the complainant 
and caused fire arm injuries on different parts of his 
body.  Hence, this case was registered.  
3. 
I  have  heard 
learned  counsel  for 
the 
petitioner,  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General 
appearing for the State assisted by learned counsel 
for  the  complainant  and  have  perused  the  record 
with their able assistance. 
4. 
The  petitioner  was  saddled  with 
the 
responsibility  of  making  two  fire  shots  causing 
injuries at the right side of ribs (thorax) and the right  
Crl. Misc. No.1253-B/2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
thigh of injured Khadim Hussain.  The medico-legal certificate of 
the said injured witness shows that the injury sustained by him at 
the chest was falling within the ambit of Section 337-D PPC and 
the other injury at his right thigh was falling within the ambit of 
Section  337-F(ii)  PPC.    The  statement  of  injured  witnesses  was 
recorded with the delay of 19-days, which prima facie renders it to 
be  legally  unacceptable  as  held  in  case  titled  “MUHAMMAD 
ASIF versus The STATE” (2017 SCMR 486)”.   
5. 
Admittedly,  during  investigation,  nothing  was  recovered 
from  the  petitioner’s  possession.  Furthermore,  during  two 
successive  investigations,  it  was  found  that  the  petitioner  was 
though  present  at  the  place  of  occurrence  yet  empty-handed 
without  playing  any  role  whatsoever  and  one  of  the  co-accused 
namely Imran was declared to be not involved in this case.  This 
shows that it is a case of two versions, one put by the complainant 
and the eye witnesses including the injured one that the petitioner 
had  caused  two  fire  arm  injuries  to  the  injured  witness  and  the 
second  one  of  the  investigating  agency  during  two  successive 
investigations  wherein  he  was  found  present  at  the  place  of 
occurrence empty-handed.  The aforesaid facts and circumstances 
of the case render it to be one of further inquiry into the guilt of 
the  petitioner  in  view  of  the  dictum  laid  down  in  case  titled 
“EHSAN  ULLAH  versus  THE  STATE”  (2012  SCMR  1137) 
wherein it was held as under:- 
“It is pertinent to mention that the investigating agency had 
reached at a definite conclusion that the petitioner was not 
even present at the scene of the crime at the relevant time 
and  as  a  matter  of  fact  he  had  provided  behind-the-scene 
abetment to his co-accused for commission of the alleged 
offences  and 
this 
is  why 
the  petitioner  has  been 
recommended for trial only in respect of an offence under 
section 109 PPC.  This shows that in the present  case the 
prosecution itself has two versions vis-à-vis the petitioner, 
first  of  the  complainant  party  according  to  which  the 
petitioner was present at the spot and had resorted to firing 
and second of the investigating agency according to which 
the petitioner was not present at the spot and he was abetting 
 
 
Crl. Misc. No.1253-B/2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
his  co-accused  from  behind 
the  scene. 
  All 
the 
considerations surely render the case against the petitioner 
one of further inquiry into his guilt.”       
 
6. 
The petitioner was arrested in this case on 15.12.2017 and 
he is behind the bars since then without any substantial progress in 
the  conclusion  of  the  trial  and,  thus,  he  cannot  be  kept  in  the 
judicial lockup for an indefinite period.   
In  view  of  above,  the  petition  in  hand  is  allowed  and  the 
petitioner is admitted to bail subject to his furnishing bail bonds in 
the  sum  of  Rs.100,000/-  (rupees  one  lac)  with  one  surety  in  the 
like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court. 
 
 
                 (Asjad Javaid Ghural) 
                         Judge 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
                                 JUDGE 
 
Asif* 
 
 
