Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
 JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 
 
C.R. No.1798/2015. 
 
Ahmad Yar & another. 
Versus 
Muhammad Ali & another. 
 
Date of Hearing  13.09.2018. 
Petitioners by 
Ch.  Naveed  Akhtar  Bajwa  and  Salah-
ud-Din Siddique, Advocates.  
Respondents By  Nemo. 
 
             MUHAMMAD  AMEER  BHATTI,  J:-  Suit  for  possession 
through pre-emption filed by the present petitioners regarding land 
measuring  3-Kanals  2-Marlas  allegedly  purchased 
for  a 
consideration  of  Rs.2,00,000/-  through  oral  mutation  dated 
29.01.2010  was  decreed  by  the  learned  trial  Court  vide judgment 
dated  20.05.2014  holding  that  the  petitioners  had  performed  the 
requisite  Talbs  in  accordance  with  law  and  they  have  preferential 
right. Appeal whereof filed by the respondents/defendants/vendees 
was  accepted  by  the  learned  first  appellate  Court  vide  impugned 
judgment  dated  09.05.2015,  as  a  consequence  whereof,  the  suit 
filed by the petitioners stood dismissed.  
2. 
 
Learned  counsels  for  the  petitioners  have  been 
heard and record perused.  
C.R. No.1798/2015 
 
2 
3. 
Indeed,  essential  requirement  of  law  as  envisaged  in 
Section  13(3)  of  the  Punjab  Pre-emption  Act,  1991  is  sending  of 
notice to the vendee confirming his intention to  exercise the right 
of pre-emption. The mode of sending of notice has been specified 
which  is  mandatory  to  be  followed  and  omission  of  any  of  the 
ingredients mentioned in the section extinguishes the right of pre-
emption.  Section  13(3)  of  Punjab  Pre-emption  Act,  1991  further 
stipulates  that  notice  of  Talb-i-Ishhad  must  be  dispatched  to 
vendee  through  registered  acknowledgement  due  and  these 
documents  i.e.  notice,  postal  receipt  and  acknowledgment  due 
containing either signature/thumb impression of recipient or report 
of  postman  regarding  refusal  or  his  non-availability  have  to  be 
tendered  in  evidence;  besides,  proving  of  these  documents  by 
producing  their  witnesses  is  also  mandatory  and  obligation  of  the 
pre-emptor. 
 
In  the  case  of  Muhammad Bashir and others v. 
Abbas  Ali  Shah  (2007  SCMR  1105), 
the 
implication  of 
acknowledgment card was emphasized in the following terms:- 
 
  “11.  The requirement of, “sending a notice in writing” 
is  followed  by  a  rider  i.e.  “under  registered  cover 
acknowledgement  due”.  This  signifies  that  the  intention 
of  law  is  not  merely  a  formal  notice  on  the  part  of  the 
pre-emptor  conveying  his  intention  to  pre-empt  but  a 
notice served on the addressee to apprise him about his 
intention  to  pre-empt.  To  say  that  mere  “sending  of 
notice” 
the  expression 
“acknowledgement  due”  redundant.  The  service  of  the 
addressee, as prescribed in law therefore, is imperative. 
is  enough  would  make 
C.R. No.1798/2015 
 
3 
If the acknowledgement card carries an endorsement of 
“refusal”  or  “not  accepted”,  a  presumption  of  service 
would  arise  unless  it  is  rebutted.  The  expression 
“sending  notice”  came  up 
in 
Thammiah,  b.  v.  Election  Officer  (1980)  1.  Kant  L.J.  19 
and  the  Court  held  that  it  means,  “that  it  should  reach 
the hands of the person to whom it has been given and 
the  giving  is  complete  when  it  has  been  offered  to  a 
person but not accepted by it”.  
for  consideration 
 
Further,  in Ghulam Abbas and another v. Manzoor Ahmad 
and  another  (2008  SCMR  1366) 
the 
requirement  of 
acknowledgement due receipt was held to be one of the modes to 
satisfy  that  the  notice  had  reached  the  addressee.  Obviously 
without  production  of  any  of  the  document  appearance  of  any 
related witness would not be enough to absolve him of the duties 
to  prove  the  document  inasmuch  as  it  is  settled  law  that  the 
documentary evidence cannot be excluded by oral assertion (2017 
CLC Note 117 is referred), therefore, it is mandatory not only to 
produce the document but its witnesses also whereas in this case 
although  postman  was  produced  who  testified  the  delivery  of  the 
notice of Talb-i-Ishhad to the vendee alleging that he obtained the 
signature/thumb  impression  of  the  vendee  on  acknowledgment 
card  but  on  the  other  hand,  vendee  had  specifically  denied 
receiving  of  notice  of  Talb-i-Ishhad  and  in  such  eventuality  the 
production of acknowledgement card containing his  signature was 
sine qua non to get the benefit of the testimony of postman which 
had 
neither 
been 
exhibited 
nor 
produced 
by 
the 
C.R. No.1798/2015 
 
4 
plaintiffs/petitioners  despite  the  fact  that  they  admitted  its 
availability  with  them,  so  withholding  the  evidence  confirmed  this 
fact  that  it  did  not  favour  them  and  non-production  of  said 
evidence  is  fatal  to  obtain  a  decree  in  a  pre-emption  suit.  In 
absence of the acknowledgement card significance of production of 
postman has lost its efficacy extinguishing the pre-emption right of 
the pre-emptor.  
4. 
In  view  of  above,  it  is  held  that  the  petitioners  have 
failed to discharge their mandatory obligation to prove the service 
of  notice  of  Talb-i-Ishhad  as  envisaged  under  Section  13(3)  of 
Punjab  Pre-emption  Act,  1991 which is  fatal  for  their  pre-emption 
suit.  
5. 
For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  I  find  no  reason  to 
interfere  in  the  findings  recorded  by  the  learned  first  Appellate  Court 
which are in consonance with the settled principle of law and it does not 
disclose  any  illegality  or  irregularity  which  is  essential  to  exercise  the 
power provided under Section 115 C.P.C., therefore, this petition having 
no merit stands dismissed. No order as to costs.  
             
 
 
 
 
                                    (MUHAMMAD AMEER BHATTI)                            
 
  
 
             JUDGE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting.    
 
 
 
 
Nadeem *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   JUDGE.  
 
 
