. 
 
 
 
 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
(Muhammad Aslam vs. The State) 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
(The State vs. Muhammad Aslam) 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing: 
 
 
 
01.10.2018   
 
 
Appellant by: 
Mr. Azam Nazeer Tarar, Advocate. 
State by: 
Mr.  Usman 
General with Basheer, A.S.I. 
Iqbal,  Deputy  Prosecutor 
Complainant by: 
M/s  Malik  Rehmat  Ullah  and  Hafiz  Allah 
Yar Sipra, Advocates. 
 
 
SAYYED  MAZAHAR  ALI  AKBAR  NAQVI,  J:- 
Muhammad Aslam son of Mansabdar, caste Deoka, resident of Chak 
No.244/JB,  Tehsil  and  District  Chiniot,  appellant,  along  with  Alam 
Sher,  Mohammad  Nawaz,  Mazhar  Iqbal,  Mansabdar,  Mohammad 
Ayub,  Mohammad  Ramzan,  Rab  Nawaz,  Jahangir,  Afzal  and  Sajjad 
alias  Sajid  (all  since  acquitted)  was 
involved 
in  case  FIR 
No.333/2013, dated 22.08.2013, offence under Sections 302, 148, 149, 
PPC,  registered  with  Police  Station  Langrana.  He  was  tried  by 
learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Chiniot,  under 
the  afore-
mentioned offences. The learned trial court after completion of trial, 
convicted  and  sentenced 
the  appellant  vide 
judgment  dated 
07.10.2015 in the following terms:- 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(2) 
  Under  Section  302(b),  PPC,  sentenced  to  death  as 
Ta‟zir  with  direction 
to  pay  Rs.2,00,000/-  as 
compensation  to  legal  heirs  of  deceased  in  terms  of 
Section  544-A,  Cr.P.C.  and  in  case  of  default  in 
payment thereof, to undergo S.I. for six months. 
2. 
 
Feeling  aggrieved  by  the  judgment  of  the  learned  trial 
court, the appellant has assailed his conviction and sentence through 
filing Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 while learned trial court forwarded 
Murder  Reference  No.373/2015  for  confirmation  of  death  sentence 
inflicted upon the convict in terms of Section 374, Cr.P.C. As both the 
matters are arising out of one and the same  judgment of the learned 
trial  court, 
therefore, 
these  are  being  disposed  off 
through 
consolidated judgment. 
3. 
 
Prosecution  story  as  portrayed  in  the  FIR  (Exh.PA/1) 
lodged  on  the  written  application  (Exh.PA)  of  Soba  Khan  son  of 
Ghulam  Muhammad,  caste  Deoka  (PW-1)  is  that  the  complainant  is 
resident  of  Chak  No.244/JB  and  involved  in  Zamindara.  On 
22.08.2013, the complainant along with his brother Muhammad Ayub, 
Zafar Abbas son of Ghulam Muhammad, Zulfiqar son of Shahamand, 
all  Deoka  by  caste  and  residents  of  the  same  village,  were  busy  in 
work in their fields. In the meanwhile accused (1) Muhammad Aslam 
son of Mansabdar armed with gun .12-bore double barrel, (2) Mazhar 
Abbas son of  Mansabdar armed with pistol .30-bore, (3) Mansabdar 
son  of  Machhia  armed  with  Sota,  (4)  Muhammad  Ramzan  son  of 
Muhammad  Nawaz  armed  with  sota,  (5)  Muhammad  Ayub  son  of 
Sardara armed with sota, (6) Rab Nawaz son of Dilmeer armed with 
gun  .12-bore,  (7)  Alam Sher son of Barkhurdar armed with sota, (8) 
Muhammad Nawaz son of Allah Yar, all Deoka by caste and residents 
of the same village along with three unknown accused persons while 
raising  lalkara  emerged  there.  On  seeing  them  Zulfiqar  son  of 
Dilmeer  Khan,  caste  Deoka,  who  was  present  in  Killa  No.17  went 
towards  the  complainant  and  raised  lalkara  to  teach  lesson  to 
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(3) 
Muhammad  Ayub  etc.  to  support  Zulfiqar.  In  pursuance  of  lalkara 
Muhammad  Aslam  son  of  Mansabdar  made  a  fire  shot  with  his  gun 
.12-bore, which inflicted injury on the left side of chest. Thereafter he 
made  second  fire  shot,  which  landed  at  the  left  flank  of  Muhammad 
Ayub.  After  receipt  of  injuries  Muhammad  Ayub  fell  down  on  the 
ground. The accused persons while raising lalkaras and making firing 
fled away from the scene of occurrence. Muhammad Ayub succumbed 
to the injuries at the spot.  
 
Motive  behind the occurrence as disclosed in the crime report 
was that Zulfiqar son of Dilmeer Khan is behnvai of the complainant, 
who inherited land from his mother and he had possession over Killa 
No.17.  In  this  regard  a  case  was  pending  in  the  civil  court.  The 
accused  had  nourished  grudge  due  to  which  they  committed  the 
murder. 
4. 
 
On  receipt  of  information  regarding  the  occurrence, 
Zafar  Ullah,  S.I.  (PW-9)  visited  the  place  of  occurrence  where  the 
complainant  presented  his  application  and  after  endorsing  police 
karvai  the  same  was  transmitted  to  Police  Station  through  Abid  Ali 
104/C  for  registration  of  formal  FIR.  He  prepared  injury  statement 
(Exh.PJ),  drafted  inquest  report  (Exh.PK)  and  dispatched  the  dead 
body to  mortuary under the escort of Tahir 930/C (PW-6). From the 
spot  Investigating  Officer  secured  blood  stained  earth  vide  recovery 
memo Exh.PC and four crime empties (P-9/1-4) vide recovery memo 
Exh.PB. He also prepared rough site plan of the place of occurrence 
(Exh.PN).  After  postmortem  examination  last  worn  clothes  of  the 
deceased qameez (P-6), bunyan (P-7) and dhoti (P-8) were produced 
before  the  Investigating  Officer,  which  were  secured  vide  recovery 
memo  Exh.PL.  Upon  the  direction  of  Investigating  Officer  and 
pointing out of the PWs, Muhammad Arif, Patwari (PW-7) took rough 
notes  of  the  place  of  occurrence  on  24.08.2013  and  thereafter 
prepared scaled  site plan (Exh.PM and Exh.PM/1), which was made 
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(4) 
part  of  the  file.  On  18.09.2013  Investigating  Officer  arrested  the 
appellant  and  obtained  his  physical  remand.  During  the  course  of 
interrogation in pursuance of disclosure on 23.09.2013, appellant led 
to  the  recovery  of  gun  .12-bore  (P-4)  along  with  five  live  cartridges 
(P-5/1-5),  which  were  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo 
Exh.PG.  On  reaching  Police  Station,  Investigating  Officer  handed 
over  case  property  to  Moharrar  Malkhana  for  safe  custody  and 
onward  transmission  to  the  quarter  concerned.  He  also  recorded 
statements of the prosecution witnesses under Section 161, Cr.P.C.  
5. 
 
During  the  course  of  investigation  having  found  the 
appellant guilty,  Investigating  Officer  prepared  report  under  Section 
173, Cr.P.C. while placing his name in column No.3, which was  sent 
to  the  court  of  Sessions  en-routed  through  the  Illaqa  Magistrate  as 
provided  under  Section  190(2),  Cr.P.C.  The  learned  trial  court  vide 
order  dated  22.07.2014  formally  charge  sheeted  the  appellant  to 
which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. In order to substantiate 
its  version,  prosecution  produced  as  many  as  nine  (9)  prosecution 
witnesses. 
6. 
 
Soba  Khan  (PW-1)  is  complainant  of  the  case  while 
Zulfiqar  Ali  (PW-2)  is  other  witness  of  the  occurrence.  Muhammad 
Qais  334/HC  (PW-3)  had  chalked  out  formal  FIR  while  Muhammad 
Arif,  Patwari  (PW-7)  had  prepared  scaled  site  plan  of  the  place  of 
occurrence. Investigation in this case was conducted by Zafar Ullah, 
S.I. (PW-9). 
 
On  22.08.2013,  Dr.  Muhammad  Rehmatullah  (PW-4)  had 
conducted postmortem examination over the dead body and observed 
following injuries on his person:- 
 “1.  A  lacerated  wound  of  1  cm  x  1  cm  with  inverted 
margins  on  left  front  of  chest,  5  cm  above  nipple 
(entry wound). 
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(5) 
2. 
A lacerated wound of 1 cm x 0.8 cm, with inverted 
margins on left lateral and lower chest. A foreign 
body  was  palpable  on  posterior  chest  wall 
muscles, 8 cm posterior to this entry wound.”  
After  conducting  postmortem  examination,  doctor  rendered  the 
following opinion:- 
“In  my  opinion  the  cause  of  death  in  this  case  was 
haemorrhage and shock due to injury to vital organ lung 
and  major  blood  vessels  of  chest  due  to  injury  No.1. 
Injury No.1 individually and both the injuries collectively 
were  sufficient  to  cause  death  in  ordinary  course  of 
nature.” 
Statements of rest of the prosecution witnesses are formal in nature. 
7. 
 
The appellant was examined  under Section 342, Cr.P.C. 
wherein  he  refuted  the  accusations  levelled  against  him  in  the 
prosecution evidence and claimed his innocence. 
8. 
 
Learned 
trial  court  after  evaluating 
the  evidence 
available on record, found version of the prosecution proved beyond 
shadow  of  reasonable  doubt  against  the  appellant,  resulting  into  his 
conviction in the afore-stated terms. 
9. 
 
At  the  very  outset,  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant 
submitted  that  the  impugned  judgment  has  been  recorded  by  the 
learned  trial  court  in  a  slipshod  manner  without  adverting  to  real 
facts  of  the  case  and  material  available  on  record.  Learned  counsel 
contended  that  story  advanced  by  the  prosecution  on  the  face  of  it 
does not sound sense. It was argued that presence of the prosecution 
witnesses  at  the  place  of  occurrence  at  the  relevant  time  is  highly 
improbable.  Further  argued  that  there  are  glaring  contradictions  in 
the  statements  of  the  prosecution  witnesses  creating  serious  dents  in 
its authenticity. Further submitted that the medical evidence does not 
corroborate  the  prosecution  version  and  even  the  postmortem 
examination  was  conducted  belatedly.  Learned  counsel  vigorously 
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(6) 
argued  that  motive  in  this  case  is  very  weak  and  no  evidence 
whatsoever was adduced to substantiate the same. It was argued that 
during  the  course  of  investigation  six  accused  were  found  innocent 
and even except the appellant rest of the accused were acquitted of the 
charge  by  the  learned  trial  court.  Finally  learned  counsel  for  the 
appellant submitted that if the whole prosecution version is presumed 
to be true at the most it is not a case of capital punishment and prayed 
for alternative sentence provided under the law. 
10. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General 
assisted  by  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  vehemently  opposed 
the contentions raised on behalf of the appellant. It was argued that it 
is a daylight occurrence and the parties are previously known to each 
other,  hence  question  of  mistaken  identity  does  not  arise.  Further 
contended  that  the  appellant  is  duly  named  in  the  crime  report  with 
his specific role of inflicting injury on the person of deceased. It was 
argued that prosecution witnesses while appearing in the witness-box 
fully  substantiated  the  prosecution  case.  They  remained  coherent  on 
salient features of the prosecution version and despite lengthy cross-
examination  nothing  adverse  to  the  prosecution  version  could  be 
brought  on  record.  Further  contended  that  medical  evidence  fully 
corroborates the prosecution version. It was argued that the accused 
had  committed  occurrence  with  strong  motive.  Learned  Deputy 
Prosecutor General contended that during the course of investigation 
gun  .12-bore  was  recovered  from  the appellant,  who was also  found 
guilty  as  such  his  name  was  placed  in  column  No.3  of  the  report 
prepared  under  Section  173,  Cr.P.C.  It  was  finally  argued  that 
keeping in view the tenor of evidence adduced by the prosecution, the 
learned trial court was rightly justified in inflicting punishment  upon 
the appellant under the relevant provisions of law, which in the given 
scenario is in exact proportionate to the act committed by him.  
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(7) 
11. 
 
We  have  considered  the  arguments  advanced  from  both 
sides and perused the record available on file with the able assistance 
of  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant,  learned  counsel  for  the 
complainant, as well as, learned Deputy Prosecutor General. 
12. 
 
There  is  no  second  cavil  to  this  proposition  that  each 
criminal  case  has  its  own  peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  and  the 
same hardly coincide with other cases. As per prosecution version the 
occurrence  in  the  instant  case  had  taken  place  in  broad  daylight  on 
22.08.2013 at 6:15 a.m. while the same was reported to the police at 
7:50 a.m.  whereas inter-se distance between the place of occurrence 
and  the  Police  Station  is  30-KMs,  hence  in  all  eventualities  it  is  a 
promptly  lodged  FIR.  In  this  unfortunate  incident,  brother  of  the 
complainant was assaulted upon at the hands of the assailants. As far 
as appellant before this Court is concerned he has been ascribed the 
role of making fire shots with his gun .12-bore upon Muhammad Ayub 
resulting  into  injuries  at  his  chest  and  left  flank.  In  order  to 
substantiate  its  case  the  prosecution  has  led  evidence  qua  occular 
account,  medical  evidence,  motive,  recovery  of  gun 
.12-bore, 
investigation, as well as, other pieces of evidence.  
13. 
 
As  far  as  the  occular  account  in  this  case  is  concerned 
that  is  coming  from  the  mouth  of  Soba  Khan  (PW-1)  and  Zulfiqar 
(PW-2). Both the prosecution witnesses of the occular account claim 
to  be  present  at  the  spot  and  have  seen  the  occurrence  with  their 
naked eyes. As far as complainant is concerned, he happens to be real 
brother of the deceased while Zulfiqar PW is from  his brotheri. This 
aspect  of  the  prosecution  case  clearly  reflects  that  the  prosecution 
version  of  the  occular  account  is  coming  from  a  source,  which  is 
interested  and  related,  hence  possibility  of  being  biased  cannot  be 
ruled out. It is established principle of law that in such circumstances 
the superior courts always seek independent corroboration, which is a 
rule of prudence and depicts that the case has to be evaluated on the 
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(8) 
principle of safe administration of criminal justice. In the instant case 
this aspect can neither be undermined nor ignored that despite of the 
fact  that  the  occurrence  being  broad  day,  in  the  crime  report  eight 
accused  were  duly  named  while  three  were  mentioned  as  unknown 
person. Out of them six accused persons were  found innocent during 
the course of investigation and neither the complainant challenged the 
findings  of  the  Investigating  Officer  nor  alternative  remedy  of  filing 
private  complaint  was  availed.  In  the  past  the  principle  of  „falsus  in 
uno falsus in omnibus‟ was fully applicable in such like situation and 
the  same  was  made  basis  for  adjudication  by  the  superior  courts. 
However,  in  the  early  70s  there  was  slight  deviation  from  the  same 
and  principle  „sifting  the  grain  from  the  chaff‟  was  introduced  in 
letter  and  spirit.  This  principle  is  squarely  attracted  in  the  instant 
case. As far as role ascribed to the appellant is concerned he has been 
saddled  with  the  liability  of  making  two  fire  shots:  one  at  chest  and 
the  other  on  left  flank  of  Muhammad  Ayub  deceased.  Both  the 
prosecution  witnesses  of  occular  account  while  making 
their 
statements had fully implicated the appellant in the instant case. They 
remained  coherent on salient features to the prosecution version  viz. 
time,  place,  mode  and  manner  of  occurrence  and  despite  lengthy 
cross-examination  nothing  adverse  to  the  prosecution  version  could 
be brought on record.  
14. 
 
As far as medical evidence in this case is concerned, Dr. 
Muhammad  Rehmat  Ullah  (PW-4)  had  conducted  postmortem 
examination over the dead body of deceased and affirmed the injuries 
on the person of deceased. The dimension of injuries on the person of 
deceased  and  opinion  of  the  doctor  that  injuries  ascribed  to  the 
appellant  were  caused  by  firearm  weapon  further  substantiates  the 
prosecution  case.  Even  the  doctor  opined  that  injuries  No.1  and  2 
collectively resulted into death of the deceased. This aspect is further 
fortified from the fact that during the course of investigation gun .12-
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(9) 
bore  (P-4)  was  recovered  on  the  pointing  out  of  the  appellant. 
Moreover,  the  report  of  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency  (Exh.PR) 
qua  blood-stained  earth  collected  by  the  Investigating  Officer  at  the 
time of spot inspection also supports the prosecution case.  
15. 
 
The  accumulative  effect  of  the  whole  discussion  is  that 
prosecution  has  been  succeeded  in  bringing  home  guilt  against  the 
appellant  through  reliable,  trust-worthy,  substantive  evidence  on  the 
record,  which  in  other  words  is  unshaken  and  confidence  inspiring. 
Therefore,  the  learned  trial  court  was  rightly  justified  in  recording 
conviction against the appellant under Section 302(b), PPC.  
16. 
 
Now  the  question  arises  whether  sentence  of  death 
inflicted by the learned trial court is appropriate to meet the ends of 
safe administration of justice keeping in view the facts floating on the 
record. Perusal of record available on file reflects that while lodging 
the  crime  report  a  very  specific  motive  was  alleged,  however,  no 
evidence  whatsoever  was  adduced 
to  substantiate 
the  same. 
Moreover, in the crime report eight accused were named while three 
were  mentioned  as  unknown,  who  were  surfaced  subsequently. 
However,  during  the  course  of  investigation  six  accused  were  found 
innocent  and  even  the  learned  trial  court  had  acquitted  rest  of  the 
accused  except  the  appellant and  appeal filed against their acquittal 
was also withdrawn. Fact also remains that although it is alleged that 
during the course of investigation gun .12-bore was recovered on the 
pointing  out  of  the  appellant,  however,  there  is  no  report  of  Punjab 
Forensic Science Agency qua its matching. All these facts when taken 
into  consideration  conjointly,  we  are  of  the  considered  view  that  the 
appellant has made out a case for infliction of alternative sentence of 
imprisonment  for  life  as  provided  under  Section  302(b),  PPC. 
Guidance in this regard is sought from the ratio decidendi laid down 
by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Muhammad 
Riaz  and  another  vs.  The  State  and  another  (2007  SCMR  1413); 
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 
Crl. Appeal No.986-J/2015 
 
(10) 
wherein their Lordships in the august Supreme Court of Pakistan have 
held as under:- 
“No  doubt  normal  penalty  for  an  act  of  commission  of 
Qatl-i-Amd  provided  under  law  is  death,  but  since  life 
imprisonment  also  being  a  legal  sentence  for  such 
offence  must  be  kept  in  mind  wherever  the  facts  and 
circumstances  warrant  mitigation  of  sentence,  because 
no  hard  and  fast  rule  can  be  applied  in  each  and  every 
case.” 
Similar  view  was  affirmed  in  the  case  of  MUHAMMAD  SHARIF  vs. 
THE STATE (PLD 2009 Supreme Court 709); wherein it was held as 
under:- 
“It  has  been  seen  and  observed  from  the  perusal  of  the 
various  proceedings in  relation  to section  302  of  P.P.C. 
in  particular  its  clause  (b),  that  there  is  a  choice  and 
discretion left with the Court to inflict punishment “with 
death or  imprisonment  for  life  as tazir  having regard to 
the facts and circumstances of the case.”  
17. 
 
For  the  foregoing  reasons  while  taking  the  afore  stated 
circumstances  falling  within  the  ambit  of  mitigation,  Crl.  Appeal 
No.986-J/2015 filed by the appellant is dismissed with modification in 
his  sentence  from  death  to  imprisonment  for  life  under  Section 
302(b),  PPC,  as  Ta‟zir.  However,  the  burden  of  compensation  in 
terms of Section 544-A, Cr.P.C. as imposed by the learned trial court 
and the effect in failure thereof, shall remain intact. Benefit of Section 
382-B, Cr.P.C. is also extended in favour of the appellant.  
18. 
 
Murder Reference No.373/2015 forwarded by the learned 
trial court in terms of Section 374, Cr.P.C. for confirmation of death 
sentence upon the convict fails, which is answered in negative. Death 
sentence is not confirmed. 
 
(Sardar Ahmed Naeem) 
(Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi) 
Approved for Reporting 
Judge 
Riaz 
Judge 
 
