 
 
I.C.A. No.203/2015 
 
 
 
From No:HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
                               IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, RAWALPINDI BENCH, RAWALPINDI. 
          JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
                                                           Case No. 
 
 
 
 
I.C.A. No.203/2015 
 
                   Suhail Jute Mills  Versus                Govt. of Punjab etc. 
 
S. No. of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of 
order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
Parties or Counsel, where necessary. 
Proceeding 
 
 
 
                           24.04.2018 
 
 
 
 
Malik Qamar Afzal, Advocate for the appellant. 
Raja Shahid Mehmood Abbasi, AAG. 
 
 
 
Through this Intra Court Appeal the appellant has called-
in-question  the  judgment  dated  02.06.2015  passed  by  the 
learned  Judge-in-Chamber  in  Writ  Petition  No.1290/2008, 
whereby  the  said  constitutional  petition  was  dismissed  by 
holding  that  disputed  question  of  fact  regarding  submission  of 
document alleged by the appellant whereas denied by the other 
side barring exercise of writ jurisdiction in such circumstances.  
 
2. 
 The  brief  facts  of  the  case  necessary  to  adjudicate  this 
matter  are  that  the  appellant  in  response  to  tender  invited 
through press for supply of  2611 bales of jute bags for storage 
of wheat for the season 2005-06, had submitted tender No.SOF-
V(I)/2006  @  Rs.49.75  per  bag.  The  offer  of  the  appellant  on 
account  of  missing  of  “Price  Reasonability  Certificate”  in  the 
terms  of  offer  being  defected  pointed-out  by  the  respondent 
department  by  making offer  to  remove  the  said deficiency  and 
matter  of  acceptance  kept  pending  till  definite  reply  regarding 
its  inclusion  and  ultimately  vide  letter  dated  07.04.2006  the 
requisite certificate was  furnished. Consequently, tender  of  the 
appellant was accepted and formal agreement was executed on 
 
 
I.C.A. No.203/2015 
 
 
12.04.2006. At the time of disbursement of price of total supply 
of  jute  bags,  it  transpired  that  the  appellant  had  sold-out  the 
same  bags  to  PASSCO  @  Rs.46.25  per  bag.  Accordingly  the 
respondent  department  made  the  payment  to  the  appellant  for 
supplied bags at the latter rate thus reduction in rate was called-
in-question  by  the  appellant  through  constitutional  petition  on 
the  ground  that  the  appellant  had  not  supplied  any  bag  to 
PASSCO  after  issuance  of  “Price  Reasonability  Certificate” 
dated  07.04.2006,  therefore,  the  deduction  from  his  total 
amount-price,  reducing  the  rate  from  Rs.49.75  per  bag  to 
Rs.46.25  per  bag  was  illegal,  unlawful  and  without  any  legal 
justification.  However,  the  learned  Judge-in-Chamber  vide 
paragraph 5 of judgment although decided that the action of the 
respondents  was  legal  and  justified,  nevertheless  regarding 
Note-1 it was held that this Note is disputed by the other side; 
hence, cannot be examined in constitutional jurisdiction.  
3. 
The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant is 
that  the  learned  Judge-in-Chamber  on  one  hand  has  not  only 
decided  the  matter  on  merits  but  also  dismissed  the  petition 
holding  that  the  disputed  question  of  fact  cannot  be  gone 
through and decided in a constitution petition whereas receiving 
of  note  considered  to  be  disputed  had  not  been  denied  by  the 
respondent department rather admitted reflecting from its letter 
dated  27.05.2006,  therefore,  exclusion  of  the  validity  of  said 
Note from consideration by the learned Judge-in-Chamber was 
unwarranted; hence decision is unsustainable in the eye of law. 
Further contention of the learned counsel on merits of the case 
is that the Certificate furnished by the appellant on 07.04.2006 
had  no  retrospective  effect,  hence,  on  the  basis  of  said 
Certificate  the  respondents  were not  entitled to  reduce  the  rate 
of bag as per the rate given to PASSCO, which admittedly was 
 
 
I.C.A. No.203/2015 
 
 
less  than  the  rate  offered  to  the  present  respondents  and  this 
aspect  of  the  case  has  not  been  scrutinized  by  the  learned 
Judge-in-Chamber 
in 
its 
true  perspective  rendering 
the 
impugned  judgment  unsustainable  in  the  eye  of  law  inasmuch 
as the action of the respondents is illegal and unlawful.  
4. 
The  learned  Law  Officer  has  vehemently  supported  the 
judgment  of  the  learned  Judge-in-Chamber  and  explained  that 
after  issuance  of  the  Certificate  on  07.04.2006  appellant’s 
tender  was  accepted,  therefore,  it  was  not  a  case  where  said 
Certificate would be presumed to have not backdated effect.  
5.  We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  as 
well as the learned Law Officer and gone through record of the 
case.  
6. 
The requisite certificate furnished though at later stage by 
the  appellant  but  it  was  part  of  the  tender  condition  submitted 
by  him  in  response  to  the  invitation  made  by  the  respondents; 
hence it does not mean that its effect would commence from its 
submission.  It  is  also  noticed  that  the  letter  dated  07.04.2006 
containing  the  requisite  certificate  is  silent  qua  its  effect  and 
agreement  executed  between  the  parties  also  did  not  have  any 
explanation  regarding  its  effect.  Obviously  it  was  part  of  the 
terms and conditions of offered tender without which authority 
was  not  inclined  to  grant  contract  to  the  appellant;  hence  this 
mandatory  condition  for  submission  of  ‘Price  Reasonability 
Certificate’ 
imposed  by 
the  authority  was  subsequently 
fulfilled/completed  by  addition  of  said  certificate.  It  was  just 
deficit  tender  which  was  virtually  approved  but  practically  its 
effect  had  not  commenced  on  account  of  non-providing  the 
requisite certificate, therefore, at this stage the appellant has no 
reason to ask for its effect from the date of its issuance.  It was 
part  and  parcel  of the  tender  submitted by  the  appellant  which 
 
 
I.C.A. No.203/2015 
 
 
remained 
pending 
for 
provision 
of 
requisite 
certificate/undertaking.  
 
The  order  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  passed  on 
28.03.2013  in  identical  matters  bearing  Civil  Appeal  No.22-L 
of 2011 & C.M.A. No.2051-L of 2009 has also been presented 
by the learned Law Officer according to which the apex Court 
refused  to  accept  the  similar  plea  of  the  supplier  of    jute  bags 
so, taking benefit of the said verdict of Hon’ble Supreme Court 
which has binding force in view of Article 189 of  Constitution 
of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  we  also  conclude  that  the 
respondents  while  deducting  the  excessive  amount  claimed  by 
the  appellant  from  the  respondents  as  compared  to  PASSCO 
have not travelled beyond their limit prescribed in the terms of 
tender submitted by the appellant and action of the respondents 
was  within  parameter  of  the  terms  of  the  tender;  hence  no 
interference is warranted.  
7. 
In  view  of  the  above,  we  find  no  merit  in  this  appeal, 
which stands dismissed. 
 
Gull*  
 
           (ALI AKBAR QURESHI)       (MUHAMMAD AMEER BHATTI) 
              JUDGE.                                                        JUDGE.                            
