Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET  
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
Pakistan Medical and Dental Council.  
Versus 
Junaid Alam etc.  
 
Sr.No. of 
Order/ 
Proceeding 
 
Date of 
Order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signatures of Judge and that of parties or 
counsel, where necessary.    
06.11.2018  Ch. Muhammad Umar, Advocate.  
 
 
 
 
This  single  order  shall  decide  the  present  Intra 
Court  Appeal  No.246925  of  2018  and  connected 
I.C.A.Nos.  246929  of  2018,  246937  of  2018,  246950 
of 2018, 246924 of 2018, 246947 of 2018, 246948 of 
2018,  246949  of  2018,  246951  of  2018,  246952  of 
2018,  246953  of  2018,  246954  of  2018,  246955  of 
2018,  246946  of  2018,  246927  of  2018,  246930  of 
2018,  246939  of  2018,  246941  of  2018,  246926  of 
2018.  246942  of  2018,  246945  of  2018,  246940  of 
2018,  246932  of  2018,  246928  of  2018,  246933  of 
2018, 246931 of 2018 and 246936 of 2018 as common 
questions  of  law  and  facts  are  involved  in  all  the 
appeals and have arisen out of the same judgment.  
Through  this  Intra  Court  Appeal  (“ICA”)  the 
appellant  has  challenged 
the 
judgment  dated 
09.10.2018  whereby  the  learned  Single  Judge  in 
Chamber  while  allowing  Writ  Petition  filed  by 
respondent  No.1  declared  Regulation  No.48  &  60  of 
the  Pakistan  Registration  of  Medical  and  Dental 
Practitioners  Regulations,  2008  (“the  Regulations, 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
2 
2008”) ultra vires of the provisions of section 15 read 
with  Section  33  of  the  Punjab  Medical  and  Dental 
Council Ordinance, 1962 (“the Ordinance, 1962”) as 
amended in the year 2012 (through the Punjab Medical 
and  Dental  Council  (Amendment)  Act,  2012)  and 
directed  the  appellant  to  allow  the  respondents  to 
appear in the forthcoming National Examination Board 
Examination (NEB Examination) and if they are found 
in  possession  of  sufficient  knowledge  and  skill,  be 
registered as practitioner under the Ordinance, 1962.  
 
2. 
Learned counsel for the appellant submits: 
(i)  that  regulations  48  and  60  were  framed  under  the 
provisions of Section 33 of the Ordinance, 1962;  
(ii)  that  the  object  of  these  regulations  is  to  maintain 
the better standard of medical education in the country. 
Through  the  aforementioned  regulations  the  condition 
to get NOC from PM&DC has been imposed on those 
students  who  intend  to  get  medical  education  in 
foreign  countries  as  otherwise  they  would  not  be 
eligible  under  Regulation  No.  60  of  the  Regulations, 
2018 to appear in NEB Examination;  
(iii) that PM&DC being regulatory body is competent 
to  make  such  regulations  so  as  to  establish  a  uniform 
minimum  standard  of  basic  and  higher  qualifications 
in medicine and dentistry and,  
(iv)  that  there  is  no  conflict  between  the  regulations 
and Section 15 as well as 33 of the Ordinance, 1962.   
 
3. 
Question  which  falls  for  determination  in  this 
appeal is whether the Regulations, 2008 are consistent 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
3 
with  the  provisions  of  the  Ordinance,  1962.    Law 
governing this question is well settled, and that is, that 
while interpreting the vires of a law, rule or regulation 
through a court makes utmost effort to avoid the grant 
of  any  declaration,  pronouncing  any  subordinate 
enactment  or  rule  or  regulation  as  ultra  vires  but  if  it 
becomes  inevitable,  it  may  declare  any  law  or  rule  or 
regulation as ultra vires on the following grounds:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
it  is  without  jurisdiction,  or  in  excess  of 
jurisdiction; 
 
it is beyond the scope and purpose of the statute;  
it is result of excessive delegation, or, 
it is against the fundamental right. 
In this regard reliance is placed on paras 29, 31 
and  32  of  the  case  reported  as  Khawaja  Ahmad 
Hassaan  Vs.  Government  of  Punjab  and  others  (2005 
SCMR 186), wherein it is held as under:- 
  
29.  It  is  a  well-recognized  principle  of  interpretation  of 
statutes  that  if  the  rules  framed  under  the  statute  are  in 
excess  of  the  provisions  of  the  statute  or  are  in 
contravention  of  or  inconsistent  with  such  provisions 
then those provisions must be regarded as ultra vires of 
the  statute  and  cannot  be  given  effect  to.  (Barisal 
Cooperative  Central  Bank  v.  Benoy  Bhusan  AIR  1934 
Cal.537;  Municipal  Corporation  v.  Saw  Willie,-AIR 
1942 Rang 70, 74)"…… 
  
  
31.  A  rule-making  body  cannot  frame  rules  in  conflict 
with or derogating from the substantive provisions of the 
law  or  statute,  under  which  the  rules  are  framed.  No 
doubt that the rules-making authority has been conferred 
upon the Government but "a rule, which the rule-making 
authority  has  power  to  make  will  normally  be  declared 
invalid only on the following, grounds:-- 
  
(1)        Bad faith, that is to say that powers entrusted for 
one  purpose  are  deliberately  used  with  the  design  of 
achieving  another, 
itself  unauthorized  or  actually 
forbidden; 
  
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
4 
(2)        that it shows on its face a misconstruction of the 
enabling Act  or a failure to  comply  with  the conditions 
prescribed under the Act for the exercise of the powers; 
and 
  
(3)        that it  is  not  capable  of  being  related  to  any  of 
the purposes mentioned in the Act. (Shankar Lal  Laxmi 
Narayan Rathi v. Authority under Minimum Wages Act, 
1979 MPLJ 15 (DB). 
  
Rules  cannot  go  beyond  the  scope  of  the. act M.P. 
Kumaraswami  Raja  AIR  1955  Mad.  326  nor  can  they, 
by themselves, enlarge the scope of statutory provisions. 
K.  Mathuvadivelu  v.  RT  Officer,  AIR  1956 Mad. 143. 
They  cannot  also  militate  against  the  provision  under 
which they were made.Kashi Prasad Saksena ro. State of 
U. P. AIR 1967 All. 173. 
  
32.  There  is  no  cavil  with  the  proposition  that  "the 
power  of  rule  making  is  an  incidental  power  that  must 
follow and not run parallel to the present Act. These are 
meant to deal with details and can neither be a substitute 
for  the  fundamentals  of  the  Act  nor  can  add  to  them. 
PLD  1975  Azad  J&K  81  =  PLJ  1975  Azad  J&K  89. 
There are two main checks in this country on the power 
of the Legislature to delegate, these being its good sense 
and the principle that it should not cross the line beyond 
which 
and 
self-effacement.  The  only  requirement  of  law  in  such 
situations  is  to  insist  that  the  subordinate  body  charged 
with the duty of making rules must strictly confine itself  
within  the  sphere  of  its  authority  for  the  exercise  of  its 
subordinate C legislative power and in each case it is the 
duty  of  the  Courts  in  appropriate  proceedings  to  be 
satisfied that the rules and regulations so made are:-- 
  
(a) by the authority mentioned in the Act, and 
  
(b) that they are within the scope of the power delegated 
therein. (PLD 1966 Lah. 287). 
delegation 
abdication 
amounts 
to 
The  Hon’ble  Apex  Court  in  the  case  reported  as  Suo 
Motu  Case  No.13  of  2009    (PLD  2011  SC  619)  has 
held as under:- 
“18.  From  an  examination  of  the  above  case  law  it  is 
clear  that  a  rulemaking  body  cannot  frame  rules  in 
conflict  with,  or  in  derogation  of,  the  substantive 
provisions  of  the  law  or  statute,  under  which  the  rules 
are  framed.  Rules  cannot  go  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
Act.  Thus,  we  are  inclined  to  hold  that  no  rule  can  be 
made  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  parent  statute, 
whereas,  no  regulation  can  be  made  inconsistent  with 
the  parent  statute  or  the  rules  made  thereunder  and  the 
provisions of these rules or regulations, as the case may 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
5 
be,  to  the  extent  of  their  inconsistency  with  the  parent 
statute or the rules shall be inoperative. 
 
In  the  case  of  Zarai  Taraqiati  Bank  Ltd.  and 
others  Vs.  Said  Rehman  and  others  (2013  PLC  (CS) 
1223), it has been held that:- 
  
16.       The  "rules"  and  "regulations"  framed  under  any 
Act  are  meant  to  regulate  and  limit  the  statutory 
authority. All statutory authorities or bodies derive their 
powers  from  statutes  which  create  them  and  from  the 
rules  or  regulations  framed  thereunder.  Any  order 
passed  or  action  taken  which  is  in  derogation  or  in 
excess  of  their  powers  can  be  assailed  as  ultra  vires. 
Rules  and  regulations  being  forms  of  subordinate 
legislation do not have substantial difference as power to 
frame them is rooted in the statute. Statutory bodies are 
invariably  authorized  under  the  Act  to  make  or  adopt 
rules and regulations not inconsistent with the Act, with 
respect  to  such  matters  which  fall  within  their  lawful 
domain  to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  the  Act.  This  rule 
making  power  of  such  bodies,  called 
'delegated 
legislation' has assumed importance in the contemporary 
age.  "The  justification  for  delegated  legislation  is 
threefold. First, there is pressure on parliamentary time. 
Second,  the  technicality  of  subject  matter  necessitates 
prior  consultation  and  expert  advice  on 
interests 
concerned.  Third,  the  need  for  flexibility  is  established 
because it is not possible to foresee every administrative 
difficulty that may arise to make adjustment that may be 
called  for  after  the  statute  has  begun  to  operate. 
Delegated legislation fills those needs. 
 
17.       Broadly  the  salient  characteristics  of  statutory 
rules are threefold:-- 
  
(i)         Rules or Regulations are framed by statutory or 
public body; 
  
(ii)        Those are framed under the authority or powers 
conferred in the statute; 
  
(iii)       Those have statutory Governmental approval or 
statutory sanction." 
  
In  the  judgment  reported  as  Devi  Das  Gopal 
Krishnan & Ors vs State Of Punjab & Ors (AIR 1967 
SC  1895)  Indian  Supreme  Court  summing  up  the 
parameters of delegated legislation held:- 
……… 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
6 
An  overburdened  legislature  or  one  controlled  by  a 
powerful  executive  may  unduly  overstep  the  limits  of 
delegation. It may not lay down any policy at all; it may 
declare its policy in vague and general terms; it may not 
set down any standard for the guidance of the executive; 
it  may  confer  an  arbitrary  power  on  the  executive  to 
change  or  modify  the  policy  laid  down  by  it  without 
reserving  for 
itself  any  control  over  subordinate 
legislation.  This  self-effacement  of  legislative  power  in 
favour  of  another  agency  either  in  whole  or  in  part  is 
beyond  the  permissible  limits  of  delegation.  It  is  for  a 
Court to hold on a fair, generous and liberal construction 
of an impugned statute whether the legislature exceeded 
such limits.  But  the said  liberal  construction should  not 
be carried by the Courts to the extent of always trying to 
discover a dormant or latent legislative policy to sustain 
an arbitrary power conferred on executive authorities. It 
is  the  duty  of  the  Court  to  strike  down  without  any 
hesitation  any  arbitrary  power  conferred  on 
the 
executive by the legislature.  
Further in the judgment reported as Muhammad 
 
 
Amin  Muhammad  Bashir  Limited  Vs. Government  of 
Pakistan 
through  Secretary  Ministry  of  Finance, 
Central  Secretariat,  Islamabad  and  others  (2015  PTD 
1100), the Hon’ble august Supreme Court held that:- 
“7.         Can  any  executive  authority  be  authorized  to 
overrule a substantive provision of law such as section 
25? Is the non obstante clause in section 25B valid? On 
the  face  of  it,  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  uphold  the 
granting  or  delegation  of  authority  to  any  executive  or 
other  body  which  entitles  it  to  overrule  a  substantive 
provision of law. The principles of delegated legislation 
are very clear and hardly require any reiteration by us at 
this late stage. In brief, they entitle the delegate to carry 
out  the  mandate  of  the  legislature,  either  by  framing 
rules,  or  regulations,  which  translate  and  apply  the 
substantive  principles  of  law  set  out  in  the  parent 
legislation  or  by  recourse  to  detailed  administrative 
directions  and  instructions  for  the  implementation  of 
the  law.  They  are  intended  to  enforce  the  law,  not 
override  it.  They  can  fill  in  details  but  not  vary  the 
underlying statutory principles.  In case of conflict they 
must  yield  to  the  legislative  will.  They  are  below  and 
not above the law. The minutiae can be filled in but the 
basic law can neither be added to nor subtracted from.” 
In  the  case  reported  as  National  Electric  Power 
Regulatory  Authority  Vs.  Faisalabad  Electric  Supply 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
7 
Company  Limited  (2016  SCMR  550)    the  Hon’ble 
Apex Court held that:- 
“11.  NEPRA  Rules,  1998  are  framed  by  the 
Authority  under  Section  46  of  the  Act,  1997 
with  the  approval  of  the  Federal  Government. 
Rules and or Regulations are the progeny or off 
spring  of  a  Statute  and  are  to  be  strictly  in 
conformity  with  the  provisions  of  the  Statute 
where  under  same  are  framed.  It  is  settled 
proposition of law that the rules framed under a 
Statute  are  to  remain  within  the  precinct  of  the 
Statute  itself  and  cannot  transgress  the  limits 
and  parameters  of  the  parent  Statute  itself.  All 
efforts are to be made to interpret the rules so as 
to  bring  it  in  conformity  and  without  injuring 
the intent and spirit of the Statute, where it is not 
possible  then  the  rules  in  as  much  as  it  is 
injuring  the  very  intent  and  spirit  which  must 
yield  to  the  Statute.  This  view  finds  support 
from  a  case  reported  as  Ziauddin  v.  Punjab 
Local  Government  (1985  SCMR  365  at  368), 
wherein it was held as under:-  
“Rules framed under the statute could not 
go  beyond  and  over  reach  the  statute 
itself.  To  make 
implementation  of 
statutory provision consistent harmonious 
directory  effect  must  be  given 
to 
requirement of Rule”.  
12.  In  another  case  reported  as  Pakistan  v. 
Aryan  Petro  Chemical  Industries  (Pvt)  Ltd 
(2003  SCMR  370)  in  paragraph  11  of  the 
judgment,  it  was  held  that  “This  is  a  settled 
principle that a statutory rule cannot enlarge the 
scope  of  the  section  under  which  it  is  framed 
and  if  a  rule  goes  beyond  what  the  section 
completes, the rule must yield to the statute. The 
authority  of  executive 
to  make  rules  and 
regulations  in  order  to  effectuate  the  intention 
and policy of the Legislature, must be exercised 
within  the  limits  of  mandate  given  to  the  rule 
making authority and the rules framed under an 
enactment  must  be  consistent  with 
the 
provisions  of  said  enactment.  The  rules  framed 
under  a  statute  if  are  inconsistent  with  the 
provisions of the statue and defeat the intention 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
8 
of  Legislature  expressed  in  the  main  statute, 
same shall be invalid” 
4. 
Now  we  proceed  to  examine  Regulation,  2018 
in 
the 
light  of  above  stated  principle  of 
law. 
Admittedly  legislature  keeping  in  view  the  needs  of 
the society  promulgated the  Ordinance, 1962  with  the 
object  to  establish  a  uniform  minimum  standard  of 
basic  and  higher  qualification 
in  medicine  and 
dentistry.  To achieve the said objective, section 15 of 
the Ordinance, 1962 as amended in 2012  provides that 
the  Council  shall  conduct  an  examination 
for 
assessment  of  medical  knowledge  and  skill  of  a 
candidates  so  as  to  select  the  most  competent, 
intelligent  and  suitable  medical  practitioner.    It  is  for 
that reason the PMDC in exercise of powers conferred 
upon  it  under  Section    33  of  the  Ordinance,  1962 
framed  Regulations,  2008  published  on  26.01.2009. 
Since  the  entire  controversy  in  these  appeals  is 
centered around the issue as to whether Regulations 48 
and  60  of  the  Regulations,  2008  are  intra  vires  of 
Section  15  and  33  of  the  Ordinance,  1962  or 
otherwise,  it  shall  be  appropriate  to  examine  the 
provisions  of  Section  15  of  the  Ordinance,  1962, 
which is reads as under:- 
“15.  Power  of  the  Council  to  certify  certain 
persons  to  be  possessed  of  sufficient  medical 
qualification.–  (1) If, after an examination by a 
board constituted by the Council, the Council is 
satisfied  that  a  person  holding  a  qualification 
granted  by  a  medical 
institution  outside 
Pakistan,  is  possessed  of  sufficient  knowledge 
and  skill  to  be  registered  as  a  practitioner  for 
the  purpose  of 
it  may 
recommend to the Federal Government to issue 
a  notification  in  favour  of  such  person  to 
register  him  and  his  qualification.  Upon  such 
this  Ordinance, 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
9 
notification,  the  Council  shall  register  the 
qualification possessed by the person without it 
being  entered  in  any  of  the  Schedules  of  this 
Ordinance.  
(2)  The  Council  shall  register 
the 
qualification  granted  by  a  medical  institution 
outside  Pakistan,  possessed  by  the  person  by 
maintaining a separate list in the register.”. 
The above provisions of law empower the PM&DC to 
make  assessment  or  evaluation  regarding  sufficient 
medical  knowledge  and  skill  through  an  examination 
administered  by the Board constituted by the Council. 
To  regulate 
this  mechanism  of  conducting 
the 
examination  the  PM&DC  or  interchangeably  the 
council  is  bestowed  with  specific  power  to  make 
regulations  under  the  provisions  of  Section  33  of  the 
Ordinance,  1962  with  permission  of  the  Federal 
Government. Section 33 is as follows:- 
“33.---(1).  The Council may, with the previous 
sanction  of  the  Federal  Government  make 
Regulations generally to carry out the purposes 
of  this  Ordinance  and  without  prejudice  to  the 
generality  of  this  power,  such  Regulations  may 
provide for--- 
(a) The  management  of  the  property  of  the 
Council and the maintenance and audit of its 
accounts; 
(b) The  summoning  and  holding  of  meetings  of 
the Council, the times and places where such 
meetings  are  to  be  held,  the  conduct  of 
business  threat  and  the  number  of  members 
necessary to constitute a quorum; 
(c) The  powers  and  duties  of  the  President  and 
Vice President; 
(d) The  mode  of  appointment  of  the  Executive 
Committee  and  other  Committees, 
the 
summoning and holding of meetings, and the 
conduct of business of such Committees; 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
10 
(e) The  tenure  of  office  and  the  powers  and 
duties of the Registrar and other officers and 
servants of the Council. 
(f) The  appointment,  powers  duties  and 
procedure of medical and dental inspectors; 
(g) The procedure for maintenance, compilation 
and  publication  of  the  Register,  list  of 
medical practitioners possessing registerable 
licences  or  diplomas,  and  the  fees  to  be 
charged for registration and if necessary for 
opening  of  sub-offices  or  branches  for  this 
purpose; 
(h) The procedure at an inquiry held under sub-
section (1) of section 31; and  
(i) Any  matter  for  which  under  this  Ordinance 
provision may be made by Regulations.  
(2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in 
sub-section 
shall  make 
Regulations which may provide for--- 
the  Council 
(1) 
post-graduate  medical 
(a) 
prescribing  a uniform  minimum  standard 
of  courses  of  training  for  obtaining  graduate 
and 
dental 
qualifications 
included 
respectively 
the  First,  Third  and  Fifth 
Schedules; 
included  or 
to  be 
and 
in 
(b) 
prescribing  minimum  requirements  for 
the content  and  duration of  courses  of  study  as 
aforesaid; 
prescribing  the  conditions  for  admission 
(c) 
to courses of training as aforesaid; 
(d) 
prescribing  minimum  qualifications  and 
experience required of teachers for appointment 
in medical and dental institutions; 
the 
standards 
prescribing 
(e) 
of 
examinations,  methods  of  conducting 
the 
examinations  and  other  requirements  to  be 
satisfied for securing recognition of medical and 
dental qualifications under this Ordinance; 
the 
required 
prescribing 
and 
(f) 
for 
of 
experience 
professional  examinations 
in  medicine  and 
dentistry  antecedent  to  the  granting  of  re-
cognized medical qualifications; 
qualifications 
examiners 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
11 
(g) 
registration of medical or dental students 
at  any  medical  or  dental  college  or  school  or 
any university and the fees payable in respect of 
such registration. 
Admittedly Regulations, 2008 are framed under 
Section  33  of  the  Ordinance  1962.  The  vires  of 
Regulations  48  and  60  are  under  judicial  scrutiny 
before this Court. The said regulations are reproduced 
as under:- 
48.  On  the  commencement  of  these 
 
regulations, a person who gets admission in any 
medical  or  dental  course  in  a  foreign  country 
without  being  in  possession  of  a  valid  No 
Objection  Certificate  issued  by  the  Council  to 
him prior to joining the course abroad shall not 
be  eligible  for  processing  of  registration  of  his 
qualification if it  is not included  in the  Second, 
Third  or  Fifth  Schedule 
the  PM&DC 
Ordinance, 1962. No person shall be allowed to 
appear  in  the  National  Examination  Board 
examination  without  the  eligibility  certificate 
issued  by  the  Council.  Persons  admitted  in 
medical  and  dental  courses  on  or  before  the 
approval  of  these  regulations  shall  be  issued 
eligibility without the no objection certificate by 
the  Council  provided  they  fulfill  all  other 
requirements. 
to 
60.  A candidate who acquires admission after 
the  end  of  the  year  of  commencement  of  these 
regulations  into  a  foreign  medical  school  with 
less  than  60%  marks  in  F.Sc.  premedical  or 
equivalent qualification shall not be entertained 
for NEB Examination under any circumstances. 
 
A  conjoint  reading  of  Regulation  48  and  60  of  the 
Regulations,  2008  makes  it  clear  that:  (a) 
two 
conditions have been imposed on a student who wants 
to  get  medical  education  in  a  foreign  country,  that  is, 
firstly,  to  obtain  NOC  from  PM&DC  prior  to  joining 
the  course  abroad  and,  secondly,  to  secure  more  than 
60% marks in F.Sc.; and, (b) in case of failure to meet 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
12 
the  said  two  conditions  he  shall  not  be  eligible  for 
processing  of  his  registration  of  qualification  and  to 
appear  in  the  NEB  Examination.    On  the  other  hand,  
section  15  of  the  Ordinance,1962  does  not  prescribe 
any  embargo  or  restriction  on  the  medical  students  to 
get  education  in  a  foreign  country,  rather  it  only 
confers  an  authority  upon  PM&DC  or  the  Council  to 
hold examination for evaluation and assessment of the 
sufficient  medical  knowledge  and  skill  possessed  by 
the  candidate  and  if  it  is    satisfied  then  register  the 
candidate as a practitioner.   It is, therefore, clear that 
the  PM&DC  while  framing  Regulations  48  and  60  of 
Regulation, 2008 exceeded its jurisdiction.    
5. 
Undeniably  the  PM&DC  is  established  under 
the  Ordinance,  1962  and  it  has  to  function  within  the 
parameters  described  in  the  very  legislated  law  and  it 
has  no  unfettered  power  to  make  regulations  at  its 
whims  and  caprice  or  in  contravention  of  the  main 
statute.  There  is  no  authority  or  power  given  by  the 
statute  i.e  Section  15  read  with  Section  33  of  the 
Ordinance, 1962 to make regulation 48 to restrain the 
foreign medical qualified doctors to get registration as 
medical  practitioner  after  passing  the  required  NEB 
Examination.  Although  it  is  desirable  that  a  stringent 
scrutiny  of  eligibility,  qualification  and  skill  is  to  be 
evaluated and assessed in the said examination yet it is 
inappropriate to oust a candidate who obtains medical 
education from a foreign country solely on the ground 
that  he  had  not  obtained  any  NOC  from  the  Council 
prior  to  joining  course:  It  is  simply  an  arbitrary 
approach  of  the  Council  as  it  has  no  backing  of  the 
Ordinance, 1962.    
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
13 
As regards Regulation 60, it is suffice to say that 
it is not only contrary to the provisions of Sections 15 
and 33 of the Ordinance, 1962 but also discriminatory 
in  character  as  the  Council,  on  the  one  hand,  through 
the  said  regulation  creates    a  bar  on  a  student  / 
candidate,  who  secures  less  than  60%  marks  in  F.Sc., 
to  obtain  medical  education  abroad  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  through  letter  dated  16.01.2017  allowed  private 
medical colleges to give admission to the students who 
have secured above 50% marks in F.Sc.   
6. 
There  is  another  aspect  of  the  matter  which  is 
worth  consideration  that  under  Article  8  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  
and 
law 
inconsistent  with  or 
in  derogation  of 
fundamental  rights  of  the  citizens  of  this  country  are 
considered to be void. The superior Courts are saddled 
with  unalienable  obligation  to  protect,  preserve  and 
safeguard  such  rights  and  any  statutory  provision  or 
rule,  regulations  or  instructions,  militating  with  the 
fundamental rights, such legislation or rule as the case 
may  be  deserved  to  be  struck  down  without  any 
hesitation. To acquire education is a fundamental right 
under  Article  9  of  the  Constitution  which  cannot  be 
allowed to be usurped in the garb of Regulations 48 or 
60  by  imposing  unreasonable  and  discriminatory 
conditions  upon  the  students  who  are/were  intending 
to  get  medical  education  from  foreign  educational 
institutions.    
7. 
“Knowledge  is  power  is  an  edge”.    Today  the 
era  of  ignorance  is  gradually  fading  away  and 
exploration  of 
reason,  science, 
technology  and 
recovery  of  astonishing  new  horizens  has  blasted  the 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
14 
knowledge  and  education.  No  society  or  civilization 
can  survive  any 
longer  without  knowledge  or 
education.  It  is  glowing  trait  of  Islam  and  Islamic 
teachings which specially lays extraordinary emphasis 
upon  the  Muslim  and  generally  upon  the  entire 
humanity 
to  enlighten 
itself  with 
the 
jewel  of 
education,  its  significance  and  elevated  standards. 
Following  verses  from  Holy  Quran  are  quoted  herein 
below.  
Quran Sura Baqra Ayat 67
 
Sura Baqra Ayat 119 
 
 
Urdu Translation of Ayat 145 of Sura Baqra is as 
under: 
 
 تو علم سا
 پ کے پآ چکا آ کہ بعد کے سا کی ںہشواخو کی نا ۔یںکر یوپیر پآ
 
۔گے ںہو )رشما( میں ںلموظا 
قو سا پآ ًیقینا
 
Urdu Translation of Ayat 268 and 962 of Sura 
Baqra is as under: 
 
 للہا روا 
 کا ئیحیا بے کو تم ہے 
پکر حکم روا سے ستید تنگ تمہیں ہے 
پارڈ
 نشیطا
 یر
 ب 
ٰلیتعا للہا  روا کا )مکر  و( فضل  روا کا بخشش پنیا سے تم ہے 
پمار
ف  ہعدو 
ٰلیتعا
 روا ہے ہتاچا جسے  ئیا
پاد ہے 
پمار
ف عطا 
  ۔ ہے  لااو ننےجا کچھ 
 س  لااو سعتو
 لقبو نصیحت نہیں روا ئیبھلا بہت گئی ید ےد سے
ا 
ًیقینا تو ئیا
پاد گئی کی عطا جسے
 
۔مند عقل مگر تےکر
 
 
 
 
ت
ت
ا
ت
ا
ت
 
ا
ت
 
 
ا
ت
 
 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
15 
Urdu Translation of Ayat 7 of Sura Al-Imran is as 
under: 
 کہتے لےاو علم پختہ  روا کے 
ٰلےتعا للہا بغیر کو معنی صحیح کے سا نتاجا نہیں  روا
 روا ہے سے  سا
 پ کے بر ےرا
ہ 
 س کے  سا  تھسا ئےلا  نیماا  ہم ہیں
 
۔مند عقل مگر تےکر لقبو نصیحت 
نہیں
 
Urdu Translation of Sura Al Imran Ayat 18 is as 
under:. 
 کے سا ئےاسو اد
ک
خ ئیکو نہیں بیشک ) ہک ی
 تا
 پ سا( نے 
ٰلیتعا للہا ید تدشہا
 ہیاگو بھی یہ نے 
 س نا( نے علم ہلا  روا نے ںشتور
ف )ید ہیاگو یہی(  روا
 سا ئےاسو دمعبو ئیکو نہیں کو فنصاا و لعد
 
۔ہے لااو نےمار
ف ئمقا )ہو کہ ید
 
 ۔ہے لااو حکمت لااو تعز )جو( کے
 
Urdu Translation of Sura Al Mujadla Ayat 11 is as 
under:. 
 نیماا سے میں تم جو کے نا 
ٰلیتعا للہا ۔  وکر  اہو ےکھڑ ٹھا  تو ہو ےکھڑ ٹھا
 تم  جو 
ٰلیتعا  للہا  رو
ا  ۔گا ےد  مار
ف  بلند  تجارد  گیا 
 پد  علم  کو جن  روا ئےآ لے
 
 ۔ہے ہگاآ بخو سےا ہو تےکر
Sura Al Alaq Ayat 4,5. 
 
Sura Taha Ayat 114. 
 
 
 
Urdu Translation of Sura Araf Ayat 52 is as under: 
 
 
 
م
 
 
 
 
ا
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
16 
 ہے 
 پد کر ضحاو نے ہم جسے بکتا 
 یا سا
 پ کے نا ہم ئےآ 
 لے شک بے روا
 کے مقو 
 سا  ،ہے حمتر  روا 
یاہد  ہو لیکہحا ںآرد سے  )ملکا( علم  )پنےا(
 
 ۔ہیں تےلا نیماا جو لیے
 
In  Surah  Baqrah,  Allah  Almighty  has  declared 
the superiority of Adam over the angles because 
of knowledge and emphasized as under:  
 
“And  He  taught  Adam  the  nature  of  all 
things;  then  He  placed  them  Before  the 
angels,  and  said:  “Tell  Me  The  nature  of 
these if ye are right”.  
 
They said: “Glory to Thee: of knowledge We 
have none, save what Thou Hast taught us: in 
truth it is Thou Who art perfect in knowledge 
and wisdom. [2:31-32]”  
 
 In  another  place  of  the  same  Surah  The  Quran 
says  that  We  send  the  Prophets  to  teach  people 
wisdom.  Tex  from  English  translation  is  as 
under:-  
 
“But the best of provisions is right conduct so 
fear me, O ye that are wise”. (2:197).  
 
Similarly,  the  Holy  Prophet  (Peace  be  upon 
him)  has  laid  extraordinary  emphasize  on  acquiring 
knowledge in the following Hadiths:  
 
(Sahih Bukhari) Jild Awal Page 109. 
ا
ت
 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
17 
 
Mishkat. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
18 
 
Sunan Abu Dawood. 
 
 
 
 
 
As well as  
“Seek knowledge from the cradle to grave.”  
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
19 
 
In another Hadith, it has been said:-  
“Seek knowledge even as far as China.”  
Martyr  of  Islam  has been bestowed outstanding 
grandeur  and  glory  and  while  comparing  an  “Alam” 
with a martyr, the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H.) has said:  
“A  drop  of  sweat  of  the  brow  of  thinker  is 
better  than  the  thousand  blood  drops  of  the 
martyr”  
Similarly on another occasion it has been said:  
“Whoever  seeks  a  way  to  acquire  knowledge 
Allah  will  make  easy  his  way  to  Paradise” 
[Sahih Muslim]  
In  another  Hadith  regarding 
the  need  of 
knowledge, the Holy Prophet (P.B.U.H.) has said:  
“Seeking knowledge is obligatory upon every 
Muslim”.[Sunan Ibn Majah]  
 
Dr.  Maurice  Bucaille  in  a  book  titled,  “The 
Bible, The Quran and Science” has proved the Islam as 
a  scientific  religion  emphasizing  on  the  need  of 
scientific inquiry.  
  
Moreover the glory of education and its need for 
the development of society/nation remained vibrant in 
the  catalogue  of  great  Muslim  educationist  reformers 
such  as  Sir  Syed  Ahmad  Khan  and  similarly  the 
significance  of  knowledge  even  could  not  have  been 
escaped from the vision of Quaid-e-Azam, who in his 
Presidential  Address  at  All  India  Muslim  League, 
Lahore on March 23, 1940 said:  
“Come forward as servants of Islam, organise 
the 
people 
economically, 
socially, 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
20 
educationally  and  politically  and  I  am  sure 
that you will be a power that will be accepted 
by everybody.”  
He also said:-  
“You must concentrate on gaining knowledge 
and 
education. 
It 
is 
your 
foremost 
responsibility.  Political  awareness  of  the  era 
is  also  part  of  your  education.  You  must  be 
aware 
of 
international 
events 
and 
environment.  Education  is  a  matter  of  life 
and death for our country”.  
Further the Charter of United Nations also protect the 
gaining  of  primary  and  higher  education,  Article  26 
whereof is as under:- 
“In  order  to  promote  the  establishment 
and  maintenance  of  international  peace  and 
security  with  the  least  diversion  for  armaments 
of  the  world's  human  and  economic  resources, 
the  Security  Council  shall  be  responsible  for 
formulating,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Military 
Staff Committee referred to in Article 47, plans 
to  be  submitted  to  the  Members  of  the  United 
Nations for the establishment of a system for the 
regulation "of armaments”. 
Moreover  the  universl  declaration  on  human 
rights has been  adopted  by  the  UNESCO  on  October, 
5, 2005 and Pakistan is signatory to it which obligated 
upon  ratifying  state  to  ensure  the  dissemination  of 
information  to  its  citizens.  To  achieve  the  above 
objective,  our  legislature  admitting  significance  of 
education through Article 25-A of the Constitution has 
declared it  as a fundamental right of the citizens.  
In  the  successful  life  of  an  individual,  the 
education  plays  an  important  role.  Generally,  it  is 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
21 
considered  to  be  the  foundation  of  society  which 
brings  economic  wealth,  social  prosperity,  political 
stability and maintaining healthy population. In case of 
deficit  of  educated  people,  the  further  progress  of  the 
society  is stopped. Educated  individuals enjoy  respect 
among  the  comity  of  nations  and  can  effectively 
contribute  to  the  development  of  their  country  and 
society by inventing new devices and discoveries. 
The  imposition  of  condition  upon  acquiring  the 
better  education  amounts  to  violation  of  fundamental 
right of education as guaranteed under Article 25-A of 
the Constitution and any provision circumventing such 
fundamental  right  has  to  crumble  down.  Reliance  is 
placed on Al-Jehad Trust through Raeesul Mujahidden 
Habib-ul-Wahabb-ul-Khairi  and others  Vs. Federation 
of Pakistan and others (PLD 1996 SC 324). Further to 
receive  better  or  higher  education  is  undoubtedly  a 
fundamental right guaranteed under Articles 4 and 9 of 
the  Constitution  which  has  direct  bearing  upon  the 
quality  of  life  of  a  citizen  and  such  preserved  and 
safeguarded  right  cannot  be  taken  away  by  any 
executive  rule  making  authority  without  any  legal 
foundation. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in 
a  case  reported  as  Rana  Aamer  Raza  Ashfaq  and 
another  Vs.  Dr.  Minhaj  Ahmad  Khan  and  another 
(2012 SCMR 6), wherein it has been held as under:- 
“33.  Right  to  education  is  a  fundamental  right  as  it 
ultimately  affects  the  quality  of  life  which  has  nexus 
with  other  Fundamental  Rights  guaranteed  by  the 
Constitution under Article 4 and 9 of the Constitution of 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan.  Awareness  of  rights  and 
duties,  growth  of  civic  consciousness  in  a  society, 
enjoyment of  Fundamental  Rights  guaranteed under the 
Constitution  and  legal  empowerment  of  people  depend 
to  a  great  extent  on  the  quality  of  education.  People 
cannot be free in the real sense unless they are properly 
educated.” 
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
Moreover  under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution, 
Freedom  of  trade,  business  or  profession  is  also  a 
fundamental  right  subject  to  certain  qualification,  (if 
any, as prescribed by law), every citizen shall have the 
right to enter upon any lawful profession or occupation 
and 
to  conduct  any 
lawful 
trade  or  business. 
Admittedly  respondent  obtained  medical  education, 
ancillary  skills  and  expertise  with  the  legitimate  two 
fold  expectations  firstly  to  enter  into  the  laudable 
medical profession and secondly for the better quality 
of life as well.  
8. 
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the 
case  reported  as  Dossani  Travels  Pvt.  Ltd.  and  others 
Vs.  Messrs  Travels  Shop  (Pvt)  Ltd  and  others  (PLD 
2014 Supreme Court 1) held that the constitution of a 
country is an organic whole and the import of a certain 
provision  has  to  be  construed  in  the  context  of  the 
overall  scheme  of  the  Constitution.  By  qualifying  the 
right  to  business  and  trade,  the  Constitution  makers 
wanted to create a balance between the societal needs 
and  the  rights  of  an  individual,  which  could  not  be 
circumvented  or  taken  away  by  means  of  any  sub 
delegated rule making executive authority. In the light 
of above, the restrictions imposed by PM&DC  under 
the  guise  of  Regulations  48  &  60  of  the  Regulations, 
2008 which unambiguously secure no support from the 
provisions  of  Section  15  and  33  of  the  Ordinance, 
1962  as  amended  in  2012,  were  rightly  declared  as 
ultra vires by the learned Single Bench.  
ICA No.246925 of 2018. 
 
 
 
23 
9. 
In  view  of  the  above  these  appeals  have  no 
merit, which are hereby dismissed in limine.  
 
 
 (Shahid Waheed)         
        (Ch. Muhammad Iqbal) 
Judge 
 
    Judge 
Approved for reporting  
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
A.Rehman.  
 
 
