Stereo.HCJDA-38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Civil Revision No.125 of 2017 
Muhammad Yar……Vs………Qasim Ali, etc. 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
Date of Hearing 
PETITIONER BY 
06.11.2018 
 
Abdul Ali Saleem, Advocate. 
 
RESPONDENTS BY  Mr. Sarfraz Ahmed Khan, Advocate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rasaal Hasan Syed, J.  
This  judgment  will 
decide  civil  revision  which  assails  judgment  and 
decree dated 23.12.2016 of the learned addl. District 
Judge  Okara,  whereby  the  judgment  and  decree 
dated  27.6.2014  of  learned  Civil  Judge,  Okara,  was 
set aside. 
2. 
Facts pertinent to decision of this case are that 
the  petitioner  (Muhammad  Yar)  filed  a  suit  for 
declaration with consequential relief, praying that he 
should  be  declared  owner-in-possession  of  the  suit-
property,  and  that  mutation  No.  1104  dated 
22.11.2003  in  respect  of  the  alleged  sale  of  suit-
property in favour of the respondents be declared to 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-2 
 
be  illegal,  a  result  of  fraud  and  collusion,  without 
consideration  and  as  such 
inoperative  against 
petitioner’s  rights.  As  consequential  relief  it  was 
prayed  that  the  respondent  be  restrained  from 
interfering  in  possession  of  the  petitioner.  The 
petitioner  alleged  that  on  the  demise  of  his  father, 
mutation  of  inheritance  No.  1103  dated  22.11.2003 
was attested; that at the time when the patwari was 
approached  for  inheritance  mutation,  he  secured 
signatures of petitioner on certain papers but it later 
transpired  that,  in  conspiracy  with  respondent,  the 
patwari  had  entered  a  mutation  of  oral  sale  of  05 
kanals  in  favour  of  Qasim  Ali,  etc.  and  allegedly 
sought its attestation; though in point of fact no sale 
was  ever  made  nor  the  petitioner  ever  received  any 
consideration  or  appeared  before  the  tehsildar  for 
attestation of any sale mutation; and that the entire 
proceedings  of  mutation  of  sale  No.  1104  dated 
22.11.2003  were  illegal,  fraudulent  and  inoperative 
qua the rights of the petitioner. It was added that the 
petitioner  continued  to  be  in  possession  of  suit-
property and came to know of the disputed mutation 
when the respondents started claiming that they had 
allegedly purchased the land. In result the petitioner 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-3 
 
sought  declaration  that  the  mutation  be  declared  to 
be inoperative. 
3. 
The  suit  was  resisted  by  respondents  who 
claimed to have purchased the land. It was asserted 
that the suit was filed by the petitioner as a counter 
blast  to  the  suit  for  partition  instituted  by  the 
respondents;  and  that  the  petitioner  was  requested 
through  punchiayat  to  deliver    the  possession  but  
instead  of  doing  the  needful    the  suit  was  filed  to 
challenge the sale mutation. 
4. 
After 
issues  and  evidence  the  suit  was 
dismissed  on  25.2.2013  by  the  learned  Civil  Judge 
and  the  judgment  was  challenged  in  appeal  which 
was  accepted  by  the  learned  District  Judge  Okara 
vide judgment dated 4.1.2014 whereby the case was 
remanded    for  decision  afresh,  after  framing  proper 
issues. 
5. 
In  post-remand  proceedings  the  learned  trial 
court  after  re-framing 
issues,  recorded 
further 
evidence  and  finally  vide  judgment  dated  17.6.2014 
decreed  the  suit  of  petitioner.  In  appeal  filed  by  the 
respondents,  the 
learned  Addl.  District  Judge, 
Okara,  set  aside  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-4 
 
learned  trial  court,  and  dismissed  the  suit  vide 
judgment  and  decree  dated  23.12.2016,  which  has 
been impugned in the present revision petition. 
6. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argued  with 
vehemence that the findings recorded by the learned 
trial  court  were  based  on  correct  analysis  of  the 
evidence,  the  reasoning  recorded  for  declaring  the 
mutation  as  invalid,  were  illegal;  but    the  learned 
Addl.  District  Judge,  completely  overlooked  the 
material  evidence  on  which  the  findings  of  the  trial 
court  were  based  and  proceeded  to  reverse  the 
judgment in oblivion of the evidence on the record. It 
was  added  that  the  appellate  court  completely 
misread the material evidence, in result the findings 
in appeal stood vitiated. As against these arguments, 
learned  counsel  for  the  respondents,  supported  the 
impugned  judgment  and  submitted  that  the  same 
was  well-reasoned  and  that  the 
learned  Addl. 
District  Judge  had  correctly  reversed  the  judgment 
of  the  trial  court  in  view  of  certain  errors  in  the 
appreciation  of  evidence  by  the  said  court  and  as 
such  the  findings  of  fact  recorded  in  appeal  could 
not be disturbed in the revisional jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-5 
 
7. 
The  submissions  from  both  sides  have  been 
considered  in  the  light  of  the  oral  as  well  as 
documentary evidence of parties. Case set up by the 
petitioner  was  that  he  did  not  sell  his  land;  there 
was  no  sale  agreement  with  the  respondent;  no 
consideration was ever paid; the petitioner had never 
agreed  for  the  attestation  of  any  sale  mutation;  and 
that he had only instructed the patwari to enter the 
mutation for inheritance of his father so as to record 
entries  of  succession;  but  the  patwari  in  conspiracy 
with 
respondents, 
fraudulently 
inserted 
the 
mutation  of  oral sale No.  1104. It  is  also the  stance 
of  petitioner  that  he  is  in  cultivating  possession  of 
suit-property which proves no that no sale was ever 
made. 
8.  With a view to establish his case, the petitioner 
appeared  as  PW  1  and  reiterated  all  the  facts  and 
circumstances  by  deposing 
that 
fraud  was 
committed  by  revenue  officials  in  conspiracy  with 
the respondents; and that he never sold his land nor 
ever  received  the  alleged  amount  of  Rs.  50,000/-.  It 
was added that he never made any statement before 
the  patwari  or  tehsildar  for  the  attestation  of 
mutation  of  oral  sale.  In  the  cross-examination  his 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-6 
 
statement  could  not  be  contradicted  nor  any  dent 
could  be  made  therein.  PW  2,  Liaqat  Ali,  supported 
the  petitioner.  As  against  the  evidence  of  the 
petitioner the respondents produced D.W 1 to D.W 5 
in the pre-remand proceedings,  while they produced 
D.W 6 to D.W 9 in the post-remand proceedings. 
9. 
The learned Civil Judge after in depth scrutiny 
of  the  evidence,  took  note  of  the  contradictions  in 
the  testimonies  of  witnesses  produced  by  the 
respondent,  and  observed 
that  all 
the 
three 
witnesses contradicted each other on the payment of 
consideration,  and  that  transfer  of  possession  had 
never  taken  place.  He  accordingly  held  that  no  sale 
could be established and in result the mutation  was 
deemed to be untenable.  
10.  Strange  enough  the  learned  Addl.  District 
Judge  while  reversing  the  judgment  of  the  learned 
trial court did not advert to the contradictions in the 
evidence  of  the  respondent  nor  kept  in  view  that 
there  was  material  evidence  on  the  record  which 
established  beyond  doubt  that  the  oral  sale  could 
not proved. Strangely enough it was observed by the 
learned Addl. District Judge that the revenue officers 
do not attest the mutation on the spot rather they do 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-7 
 
such  transaction  like  business  in  their  office  and 
that  the  parties  could  not  be  punished  for  the 
irregularity  committed  by  them,  as  the  Deputy 
Commissioner  did  not  take  any  action  against  the 
revenue  officers  who  perform  the  duties  of  attesting 
mutation. It was completely ignored  that the vires of 
the mutation are to be attested on the touchstone of 
the  mandatory  provision  in  the  Land  Revenue  Act 
and  also  the  rule  as  interpreted  by  the  Superior 
Courts  and  therefore,  if  the  court  while  examining 
the  issue  of  legality  or  otherwise    of  mutation, 
reaches  the  conclusion  that  the  concerned  revenue 
officer had completely overlooked the instructions in 
law  or  proceeded  in  derogation  to  the  provision  of 
the  Land  Revenue  Act,  such  illegality  could  not  be 
countenanced by the court. 
11.  The 
two 
judgments  when 
placed 
in 
juxtaposition  and  examined,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
learned  Civil  Judge  recorded  valid  reasons  to 
conclude that the oral sale could not be established 
and  that  the  respondents  were  unable  to  prove  the 
payment  of  consideration,  transfer  of  possession  or 
the  existence  of  any  such  deal  between  the  parties. 
Careful  scrutiny  of 
record 
reveals 
that 
the 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-8 
 
respondents  in  their  written  statement  simply  took 
the  stance  that  the  petitioner  allegedly  transferred 
the  suit-property  through  oral  sale;  he  allegedly 
appeared  before  the  revenue  officer;  and  allegedly 
received the payment upon which the mutation was 
attested  on  22.11.2003.  The  petitioner  had  on  oath 
denied 
the 
transaction  or 
receipt  of  any 
consideration.  Being  so  the  onus  was  upon  the 
respondents to prove the oral transaction of sale and 
payment  of  consideration.  The  evidence  of  the 
respondent  was  self-contradictory  inasmuch  as  the 
patwari  claimed  payment  before  the  tehsildar  on 
22.11.2003,  D.W  4  Muhammad  Saeed  also  stated 
that  the  payment was  made at the  tehsildar’s  table. 
The  respondent  Zulfiqar  deposed  as  D.W  5  that  the 
payment  was  made  before  the  tehsildar.  The  three 
statements  were  contradicted  by  the  tehsildar  who 
did not claim any payment in his presence.  
12. 
It  is  also  noteworthy  that  all  the  statements 
pertaining the mutation and alleged payment in pre-
remand  proceedings  claimed 
that 
the  entire 
transaction  was  completed  on  22.11.2003,  and  that 
the  mutation  was  entered,  which  was  allegedly 
attested  and  the  payment  was  made.  While  in  the 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-9 
 
post-remand  proceedings  the  respondents  came  up 
with  altogether  different  stance  inasmuch  as  they 
produced  D.W  6  who  claimed  that  entries  in 
roznamcha  waqiayati  190,  191  and  192  were 
recorded  on  12.11.2003  and  that  thereafter  the 
mutation  were  entered.  D.W  7  patwari  also  claimed 
that 
the 
roznamcha  entries  were  made  on 
12.11.2003,  while  the  mutation  was  attested  on 
22.11.2003.  He  admitted  in  cross-examination  that 
the sale price was never paid in his presence. D.W 4, 
Muhammad  Saeed,  came  up  with  the  new  stance 
that  on  12.10.2003,  Rs.  50,000/-  were  paid  for  the 
clearance  of  the  dues  of  Agricultural  Bank;  the 
petitioner  after  receiving  payment  left  to  clear  the 
dues,  got  a  letter  from  the  bank  whereupon  the 
mutations were attested on 22.11.2003.   
13.  Notwithstanding the fact that the entire stance 
taken 
in 
the  post-remand  evidence  by 
the 
respondent were never incorporated in the pleadings 
nor they were ever asserted in the earlier depositions 
and in law the respondent could not even permitted 
to  produce  evidence 
for  which  there  was  no 
foundation in the pleadings. As ruled by the August 
Supreme Court in  “Abdul Haq and others v. Shaukat 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-10 
 
Ali  and  others”  (2003  SCMR  74)    and    “Sardar 
Muhammad Naeem Khan v. Returning Officer” (2015 
SCMR  1698)  evidence  beyond  pleadings  would  be 
inadmissible,  but  also  this  subsequent  stance, 
vitiated  the  entire  oral  evidence  and  also  the 
pleadings in the post-remand proceedings where the 
respondents’  stance  was  that  the  alleged  payment 
was made on 23.11.2003.  So much so that  in both 
pre and post-remand evidence of the D.Ws it was not 
denied  that  the  possession  was  never  transferred. 
D.W4,  Muhammad  Saeed,  claimed  that  because  of 
the  standing  crop  the  possession  was  given  later 
while  the  respondent  Zulfiqar  appearing  as  D.W5 
claims 
that  petitioner 
forcibly  continued 
the 
possession.  
14. 
It  is  appreciable  that  the  learned  Civil  Judge 
had  correctly  taken  note  of  all  these  factors  and 
recorded a finding that oral transaction could not be 
proved  inasmuch  as  the  payment  of  consideration 
and 
the 
transfer  of  possession  was  never 
established.  The  learned  Addl.  District  Judge  was 
persuaded  by  the  existence  of  mutation  of  oral  sale 
little  appreciating  that  where  the  mutation 
is 
questioned  on  the  plea  that  no  oral  sale  was  ever 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-11 
 
made,  the  beneficiary  of  the  transaction  is  under 
obligation to prove the oral sale by credible evidence. 
In  “Muhammad  Akram  and  another  v.  Altaf  Ahmad”  
(PLD  2003  SC  688)  it  was  observed  by  the  August 
Supreme  Court  that  “…it  is  settled  principle  of  law 
that  a  mutation  confers  no  title.  Once  a  mutation  is 
challenged, the party that relies on such mutations is 
bound  to  revert  to  the  original  transaction  and  to 
prove  such  original  transaction  which  resulted  into 
the entry or attestation of such mutation(s) in dispute. 
This  oft  repeated  principle  of  law  is  quite  logical 
because a mutation not being a title deed is merely an 
evidence  of  some  original  transaction  between  the 
parties  that  had been  struck  by  someone  prior  to  the 
entry  of  mutation.  Respondent  Altaf  Ahmad  has 
utterly  failed  to  revert  back  to  any  transaction  and 
bring  on  record  any  oral  and  documentary  evidence 
thereof. The  burden  squarely  lay  on  him  to  prove  the 
transaction  because 
the  existence 
thereof  has 
throughout  been  alleged  by  him  in  affirmative.  He 
was  bound  to  sell 
in  the  event  of  non  proof 
transaction until the trial court resiled it…”.  
15. 
In 
“Fida  Hussain 
through  Legal  Heirs 
Muhammad  Taqi  Khan  and  others.  v.  Murid  Sakina” 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-12 
 
(2004  SCMR  1043)  it  was  observed  by  the  August 
Supreme  Court    that  “it  is  known  principle  of  law 
that  a  mutation  is  not  a  deed  of  title  and  is  merely 
inductive  of  some  previous  oral  sale  between  the 
parties.  This  principle  being  in  view,  whenever  any 
mutation  is  challenged,  the  burden  squarely  lies  on 
the  beneficiary  of  the  mutation  to  prove  not  only  the 
mutation but also the original transaction which he is 
acquired  to  fall  back  upon”.  Similar  view  was  taken  
in  “Abdur  Rasheed  through  L.Rs  and  others  v. 
Manzoor Ahmad and others” (PLD 2007 SC 287). 
16.   In  the  instant  case  the  respondents’  evidence 
was  found  to  be  self-contradictory,  the  respondents 
could  not  prove the payment  of consideration, there 
was  divergent  evidence  as  to  when  and  where  the 
alleged  bargain  was  settled,  the  plea  of  payment  of 
consideration on 22.11.2003 was also vitiated by the 
subsequent  evidence  of  the  D.Ws,  and  also  the 
roznamcha  waqiayati  produced  by  the  respondents 
themselves  where  the  entry  nos.  190  and  191 
occurred,  revealed  that  after  payment  of  Rs. 
54,100/-    the  bank  had  confirmed  the  clearance  of 
charge,  whereupon  the  mutation  of  redemption  was 
attested on 12.11.2003. 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. 125 of 2017  
 
 
Page-13 
 
17.  For  the  reasons  supra,  the  judgment  of  the 
learned  appellate  court  cannot  be  sustained  as  it 
suffers from material illegalities and also misreading 
and  non-reading  of  the  evidence  on  record.  The 
revision  petition  therefore  succeeds,  the  impugned 
judgment  dated  23.12.2016  of  the  learned  Addl. 
District Judge, Okara is set aside and the judgment 
and  decree  dated  27.6.2014  of  learned  Civil  Judge 
Okara is restored; in result the suit of the petitioner 
will stand decreed. No order as to costs. 
 
 
 
   
 
   
(RASAAL HASAN SYED) 
           JUDGE 
Approved for reporting 
 
  Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Mian M. Rabbani*  
 
 
 
