Form  No. HCJD/C-121 
 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, 
ORDER SHEET 
MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Civil Revision No.1472 of 2018 
Muhammad Zafar Iqbal 
Versus 
Hameeda Naz alias Hameeda Khanum and others 
 
Sr.  No.  of  order/ 
proceedings 
Date  of  order/ 
Proceedings 
Order  with  signatures  of  Judge,  and  that  of 
parties of counsel, where necessary 
 
15.11.2018  Chaudhry Abdul Razzaq, Advocate for the petitioner 
 
 
The  petitioner/plaintiffs  instituted  a  suit  for  specific 
 
performance  of  agreement  to  sell  dated  02.10.2013  alongwith 
perpetual injunction with regard to the suit property fully mentioned 
in the paragraphs No.1 and 2 of the plaint, against the respondents. 
Initially,  the  respondents/defendants  were  proceeded  against  ex-
parte  vide  order  dated  09.09.2014,  but  the  respondents/defendants 
No.2  to  5  filed  application  for  setting  aside  of  the  ex-parte 
proceedings  on  10.02.2015,  which  was  accepted  on  27.05.2016. 
The  suit  was  duly  contested  by  the  respondents  No.2  to  5  while 
submitting  written  statement  and  written  reply.  Again  on 
08.03.2017,  the  respondents  No.2  to  5  were  proceeded  against  ex-
parte,  who  submitted  application  for  setting  aside  of  the  same  on 
21.03.2017,  which  was  duly  resisted  by  the  present  petitioner; 
however,  the  same  was  allowed  on  the  statement  of  the  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioner  subject  to  cost  of  Rs.1000/-  on 
16.01.2018.  Vide  impugned  order  dated  06.06.2018,  the  learned 
trial  Court  while  dismissing  application  for  grant  of  temporary 
injunction  directed  the  petitioner/plaintiff  to  deposit  the  remaining 
consideration  of  Rs.33,00,000/-  within  30  days,  otherwise  suit 
would be dismissed. Feeling aggrieved of the said order, the present 
C.R.No.1472 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              2 
petitioner  preferred  an  appeal,  but  remained  unsuccessful  vide 
impugned  judgment  dated  25.10.2018,  which  has  culminated  in 
filing of the civil revision in hand. 
2. 
 
Avows  that  learned  subordinate  Courts  while  passing 
the  impugned  orders  have  failed  to  appraise  the  facts  and 
circumstances of the case with independent judicious mind and the 
same are not speaking orders, against the mandate of section 24-A 
of the General Clauses Act, 1897; that the learned trial Court while 
deciding application for grant of temporary injunction has illegally 
imposed  condition  for  depositing  the  remaining  consideration  of 
Rs.33,00,000/-  within  30  days  otherwise  suit  will  be  dismissed, 
such condition cannot be imposed because if the petitioner/plaintiff 
fails to deposit the amount, only the fate of application for grant of 
temporary  injunction  will  be  decided,  hence,  the  impugned  order 
has  been  passed  in  excess  of  jurisdiction.  Adds  that  when  the 
possession  of  the  suit  property  is  not  with  the  petitioner, order  for 
depositing  the  remaining  sale  consideration  is  uncalled  for. 
Contends that the impugned order and judgment are result of wrong 
application  of  law  on  the  subject.  Maintains  that  learned  appellate 
Court  has  also  failed  to  play  the  role  of  custodian  of  the  rights  of 
the  parties  by  stating  in  para  No.8  of  the  impugned  judgment  that 
petitioner/plaintiff  should  have  complied  with  the  order  passed  by 
the learned trial Court for payment of remaining sale consideration 
to  discharge  his  obligation,  by  completely  ignoring  the  non-
fulfillment  of  the  obligation  by  respondent/defendant  No.1,  who 
with  mala  fide  intention,  violating  the  terms  of  agreement, 
transferred the property in the name of defendants/respondents No.2 
to  5.  All  the  ingredients  for  grant  of  temporary  injunction  lean  in 
favour of  the  petitioner;  hence, the  application  ought to  have been 
graced  with  acceptance  instead  of  dismissing  the  same.  As  such, 
material  illegalities  and  irregularities  have  been  committed  by  the 
learned  subordinate  Courts,  which  has  resulted  in  miscarriage  of 
C.R.No.1472 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              3 
justice;  thus,  by  allowing  the  civil  revision  in  hand,  the  impugned 
order  and  judgment  may  be  set  aside,  consequent  whereof 
application for grant of  temporary injunction may be accepted and 
direction  for  deposit  of  the  remaining  sale  consideration  may  also 
be  declared  null  and  void.  Relies  on  M/s.  BIN  BAK  INDUSTRIES 
(PVT.) LTD. and another v. FRIENDS ASSOCIATES (REGD.) and 
others  (PLJ  2003  SC  24)  and  ALTAF  HUSSAIN  QAMAR  and  2 
others v. IMRAN RASOOL and 5 others (2011 CLC 1891-Lahore). 
3. 
4. 
 
 
Heard. 
Considering  the  arguments  and  perusing  the  record 
made  available,  it  is  observed  that  in  such  like  suits,  under  the 
enlightened  principles  of  justice,  it  is  bounden  duty  of  the  learned 
trial Court to consider the agreement to sell at the inception and if 
any amount is found outstanding against the plaintiff, it must order 
for its deposit in the Court within the time period so granted. In this 
regard  reliance  is  placed  on  Malik  Imam  Bukhsh  v.  Mohammad 
Boota (Deceased) through L.Rs. (2017 SCMR 516). In the present 
case, the cutoff date was 05.12.2013 but the petitioner at the time of 
filing the suit on 18.12.2013 did not, in order to show his bona fide 
and  willingness  to  perform  his  part  of  agreement,  deposit  the 
alleged  remaining  sale  consideration  in  the  learned  trial  Court  but 
he  did  not  pose  his  such  gesture  and  even  when  the  learned  trial 
Court  ordered  as  such,  he,  on  09.07.2018,  firstly  filed  written 
application  for  extension  of 
time 
to  submit  the  remaining 
consideration  amount,  and  15  days  extension  was  granted  to  him, 
but  instead  of  complying  with  the  order  of  the  learned  trial  Court, 
he assailed the order dated 06.06.2018 in appeal. When such a case 
was  brought  before  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  reported  as  Adil 
Tiwana  and  others  v.  Shaukat  Ullah  Khan  Bangash  (2015  SCMR 
828), it was invariably held that:- 
‘The  fact  remains  that  the  respondent,  who  was 
obliged  to  make  payment  of  the  balance  sum  of 
C.R.No.1472 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              4 
Rs.90,00,000/-  by  31-12.1995,  had  failed  to  fulfil  this 
material obligation until after the judgment of the High 
Court rendered on 4.4.2013. It would, in our  opinion, 
be highly unfair and inequitable if the respondent is to 
be  granted  discretionary  relief  in  the  foregoing 
circumstances, which show failure on his part to make 
payment  or  comply  with  Court  orders  in  spite  of  the 
extreme indulgence shown to him by the Court.’  
Even in the said celebrated judgment it has been held that:- 
‘We may also add at this stage that the remedy by way 
of  specific  performance  is  equitable  and  it  is  not 
obligatory  on  the  Court  to  grant  such  a  relief  merely 
because it is lawful to do so. Section 22 of the Specific 
Relief  Act  expressly  stipulates  so.  It  is  axiomatic  that 
one  who  seeks  equity  must  do  equity.  In  the  present 
case  all  equities  are  squarely  in  favour  of  the 
appellants/defendants  and  stacked  high  against  the 
respondent/  plaintiff.  This  evident  from  his  conduct 
and is a significant additional reason why the suit filed 
by 
the  respondent/plaintiff  seeking  discretionary 
equitable relief must be dismissed.’ 
In addition to the above, in the present case, the petitioner failed to 
satisfy  the  learned  trial  Court  regarding  grant  of  temporary 
injunction  in  his  favour,  so  the  same  was  dismissed,  because  the 
possession  of  the  suit  property  is  not  with  the  petitioner/plaintiff 
and he has allegedly paid a tweak of sale consideration and a huge 
amount of the same is yet to be paid, which has been ordered to be 
deposited in the learned trial Court but he did not comply with the 
same. Usually, in such like cases temporary injunction is granted so 
that  the  subject  matter  (disputed  property)  remain  intact  and 
ultimately  could  be  transferred  to  a  successful  party  in  a  litigation 
and  one  of  the  main  objects  for  giving  directions  to  deposit  the 
C.R.No.1472 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              5 
balance sale consideration in the Court is to see the bona fide of the 
purchaser, who knocks the door of Court for obtaining a decree for 
Specific  Performance  of  agreement  against  the  vendor(s);  the 
balance  amount  so  deposited  is  usually  invested  in  some  profit 
bearing schemes, enabling the vendor/defendant to get an increased 
amount  as  sale  consideration,  having  an  element  of  compensation 
for  the  time  consumed  in  litigation,  inter  alia,  considering  the 
inflationary  trends  and  in  case  a  purchaser  or  plaintiff  remains 
unsuccessful, 
the  deposited  amount,  keeping 
in  view 
the 
facts/record of the case, can be returned back to him with accruals 
in order to safeguard his interest. Thus, non-deposit of balance sale 
consideration  raises  a  legitimate  adverse  presumption  against  the 
petitioner/plaintiff  that  he  is  not  serious  in  performing  his  part  of 
the  agreement  or  in  pursuing  his  remedy  of  specific  performance, 
consequently, disentitling him to a decree for specific performance 
of agreement. 
 
Apart  from  the  above,  the  petitioner/plaintiff,  before  the 
cutoff  date,  did  not  issue  notice  to  the  respondent/defendant  No.1 
regarding fulfillment of her part of agreement and his willingness to 
perform his part of agreement, which shows that he was and is not 
serious  in  performing  his  part  of  agreement.  For  a  part  seeking  a 
remedy  of  specific  performance,  it  is  mandatory  that  he  should 
apply  to  the  Court  for  depositing  the  balance  amount  and  any 
contumacious/omission in this regard entails in dismissal of the suit 
or decretal of the suit, if it is filed by the other side. In the present 
case,  no  such  exertion  was  made  by  the  petitioner/plaintiff,  rather 
when the Court ordered him to deposit the balance consideration, he 
firstly  lingered  on  the  matter  and  requested  for  extension  of  time, 
which was granted, but later on he agitated the order through appeal 
and  when  failed  to  get  favourable  decision,  filed  the  instant  civil 
revision and contumaciously kept on disobeying all such orders.  
C.R.No.1472 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              6 
5. 
 
Another  factor  in  this  case  is  that  in  plaint  the 
petitioner has pleaded that after entering into alleged agreement to 
sell  and  its  attestation  by  the  Notary  Public  on  02.10.2013,  the 
possession  of  the  disputed  property  was  handed  over  to  him,  but 
while  agitating  the  order  dated  06.06.2018  passed  by  the  learned 
trial  Court  in  appeal,  he  averred  that  possession  of  the  disputed 
property was with the respondents/defendants No.2 to 5 and same is 
the  situation  in  the  present  civil  revision;  in  such  a  scenario, there 
remains no justifiable reason with the present petitioner for defying 
the Court’s orders by not depositing the balance sale consideration. 
6. 
 
The case law relied upon by the learned counsel for the 
petitioner, with utmost respect to the same, has no relevance to the 
peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  in  hand,  because  in 
Altaf Hussain Qamar and 2 others’ case the temporary injunction 
was  granted  with  a  condition  to  deposit  balance  consideration 
amount and failure to deposit the same would  result into dismissal 
of  the  suit,  which  ought  not  have  been  ordered,  but  in  the  present 
case  the  application  for  grant  of  temporary  injunction  has  been 
dismissed, issues were framed and thereafter the learned trial Court 
ordered,  in  second  part  of  the  impugned  order,  to  deposit  the  sale 
consideration  amount  within  30  days  otherwise  suit  will  be 
dismissed;  thus, 
the  said  part  would  be  considered  as  an 
independent  order,  which  was  mandatory  in  the  light  of  supra 
mentioned judgment reported as Malik Imam Bukhsh v. Mohammad 
Boota (Deceased) through L.Rs. (2017 SCMR 516); same was the 
situation in M/s. BIN BAK INDUSTRIES (PVT.) LTD. and another 
v. FRIENDS ASSOCIATES (REGD.) and others (PLJ 2003 SC 24); 
thus,  both  being  on  distinguished  premises  are  not  helpful  to  the 
petitioner’s case. 
7. 
 
The  above  portrayal  and  discussion  lead  me  to  the 
conclusion that one who seeks equity must also do equity, which is 
not depicting on the part of the petitioner/plaintiff; thus, by placing 
C.R.No.1472 of 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              7 
reliance  on  the  judgments  supra  and  Rabnawaz  and  13  others  v. 
Mustaqeem  Khan  and  14  others  (1999  SCMR  1362),  the  civil 
revision  in  hand  as  well  as  the  suit  instituted  by  the  present 
petitioner/plaintiff  alongwith  all  pending  application(s),  stands 
dismissed.  Copy of the judgment be transmitted to the learned trial 
Court for further proceedings. 
  
   
   (Shahid Bilal Hassan) 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
M A. Hassan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
Judge 
