Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP 
(Niaz Ahmed alias Nazo v. The State and another) 
and 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP 
(Ghulam Sarwar v. Noor Ahmed and 12 others) 
and 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
(The State v. Niaz Ahmed alias Nazo) 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
       Date of hearing:  26.09.2018 
 
 
           
 
Appellant  by:  Mian Muhammad Tayyab Wattoo, Advocate. 
Complainant by:   Mr. Rehan Zafar, Advocate. 
State by: 
Mr. Asghar Ali Gill, Deputy Prosecutor General. 
----------------------------------- 
Ch. Abdul Aziz, J.   Niaz Ahmed alias Nazo (appellant) along 
with  13-other  co-accused,  namely,  Muhammad  Sharif,  Allah  Rakha, 
Bakhtiar Ahmed, Naseer Ahmed, Muhammad Amin, Hassan Bakhsh, 
Muhammad  Ayyub,  Umer  Draz,  Mukhtiar  Ahmed,  Noor  Ahmed, 
Sardar Ahmed alias Bhola, Ali Muhammad alias Alia and Muhammad 
Munir, involved in case FIR No.437/2009 dated 27.11.2009 registered 
under  sections  302,148  &  149  PPC  was  tried  by  learned  Additional 
Sessions  Judge,  Bahawalnagar.  The  learned  trial  court  in  terms  of 
judgment  dated  12.06.2018  while  acquitting  the  afore-mentioned  co-
accused  proceeded  to  convict  and  sentence  the  appellant  in  the 
following terms:- 
Under  section  302  (b)  PPC  to  suffer  death  sentence  and  to  pay 
Rs.200,000/-  as  compensation  to  the  legal  heirs  of  the  deceased 
under  section  544-A,  Cr.P.C.  and  in  default  where  to  further 
undergo six months SI.  
 
Challenging  his  conviction  and  sentence,  Naiz  Ahmad  alias 
Nazo  (appellant)  preferred  Criminal  Appeal  No.279  of  2013, 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
2 
Ghulam  Sarwar  (appellant/complainant)  filed  Criminal  Appeal 
No.359  of  2013  against  the  acquittal  of  respondents,  namely,  Noor 
Ahmed,  Muhammad  Amin,  Mukhtiar  Ahmed  alias  Mukhi,  Hassan 
Bakhsh,  Bahtiar  Ahmad,  Umer  Daraz  alias  Dara,  Muhammad 
Naseer,  Muhammad  Sharif,  Allah  Rakha,  Sardar  alias  Dhalla,  Ali 
Muhammad  alias  Alia  and  Muhammad  Munir,  whereas  learned  trial 
court sent  reference under  section 374, Cr.P.C.  which  was numbered 
as  Murder  Reference  No.32  of  2013  for  the  confirmation  or 
otherwise  of  death  sentence  awarded  to  Niaz  Ahmed  alias  Nazo 
(convict/appellant).  All  these  matters  are  being  disposed  of  through 
this single judgment.  
2. 
Succinctly  stated  the  case  of  the  prosecution  as  unveiled  by 
complainant Ghulam Sarwar (PW.2) in FIR (Exh.PC/1) is to the effect 
that  he  was  resident  of  Mauza  Kora  Bhuttna  and  agriculturist  by 
profession; that on 01.05.1985 Niaz Ahmed alias Nazo etc. launched 
an  attack  at  the  house  of  the  complainant  party  over  a  land  dispute 
during which Naik Muhammad Chheena was murdered for which the 
complainant  and  his  brother  Noor  Ahmed  were  sentenced  to  suffer 
imprisonment  for  life  and  were  released  in  the  year  1997;  that  his 
brother  Noor  Ahmed  purchased  land  measuring  14-acres  from  one 
Allah  Ditta  Wattoo  whereupon  Niaz  Ahmed  alias  Nazo  filed 
declaratory  suit  qua  impugned  transaction  which  ultimately  was 
decided  in  favour  of  the  complainant  party;  that  said  Niaz  Ahmed 
alias  Nazo  etc.  were  inimical  against  the  complainant  party  due  to 
previous murder; that on 27.11.2009 at 9:00 a.m. complainant Ghulam 
Sarwar  along  with  Noor  Ahmed,  Saeed  Ahmed,  Bashir  Ahmed  and 
Mst.  Hanifan  Bibi  wife  of  Noor  Ahmed  was  present  in  his  landed 
property,  when  Bakhtiar  Ahmed  armed  with  pistol 
.30  bore, 
Muhammad  Ahmed  armed  with  rifle  .44  bore,  Muhammad  Sharif 
armed with rifle .222 bore, Allah Rakha armed with repeater .12 bore, 
Noor  Ahmed  alias  Waalia  armed  with  pistol  .30  bore,  Muhammad 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
3 
Amin armed with rifle, Mukhtiar alias Makhee armed with rifle  .222 
bore,  Hussain  Baksh  armed  with  repeater  .12  bore,  Muhammad 
Ayyub  armed  with  pistol  .12  bore,  Niaz  Ahmed  alias  Nazo  armed 
with  hoe,  Umar  Draz  alias  Zada,  Muhammad  Naseer  and  Sardar 
Ahmed  alias  Dhola  armed  with  hatchets,  along  with  their  two 
unknown  accused  emerged  at  the  spot;  that  Niaz  Ahmed  alias  Nazo 
raised  lalkara  that  they  had  come  for  teaching  lesson  to  complainant 
party  regarding  previous  murder  and  for  purchasing  landed  property 
whereupon  Bakhtiar  Ahmed  shot  a  straight  fire  with  pistol  hitting 
Saeed  Ahmed,  nephew  of  the  complainant,  on  the  right  side  of  his 
head;  that  Muhammad  Sharif  resorted  to  firing  with  rifle  .44  bore 
hitting  Saeed  Ahmed  on  the  right  side  of  his  neck;  that  Muhammad 
Ahmed  shot  fire  with  rifle  .44  bore  hitting  on  the  right  side  of  his 
head; that Allah Rakha shot fire with repeater .12 bore hitting him on 
the right ear, mouth and nose; that Noor Ahmed shot fire with pistol 
.30 bore straight on the chest of Saeed Ahmed; that Muhammad Amin 
shot  fire  with  rifle  hitting  him  on  the  left  side  of  his  chest;  that 
Mukhtiar Ahmed alias Mukhee shot fire with rifle .222 bore hitting on 
his right shoulder; that Hassan Bakhsh resorted to firing with repeater 
.12 bore hitting him on his left shoulder; that Muhammad Ayyub shot 
fire  with  pistol  .12  bore  hitting  him  on  right  flank;  that  unknown 
accused persons resorted to firing upon Saeed Ahmed, who fell down, 
Noor  Ahmed  took  to  his  heels  who  was  encircled  by  Umer  Draz, 
Naseer  and  Sardar  Ahmed  alias  Dholla;  that  Umar  Draz  gave  two 
hatchet blows hitting Noor Ahmed on the left side of his head, Naseer 
Ahmed  inflicted  two  hatchet  blows  on  his  head,  who  fell  down 
whereupon  Niaz  Ahmed  alias  Nazo  while  giving  a  hoe  blow  on  his 
neck  cut  his  throat;  that  besides  the  complainant  the  occurrence  was 
also witnessed by Bashir Ahmed, Muhammad Pervaiz and Mst.Hanifa 
Bibi;  that  the  accused  persons  decamped  from  the  spot  and  Noor 
Ahmed and Saeed Ahmed succumbed to the injuries at the spot.  
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
4 
3. 
The  law  was  set  into  motion  on  the  application  (Exh.PC)  of 
Ghulam  Sarwar  complainant  (PW.2)  presented  before  Muhammad 
Rafique SI (PW.6) at the Police Station, on the basis of which formal 
FIR  (Exh.PC/1)  was  chalked  out.  Subsequent  to  the  registration  of 
FIR, investigation of this case was conducted by Muhammad Rafique 
SI  (PW.6).  He  visited  the  place  of  occurrence,  prepared  rough  site 
plan (Exh.PL/2), took into possession blood stained earth of deceased 
Saeed Ahmad vide recovery memo Exh.PE. From the crime scene, he 
also  took  into  possession  three  empties  of  .30  bore  pistol  lying  near 
the dead body of Noor Ahmad deceased (P.6/1-3) vide memo Exh.PF. 
He  also  secured  one  crime  empty  and  two  live  bullets  of  pistol  .30 
bore  (P.10)  and  (P.9/1-2)  vide  memo  Exh.PG.  Then,  he  took  into 
possession  blood  stained  earth  of  deceased  Noor  Ahmad  vide  memo 
Exh.PD.  He  also  prepared  inquest  reports  of  deceased  Noor  Ahmad 
and Saeed vide separate memos Exh.PM and Exh.PN respectively and 
then dispatched their dead bodies to THQ Hospital, Chishtian through 
Muhammad  Arsahd  154/C 
for 
the  purpose  of  post-mortem 
examination.  
 
The investigation of this case was entrusted to Abdul Hakim SI 
(PW.4)  on  21.12.2009.  He  arrested  accused  persons  Niaz  Ahmad, 
Muhammad  Sharif,  Allah  Rakha  and  Muhammad  Ahmad  on 
05.01.2010. He also arrested Mukhtiar Ahmad accused on 12.01.2010. 
In  his 
investigation,  accused  persons,  namely,  Nasir  Ahmad, 
Muhammad  Amin,  Hassan  Bakhsh,  Muhammad  Ayyub,  Umar  Draz, 
Mukhtiar  Ahmad  alias  Mukhi,  Noor  Ahmad,  Sardar  Ahmad,  Ali 
Muhammad and Munir Ahmad were found innocent.  On 13.01.2010, 
Niaz  Ahmad 
(appellant),  Muhammad  Sharif,  Allah  Rakha, 
Muhammad  Ahmad  and  Mukhtiar  Ahmad  while  in  police  custody 
made separate disclosures and in pursuance thereof led to the recovery 
of weapons of offence i.e. Kassi/hoe (P.11), rifle .44 bore (P.12) along 
with  .12  live  cartridges  (P.13/1-10),  gun  repeater  (P.14)  along  with 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
5 
four live cartridges (P.15/1-4), pistol 30 bore (P.16) along with 7 live 
bullets  (P.17/1-7)  and  gun  .12  bore  (P.18)  along  with  six  live 
cartridges  (P.19/1-6)  which  were  taken  into  possession  vide  separate 
recovery  memos  Exh.PE,  Ex.PI,  Exh.PJ,  Exh.PK  and  Exh.PL.  On 
15.01.2010,  after  the  completion  of  investigation  he  handed  over  the 
file  to  SHO  for  the  preparation  of  report/challan  under  section  173, 
Cr.P.C. 
4. 
The prosecution in order to prove its case against the appellant 
and  his  co-accused  produced  nine  PWs  including    Ghulam  Sarwar 
(PW.2)  and  Muhammad  Pervez  (PW.3),  who  are  eye-witnesses  of 
the  occurrence,  Dr.Muhammad  Idrees  (PW.8)  who  furnished 
medical  evidence  and  Abdul  Hakim  SI  (PW.4)  and  Muhammad 
Rafique (PW.6), are Investigating Officers of the case. The remaining 
witnesses, more or less, were formal in nature.  
5. 
Dr.  Muhammad  Idrees  (PW.8)  on  27.11.2009  at  4:00  p.m. 
conducted  the  post-mortem  examination  of  Noor  Ahmed  (deceased) 
and observed the following injuries:- 
two 
There  were 
lacerated  wounds  on  parietal  area 
measuring  3.5  x  .1.5  cm  into  bone  deep  oblique  in 
direction. 
There  were  two  lacerated  wounds  measuring  4  x  1.7  cm 
each into bone deep oblique in direction on central parietal 
area. 
There  was  lacerated  wound  which  was  about  10  cm  x  2.5 
cm  on  right  side  of  neck  which  is  9.5  deep  and  right 
caroated vessels (neck) treachea, Oesephagus and the third 
cervical  vertegbrae  were  incised  and  spinal  cord  can  be 
seen.”  
“1. 
2. 
3. 
 
The doctor gave the following opinion:- 
“After  thorough  external  and  internal  post-mortem  of  the  dead 
body  I  am  of the opinion that injury No.3 was the cause of death 
leading  to  severe  haemorrhage,  hypovolemic  shock,  cardiac 
respiratory failure and death. This injury was sufficient in ordinary 
course of nature to cause death. All the injuries were ante mortem 
in nature and caused by sharp edged weapon.  
Probable 
injury  and  death  was 
instantaneously  and  time  between  death  and  post-mortem  written 
statement within eight hours.” 
time  elapsed  between 
 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
6 
 
 On  the  same  day  i.e.  27.11.2009  at  about  4:30  p.m., 
Muhammad 
Idrees 
(PW.8)  also  conducted 
the  post-mortem 
examination  of  Saeed  Ahmed  (deceased)  and  noted  the  following 
injuries:- 
“1. 
A lacerated wound on left parietal area measuring 2 x 5 cm 
into bone deep oblique in direction on right parietal area of 
scalp in middle. 
2-A.  A  lacerated  wound  measuring  1  x  1  cm  into  deep  going 
circular  in  direction  in  shape  in  right  temporal  region  of 
scalp  3 cm  lateral  to  pinna of right  ear, margins  of wound 
inverted  no  burning  and  blackening  was  present  on  the 
wound on exploration there was hole in  bone present under 
the wound. Brain matter written statement badly damaged. 
There was injury to base of skull Haemotoma measuring 7 
cm (intra central) also present due to this injury blood was 
coming  from  mouth  and  nose.  There  was  also  hole  in  the 
base of skull on left side of skull.  
2-B.  A  lacerated  wound  measuring  1.5  cm  x  1.5  cm  x  deep 
going circular in shape on upper part of lateral aspect of left 
side  of  neck.  Muscles  under  the  wound  were  damaged. 
Injury  No.2  is  in  continuation  of  injury  No.2-A  in  police 
injury statement this injury is mentioned as injury No.3. 
A  lacerated  wound  measuring  5  cm  x  1.5  cm  x  skin  deep 
oblique in  direction on anterior aspect  of left  side of chest 
at  the  level  of  4th  and  5th  rib.  Margins  of  the  wound  were 
inverted,  no  burning  or  blackening  was  present.  In  the 
police  injury  statement  this  injury  mentioned  as  injury 
No.5. Corresponding tear was present on covering cloth.  
3. 
4-A.  A  lacerated  wound  measuring  1  cm  x  1  cm  x  skin  deep 
circular  in  shape  on  right  side  of  chest  interiorly  on  6th 
intercostals  space  and  auxiliary  lines.  Margins  of  wound 
were  inverted.  No  burning  or  blackening  was  present.  In 
police  injury  statement  this  injury  as  mentioned  as  injury 
No.6. 
4-B.  Another  lacerated  wound  measuring  1.5  x  1.5  cm  x  skin 
deep  circular  in  shape  in  right  round  area.  Margins  of 
wound  were  everted.  No  burning  or  blackening  written 
statement  present  on  the  wound.  Injury  No.4-B  is  in 
continuation  of  injury  No.4-A.  In  police  papers  injury 
statement this injury is mentioned as injury No.11. 
5-A.  A  lacerated  wound  measuring  1  cm  x  1  cm  x  deep  going 
circular in shape on middle of medial aspect of right upper 
arm.  Margins  of  the  wound  inverted,  no  burning  or 
blackening  present  on  the  wound.  On  exploration  muscles 
under  the  wound  were  crushed,  bone  was  fractured.  In 
police  injury  statement  this  injury  is  mentioned  as  injury 
No.10. 
5-B.  Another  lacerated  wound  measuring  1.5  x  1.5  cm  x  deep 
going circular in shape on middle of lateral aspect of right 
upper arm. Margins of wound were everted. No burning or 
blackening  was  present  on  the  wound.  On  exploration 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
7 
muscles  were  damaged  and  bone  fractured.  Injury  No.5-B 
is  in  continuation  of  injury  No.5-A.  In  police  injury 
statement this injury is mentioned as injury No.7. 
6-A.  A  lacerated  wound  measuring  1  x  1  cm  x  deep  going 
circular in shape on 1/3 of lateral aspect of left upper arm, 
margins  of  the  wound  were  inverted,  no  burning  or 
blackening  was  present  on  the  wound.  On  exploration 
muscle  were  damaged.  Bone  fractured.  In  police  injury 
statement this injury is mentioned as injury N o.8. 
6-B.  A  lacerated  wound  measuring  1.5  x  1.5  cm  x  deep  going 
circular  in  shape  in  lateral  aspect  of  left  side  of  neck, 
margins  of  the  wound  were  everted.  No  burning  or 
blackening  was  present  on  the  wound.  Injury  No.6-B  is  in 
continuation  of  injury  No.6-A.  In  police  injury  statement 
this injury is mentioned as injury No.3 corresponding holes 
were present on shirt. 
7-A.  A lacerated wound measuring 1 x 1 cm x skin deep circular 
in  shape  on  back  of  left  shoulder  joint,  margins  of  the 
wound  were  inverted,  no  burning  or  blackening  were 
present on the wound. In police injury statement this injury 
is mentioned as injury No.9. 
8. 
7-B.  A  lacerated  wound  measuring  1.5  x  1.5  cm  x  skin  deep 
circular  in  shape  on  lateral  aspect  of  left  side  of  neck, 
margins  of  the  wound  were  everted,  no  burning  or 
blackening  was  present  on  the  wound.  In  police  injury 
statement  this  injury  has  been  mentioned  as  injury  No.7. 
Injury No.7-B is in continuation of injury No.7-A. 
A  lacerated  wound  measuring  3  cm  x  2  cm  x  skin  deep 
oblique  in  direction  on  lateral  aspect  of  upper  1/3  of  right 
upper  arm.  In  police  injury  statement  this  injury  is 
mentioned as injury No.12. 
A  lacerated  wound  measuring  2.5  x  1  cm  x  skin  deep 
oblique in direction on upper side of lower 1/4 of left thigh. 
In police injury statement this injury is mentioned as injury 
No.13. 
A  lacerated  wound  measuring  2  cm  x  .75  cm  x  skin  deep 
oblique  in  direction  on medial  aspect  of  left  knee  joint.  In 
police  injury  statement  this  injury  is  mentioned  as  injury 
No.14. 
10. 
9. 
Note.  In  police  injury  statement,  injury  No.4  was  not  separate 
injury but is part of injury No.2-A,B.  
 
The doctor gave the following opinion:- 
 
“After  thorough  external  and  internal  post-mortem  of  the  dead 
body  I  am  of the opinion that injury No.2 was the cause of death 
severe damage to brain matter leading to cardiac respiratory failure 
and death. This injury was sufficient in ordinary course of nature to 
cause  death.  All  the  injuries  were  ante  mortem  in  nature  and 
caused  by  sharp  edged  weapon.  Injuries  No.1,8,9  &  10  were 
caused by blunt weapons and remaining were caused by firearms. 
Probable  time  elapsed  between  injury  and  death  was  within  ten 
minutes,  and  time  between  death  and  post-mortem  was  within 
eight hours.”       
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
8 
  
6. 
After  the  conclusion  of  prosecution  evidence,  the  learned  trial 
court  examined  the  appellant  and  his  co-accused  under  section  342, 
Cr.P.C.  Niaz  Ahmad  (appellant)  in  response  to  question  “why  this 
case  against  you  and  why  the  PWs  have  deposed  against  you”  made 
the following reply:- 
“Allegations  levelled  against  me  in  the  FIR  and  statements  U/S 
161  Cr.P.C.  and  when  they  appeared  as  P.Ws  they  alleged  that  I 
caused  firearm  injury  on  the  right  side  of  neck  of  deceased 
Muhammad  Saeed  whereas  no  injury  was  found  on  the  right  side 
of his neck. Injury on the neck of left side was the exit wound. So 
they  falsely  involved  me  in  this  false  case.  It  proved  from  the 
medical  evidence.  Allegations  levelled  against  me  proved  false 
from medical evidence. No crime empty of gun 12 bore was found. 
In first part of FIR complainant party alleged that I was armed with 
222 and in second party they showed me armed with 444 bore gun 
this  shows  credibility  of  complainant  party.  This  involved  me  in 
this  case  by  widening  the  net  and  due  to  previous  enmity.  In  this 
respect detailed statement of my co-accused Niaz recorded.” 
 
The  appellant  also  opted  to  appear  as  witness  in  his  own 
defence  under  section  340  (2)  of  Cr.P.C.  and  made  a  statement  on 
oath.  In  addition,  seventeen  other  witnesses  appeared  as  DW.1  to 
DW.17 in support of the defence plea of acquitted co-accused. On the 
conclusion  of  trial,  the  appellant  was  convicted  and  sentenced, 
whereas  his  co-accused  were  acquitted,  as  mentioned  above,  hence, 
the instant appeals and murder reference. 
7. 
It  is  contended  on  behalf  of  appellant  that  though  at  first  look 
the  case  in  hand  appears  to  be    arising  out  of  promptly  lodged  FIR, 
however,  the  perusal  of  record  proves  that  it  is  not  so;  that  for  the 
murder of two persons, as many as fifteen persons were grilled in the 
case  through  wider  net;  that  this  is  also  an  admitted  fact  that  both 
sides,  on  account  of  multiple  litigation  of  civil  and  criminal  nature 
were inimically placed against each other, thus the eye-witnesses can 
easily  be  termed  as  interested  and  partisan  witnesses;  that  out  of  the 
fifteen  accused  charge  sheeted  by  the  trial  court,  fourteen  were 
acquitted;  that  in  these  circumstances,  the  deposition  of  two  eye-
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
9 
witnesses has no legal significance and conviction cannot be awarded 
on  the  basis  thereof  to  appellant;  that  in  these  circumstances, 
conviction  awarded  to  the  appellant  can  only  be  upheld  if  the  ocular 
account is getting due support from some other independent evidence; 
that  the  medical  evidence  is  also  found  not  to  be  in  conformity  with 
the  eyewitness  account  furnished  by  Ghulam  Sawar  and  Muhammad 
Pervaiz; that it is evident from the medical evidence that certain blunt 
weapon injuries were also noticed on the person of Saeed Ahmad for 
which  no  explanation  was  put  forth  by  the  two  eye-witnesses;  that 
even the postmortem examination of both the deceased was held with 
the  delay  which  gives  rise  to  further  doubt  about  the  truth  of 
prosecution  case;  that  though,  a  specific  motive  was  taken  up  by  the 
prosecution, however, prosecution  failed to  attribute it  exclusively  to 
the  appellant  and  that  though  reasonable  doubt  arises  out  from  the 
plain view of prosecution case, however, its benefit was not given to 
appellant.  With  these  submission,  it  is  urged  by  the  learned  counsel 
that the conviction awarded to the appellant is liable to be set-aside. 
8. 
On the other hand, learned  Deputy Prosecutor General assisted 
by  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  vehemently  opposed  the 
arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant and submitted that the 
occurrence  took  place  at  about  9:00  a.m.  and  its  information  was 
conveyed to police without any delay; that the case is arising out of a 
day-light  occurrence  where  there  is  no  chance  of  mistaken  identity; 
that during occurrence, the appellant inflicted Kassi blow on the neck 
of Noor Ahmad deceased which proved fatal; that it reflects from the 
medical  evidence  furnished  by  Dr.Muhammad  Idrees  that  the  injury 
ascribed  to  appellant  was  found  present  on  the  neck  of  Muhammad 
Saeed  deceased  during  postmortem  examination;  that  though  eye-
witnesses  of  the  occurrence  were  subjected  to  lengthy  cross-
examination, however, the defence failed to extract any benefit out of 
it;  that  the  case  of  prosecution  is  further  corroborated  from  the 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
10 
recovery of Kassi effected from appellant during investigation which 
was found by the Serologist to be stained with human blood; that the 
motive  taken  up  by  the  prosecution  was  not  even  denied  by  the 
defence,  thus  it  provides  required  corroboration  to  the  case  of 
prosecution;  that  the  eye-witnesses  of  the  occurrence  since  are 
residents  of  the  vicinity  of  crime,  hence  are  natural  witnesses  and 
there is no reason to disbelieve them; that since the appellant was part 
of  bunch  of  criminals  who  committed  cold  blooded  murder  of  two 
innocent persons, hence he  deserves no mercy  and  sentence of  death 
awarded to him needs no interference from this court.  
9. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
10.  A peep through the record reveals that the case of prosecution is 
comprising upon the ocular account furnished by Ghulam Sarwar and 
Muhammad  Pervaiz  (PW.2  &  PW.3),  the  medical  evidence  brought 
on  record  through  Dr.  Muhammad  Idrees  (PW.8),  the  recovery  of 
hoe/Kassi  (P.11)  witnessed  by  Muhammad  Pervaiz  (PW.3)  and  the 
motive  which  was  described  as  a  grudge  arising  out  of  previous 
criminal and civil litigation.  
11. 
It  emerges  from  the  wade  through  of  record  that  the  case  in 
hand is arising out of an occurrence which took place on 27.11.2009 
at  about  9:00  a.m.  in  an  area  known  as  “Mauza  Korra  Bootna” 
situated  at  a  distance  of  8-kilometers  from  Police  Station  Shehar 
Fareed,  District  Bahawalnagar.  The  detail  of  crime  was  reported  by 
Ghulam  Sarwar  (PW.2) 
through  written  application  (Exh.PC) 
presented before Muhammad Rafique SI (PW.6) in the Police Station 
at about 11:00 a.m. which shortly thereafter was transcribed into First 
Information  Report  (Exh.PC/1).  Though  from  above  it  appears  that 
the  case  is  arising  out  of  a  prompt  FIR,  however,  review  of  record 
reflects  that  it  is  not  so.  In  this  regard,  it  is  noticed  that  though 
complainant Ghulam Sarwar (PW.2) was a graduate but even then the 
complaint  (Exh.PC)  was  written  by  a  person  not  known  to  him. 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
11 
Surprisingly  though  the  complainant  remained  associated  with  the 
case  during  investigation  as  well  as  trial,  however,  the  veil  was  not 
lifted from the identity of the author of complaint (Exh.PC).  
According  to  the  detail  mentioned  in  the  crime  report,  two 
persons, namely, Saeed Ahmad and Noor Ahmad were done to death 
during this occurrence and as many as fifteen persons were burdened 
with  the  blame  of  having  actively  participated  in  the  commission  of 
crime. Out of these accused fourteen were acquitted by the trial court. 
Admittedly,  all  the  assailants  were  from  one  brotherhood,  closely 
related  to  each  other.  This  aspect  gives  a  strong  indication  that  the 
case  in  hand,  as  of  first  impression,  appears  to  be  of  wider  net.  In 
cases  of  like  nature,  the  courts  are  always  cautious  in  appraising  the 
prosecution  case  so  as  to  exclude  all  hypotheses  of  false  implication 
and  looming  danger  of  conviction  to  innocents.  For  this  reason 
record  of  such  cases  is  required  to  be  scanned  with  utmost  care 
and  watchful  approach.  Such  rule  is  derived  by  us  from  the 
observation  of  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  expressed  in 
Muhammad  Zaman  v.  The  State  (2014  SCMR  749)  which  is  as 
under:-  
“The  tragedy  may  have  been  enacted  by  Mukhtar  who  has  gone 
into  hiding  or  Munawar  who  has  been  acquitted  because  the 
deceased  Shabbir  was  alleged  to  have  illicit  relations  with  their 
sister,  but  many  who  have  no  visible  nexus  with  this  part  of  the 
story have  also been roped in.  It  is  so because it is  customary in 
this part of the country to throw wide the net of implication to rope 
in all those who could possibly pursue the case or do something to 
save  the  skin  of  the  one  who  is  innocent  or  who  is  actually 
responsible for the commission of crime. The Courts, therefore, is 
required  to  exercise  much  greater  care  and  circumspection  while 
appraising evidence.” 
 
12. 
It is further unveiled from the review of record that both sides 
were  in  worst  of  terms  with  each  other  on  account  of  hard  pitched 
enmity  arising  out  of  blood  feud  criminal  litigation  comprising  upon 
multiple  cases.  The  origin  of  this  enmity  is  found  in  the  roots  of  a 
murder occurrence which took place 26-years before this case, during 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
12 
which  three  persons  lost  their  lives,  whereas  eleven  others  received 
injuries.  Ghulam  Sarwar  (PW.2)  and  his  brother  Noor  Ahmad 
(deceased  of  this  case)  were  arrested  in  that  case  and  later  awarded 
imprisonment for life. Both of them were released from the jail in the 
year  1997  after  serving  out  their  sentence.  Though  certain  other 
criminal  cases  were  also  registered  between  both  sides, however,  for 
the  purposes  of  brevity,  their  detail  is  considered  not  appropriate  to 
mention here. Besides these criminal cases, two families remained at 
loggerheads with each other, over a dispute of 14-acres of land. These 
circumstances  strongly  demonstrate  that  the  witnesses  had  a  deep 
rooted  animus  against  the  appellant  and  his  family.  Such  persons,  in 
legal parlance, are called interested witnesses. Since inimically placed 
two  factions  generally  resort  to  implicate  innocent  persons  in  the 
crime,  either  to  deter  them  from  pursuing  the  case  or  for  satisfying 
their  personal  grudge,  vengeance  and  hatred,  hence,  this  is  always 
considered  not  in  the  interest  of  justice  to  place  reliance  on  their 
testimony  without  subjecting  it  to  a  test  from  corroboratory  or 
confirmatory evidence.  While forming such opinion, we are fortified 
by the observation of Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan expressed in 
the  case  of  Haji  Muhammad  Ilahi  and  others  v.  Muhammad  Altaf 
alias  Tedi  and  others  (2011  SCMR  513)  wherein  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan observed as under:- 
“Admittedly all the witnesses are interested and inimical witnesses. 
It  is  a  settled  law  that  the  evidence  of  such  witnesses  has  to  be 
taken with caution and unless it is corroborated by an independent 
circumstance, it cannot be credited with truth as law laid down by 
this Court in Misry Khan’s case (PLD 1977 SC 642).” 
 
13. 
It  is  discernible  from  record  that  as  many  as  fifteen  persons 
were indicted in the case by trial court, out of whom, the prosecution 
failed to prove its case against fourteen and they earned acquittal. The 
set  of  evidence  produced  against  acquitted  fourteen  accused  was 
almost  same  as  adduced  against  the  appellant.  Though  the  two  eye-
witnesses obsessively  burdened some  of the  accused  with  the role of 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
13 
causing  firearm  injuries  on  the  person  of  Saeed  Ahmad  and  saddled 
others  with  inflicting  blunt  and  sharp  traumas  on  the  head  of  Noor 
Ahmad,  however,  their  testimony  was  not  considered  worth  reliance 
for  awarding  conviction  to  them.  As  a  necessary  corollary,  the 
question  arises  that  whether  it  would  be  in  consonance  with  the 
dictates  of  safe  administration  of  justice  to  uphold  conviction  of 
appellant  on  the  same  ocular  account.  In  response  to  such  query,  we 
are  of  an  inescapable  view  that  law  for  appraisal  of  evidence  cannot 
be  stretched  to  an  extent  so  as  to  give  unchecked  leverage  to  such  a 
witness by declaring his credibility as divisible in nature by accepting 
it  against  similarly  placed  accused  and  to  discard  it  against  his  co-
accused.  While  forming  such  view,  we  are  enlightened  from  the 
wisdom  of  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  expressed  in  case 
reported as Imtiaz alias Taj v. The State and others (2018 SCMR 344) 
which is as under:- 
“It  is  not  disputed  that  four  co-accused  of  the  appellant  attributed 
effective firing at and specific injuries to Rustam Ali deceased  had 
been acquitted by the trial court. The law is settled that if the eye-
witnesses  have  been  disbelieved  against  some  accused  persons 
attributed  effective  roles  then  the  same  eye-witnesses  cannot  be 
believed  another  accused  person  attributed  a  similar  role  unless 
such  eye-witnesses  receive  independent  corroboration  qua  the 
other accused person and reference in this respect may be made to 
the cases of Ghulam Sikandar v. Mumraz Khan (PLD 185 SC 11), 
Sarfraz  alias  Sappi  v.    The  State  (2000  SCMR  1758),  Iftikhar 
Hussain  and  others  v.  The  State    (2004  SCMR  1185)  and  Akhtar 
Ali v. The State (2008 SCMR 6).” 
 
  
In  the  aftermath  of  above  discussion,  we  have  arrived  at 
conclusion  that  the  intrinsic  worth  of  prosecution  evidence  is  to  be 
analyzed  with  great  circumspection  for  tracing  the  existence  of 
corroboratory and confirmatory evidence of unimpeachable character 
in its support. 
14. 
In the wake of claim of defence that narrators of ocular account 
are  residents  of  a  place  situated  10-kilometers  away  from  the  crime 
scene  and the  counterclaim  of  eye-witnesses regarding their  ordinary 
place of abode in the same vicinity, we have meticulously scanned the 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
14 
prosecution case.  It is noticed at the very outset that according to the 
theory  of  crime  advanced  by  prosecution,  one  of  the  deceased, 
namely, Saeed Ahmed fell prey to inescapable clutches of death after 
receiving  only  the  firearm  injuries.  The  eye-witnesses  remained 
consistent  while  deposing  so  and  even  during  cross-examination 
stated beyond any shred of ambiguity that Saeed (deceased) received 
no blunt trauma. In this regard, it does not appear to be out of context 
to  reproduce  an  excerpt  from  the  cross-examination  of  Ghulam 
Sarwar (PW.2) which is as under:- 
“It is  correct  that on the head of deceased Saeed Ahmed no body 
inflicted any Sota blow at the time of occurrence. It is correct that 
no  body  inflicted  Sota  blow  on  left  shoulder,  left  thigh  and  left 
knee of deceased Saeed Ahmed. Volunteered he received fire shot 
only.” 
 
However, it transpired from the detail of injuries noticed by Dr. 
Muhammad Idrees (PW.8) during post-mortem examination of Saeed 
deceased  that  some  of  them  were  caused  through  blunt  weapons.  To 
be precise, according to Dr. Muhammad Idrees injuries No.1,8,9 & 10 
were  caused by  blunt  weapons.  Now  the question  arises  that  if  at  all 
the  occurrence  was  witnessed  by  Ghulam  Sarwar  and  Muhammad 
Pervaiz  (PW.2  &  3)  then  why  no  reference  was  made  to  these  blunt 
traumas.  So  much  so,  that  neither  in  the  crime  report  nor  in  their 
depositions  before  the  court,  any  accused  was  alleged  to  be  armed 
with  any  club,  rod  stick,  etc.  This  fact  gains  more  importance  when 
seen in the context that the same set of witnesses ascribed as many as 
nine  firearm  injuries  with  their  locales  to  respective  assailants  which 
otherwise is not humanly possible as an eye cannot catch the velocity 
of a bullet. We are mindful of the fact that such microscopic narration 
of an occurrence in which volley of bullets is being fired by numerous 
persons is not even a remote possibility. 
It  is  further  noticed  by  us  that  the  firearm  injuries  alleged  to 
have been caused by Sharif and Allah Rakha (since acquitted) on the 
right  side  of  the  neck,  ear  and  mouth  of  Saeed  Ahmed  (deceased) 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
15 
were not found present during autopsy. Though the acquittal of Sharif 
and Allah Rakha was challenged through Criminal Appeal No.359 of 
2013, however, it was withdrawn to their extent on 11.10.2017. Thus, 
the  finding  of  learned  trial  court  regarding  the  acquittal  of  afore-
mentioned  two  accused  attained  finality  and  this  is  a  factor  which 
adversely  reflects  upon  the  presence  and  credibility  of  the  eye-
witnesses and goes long way in demonstrating that the ocular account 
runs contrary to the medical evidence. 
We are also not impressed from the eye-witness account of the 
occurrence,  according  to  which,  Saeed  Ahmed  deceased  remained 
standing like an oak tree even after the receipt of nine firearm injuries 
and  fell  on  the  ground  after  further  injuries  inflicted  by  unknown 
persons.  It  does  not  appear  even  to  be  a  remote  possibility  that  a 
human  being  can  stand  on  his  legs  even  after  receiving  nine/ten 
firearm injuries caused through high velocity weapons and that too on 
his vital organs. We have further observed that during spot inspection, 
conducted shortly after the occurrence, only three empties of .30 bore 
(P.8/1-3) were recovered from the spot which raises an eyebrow about 
the prosecution version wherein the assailants were shown armed with 
weapons like .44 bore, .30 bore, .222 bore and .12 bore.  
16.  There  is  another  factor  which  has  persuaded  us  to  draw  an 
inference adverse to the case of prosecution and arises out of motive. 
According to Ghulam Sarwar (PW.2), the instant bloodbath took place 
in the wake of a murder enmity which started in 1985 and rejuvenated 
due to a dispute arising out of 14-acres of land. An in-depth analysis 
of record reveals that Saeed Ahmed (deceased) was figuring in neither 
of  the  afore-mentioned  two  disputes.  It  came  in  evidence  that  at  the 
time of murder of 1985, Saeed (deceased) was a minor boy and was in 
no  manner  connected  with  it.  Likewise,  nothing  emerges  from  the 
prosecution evidence that Saeed Ahmed had any stake in the ongoing 
land dispute. In this backdrop, the narration of occurrence provided by 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
16 
the  eye-witnesses  is  reviewed  from  which  it  divulges  that  Saeed 
Ahmad  (deceased)  was  taken  as  a  primary  target  of  this  murderous 
assault whereas, Noor Ahmad (deceased) fell prey to the aggression of 
assailants  only  when  he  tried  to  intervene.  It  can  safely  be  inferred 
from  the  brutality  in  which  Saeed  Ahmed  was  eliminated  that  the 
murderers were having venom against him. As this is not enough, it is 
further noticed that Ghulam Sarwar (PW.2) was a central figure in the 
1985  murder  occurrence  and  was  awarded  guilty  verdict  by  the  trial 
court. He underwent an imprisonment for life and was released from 
jail  in  the  year  1997.  In  such  circumstances,  the  unhurt  survival  of 
Ghulam  Sarwar  (PW.2)  gives  rise  to  certain  unpleasant  queries 
regarding  prosecution  case.  Even  otherwise,  motive  is  always 
regarded as double edged weapon and if on one hand it is taken as a 
driving  force  behind  the  commission  of  crime  then  on  other  hand,  it 
provides a reason for false implication.  
17.  We  have  also  pondered  in  detail  upon  the  recovery  of  Kassi 
(P.11)  alleged  to  have  been  effected  from  Niaz  Ahmad  (appellant). 
Though,  according  to  the  report  of  Serologist  (Exh.PT/1),  the  Kassi 
(P.11)  was  found  to  be  stained  with  human  blood,  however,  for 
convincing  reasons,  we  are  not  ready  to  take  it  as  a  sufficient 
corroboratory  material  in  aid  of  prosecution  case.  Firstly,  it  is 
observed  that  the  occurrence  took  place  on  27.11.2009,  whereas  the 
Kassi  was  recovered  on  13.01.2010  and  forwarded  to  Chemical 
Examiner  on  10th  of  February,  2010.  The  scrapping  taken  from  it 
forwarded to Serologist was examined by him on 06.07.2010 i.e. after 
about  7/8  months  and  even  then  was  opined  to  be  of  human  origin 
which is not possible as the blood is likely to disintegrate during this 
period.  While  forming  such  view,  we  have  followed  the  wisdom 
expressed in Muhammad Arif alias Mahi and others v. The State and 
another  (2007  YLR  1115)  and  Faisal  Mehmood  v.  The  State  (2016 
SCMR 2138). 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
17 
18.  From above discussion, it can safely be gathered that the case in 
hand  is  dubious  in  nature  as  from  its  very  appearance,  it  is  of  wider 
net,  the  ocular  account  produced  therein  is  furnished  by  interested 
witnesses,  who  were  disbelieved  against  similarly  placed  thirteen 
accused  persons.  Their  statements  apparently  are  found  to  be  in 
conflict  with  the  medical  evidence  and  even  after  subjecting  to 
scrutiny from motive and recovery, the prosecution case failed to get 
required  corroboration.  Hence,  as  a  rule  of  abundant  caution, we  are 
swayed not to place explicit reliance upon them. We are also mindful 
of  the  fact  that  during  occurrence  two  persons  were  ruthlessly 
murdered,  however,  on  this  score  alone  the  appellant  cannot  be 
hanged  to  death.  In  order  to  secure  conviction  of  Niaz  Ahmad 
(appellant), the prosecution had to prove its case beyond any scintilla 
of  doubt  on  the  basis  of  unimpeachable  and  confidence  inspiring 
evidence. From the failure of prosecution to prove its case beyond any 
shred  of  suspicion,  we  are  swayed  to  follow  the  golden  principle  of 
Criminal  Jurisprudence,  according  to  which  benefit  of  every  doubt 
ought  to  be  extended  to  none  other  than  the  accused.  In  the  light  of 
afore-discussion,  we  accept  Criminal  Appeal  No.279  of  2013  and 
set-aside  the  conviction  and  sentence  of  Niaz  Ahmed  alias  Nazo 
(appellant).  He  shall  be  released  forthwith  if  not  required  to  be 
detained  in  any  other  criminal  case.  Resultantly,  Murder  Reference 
No.32  of  2013  is  answered  in  the  negative  and  death  sentence 
awarded  to  Niaz  Ahmad  alias  Nazo  (convict/appellant)  IS  NOT 
CONFIRMED.  
19.  While  adverting  to  Criminal  Appeal  No.359  of  2013,  it  is 
noticed to have been filed initially against twelve persons. However, it 
was  withdrawn  as  not  pressed  against  Muhammad  Sharif,  Allah 
Rakha,  Sardar  alias  Dhulla,  Ali  Muhammad  alias  Alia  and 
Muhammad  Munir  (respondents  No.8  to  12)  on  the  ground  that  role 
ascribed to them was found not supported by the medical evidence. As 
Criminal Appeal No.279 of 2013/BWP, 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013/BWP& 
Murder Reference No.32 of 2013/BWP 
 
18 
a  necessary  corollary,  it  can  reasonably  be  gathered  that  afore-
mentioned five persons faced the ordeal of a murder trial, though the 
attribution  of  role  in  occurrence  given  by  prosecution  which  was  in 
conflict  with  medical  evidence.  We  have  already  observed  in  detail 
the grounds which strongly reflect the absence of eye-witnesses at the 
crime  scene  and  have  disbelieved  them.  In  the  given  circumstances, 
we  do  not  see  any  reason  to  interfere  with  the  finding  of  acquittal 
passed by learned trial court which otherwise on a scrutiny is found to 
be well reasoned. Even otherwise, it is well settled proposition of law 
that  when  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  passes  the  judgment  of 
acquittal  on  the  basis  of  cogent  grounds,  the  same  is  not  to  be 
disturbed in a mechanical manner. In order to set-aside the judgment 
of  acquittal,  it  is  to  be  proved  that  the  judgment  of  acquittal  is 
arbitrary, fanciful, perverse and contrary to record. An accused person 
on the judgment of acquittal acquires a verdict of innocence, hence it 
is  to  be  disturbed  in  exceptional  and  extraordinary  circumstances.  In 
this  regard,  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  cases  of  Iftikhar  Hussain 
and  others  v.  The  State  (2004  SCMR  1185)  and  Haji  Amanullah  v. 
Munir Ahmad and others (2010 SCMR 222). The instant appeal to the 
extent of respondents No.1 to 7 merits no acceptance and the same is 
accordingly dismissed.  
  (Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
                                Judge 
(Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed) 
                    Judge  
 
 
    
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
Najum*  
(Ch.Abdul Aziz) 
 
Judge 
 
 
