 
 
                             Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
     IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
                         JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
W.P.No.26983 of 2012 
Muhammad Azam Vs. Addl. District Judge,etc. 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing 
  23.05.2018   
Petitioner by               M/s.Sh.Naveed Shehryar & Humaira Bashir 
                                   Ch., Advocates.   
Respondents 
                                   Chohan and Imtiaz Hussain Rehan, Advocates     
                                   for respondents No.3. 
  M/s. Arshad Jhangir Jhojha, Iftikhar  
Mr.  Muhammad  Arif  Yaqoob  Khan,  Addl.   
A.G. for respondent No.4. 
           
 
       Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir ,J: This litigation 
runs  between 
two 
real  brothers.  Muhammad  Sohna 
respondent  No.3  brought  a  suit  against  the  petitioner  and 
Province  of  the  Punjab  to  assail  vires  of  oral  exchange 
mutation  No.4645  dated  29.07.1992.  In  due  course  of 
proceedings,  on  08.05.2012  the  present  petitioner/defendant 
filed an application for the decision of case on special oath to 
be  administered  by  respondent  No.3/plaintiff  and  the  matter 
was  adjourned  to  11.05.2012  for  latter’s  reply,  who  showed 
his  willingness  to  administer  the  oath,  but  at  the  same  time, 
petitioner  tabled  a  written  request  to  resile  from  the  offer 
earlier  made  by  him.  The  request  of  petitioner  was  accorded 
by  learned  Civil  Judge  and  case  was  fixed  for  further 
proceedings  on  merit.  Respondent  No.3  challenged  it  by 
filing  a  Civil  Revision  before  the  learned  District  Court, 
which  was  allowed  on  10.10.2012  compelling  the  petitioner 
to approach this Court by means of Writ Petition in hand, but 
during its pendency, the statement on special oath of the Holy 
Quran  was  administered  by  respondent  No.3  and  as  a  result 
W.P.No.26983-2012 
2 
thereof, his suit was decreed on 30.11.2012. Although it was 
assailed  in  Appeal,  but  without  any  success  when  it  was 
dismissed  by  learned  Addl.  District  Jude  on  03.07.2014, 
which  forced  the  petitioner  to  approach  this  Court  through 
connected  Civil  Revision  No.3112  of  2014.  As  common 
questions of law and facts are involved in both the lis, which 
have arisen out of a single suit instituted by respondent No.3, 
I  intend  to  dispose  of  the  same  jointly  through  this  single 
judgment.  
2. 
3. 
Arguments heard and record perused. 
Before commenting upon issue involved in the case 
in  hand,  it  would be  advantageous  to  use  up  the headway  as 
well  as  situation  of  the  suit  proceedings,  which  constrained 
the  petitioner/defendant  to  table  an  application  for  the 
resolution of suit through special oath of the Holy Quran and 
thereafter to make an effort to retract therefrom.  
The suit was instituted by respondent/plaintiff on 20.10.2007, 
but  despite  observance  of  prescribed  modes  provided  under 
Order  V  of  the  Code,  1908,  the  petitioner/defendant  did  not 
turn  up  and  ultimately  was  proceeded  against  ex  parte  on 
28.02.2008.  Pursuant 
thereto, 
in  ex  parte  evidence 
Muhammad  Rasheed  (DW2),  one  of  the  marginal  witnesses 
of  the  impugned  exchange  mutation  was  examined,  who 
explicitly  worded  in  his  statement  that  neither  he  had 
appeared  in  the  public  gathering  for  the  attestation  of 
mutation  nor  he 
signed 
it.  This 
statement  being 
uncontroverted  by  any  corner  forced  the  Civil  Court  to  pass 
an  ex  parte  decree  in  favour  of  respondent  on  26.09.2008. 
Thereafter,  petitioner  turned  up  with  an  application  for  its 
setting  aside,  which  was  granted  on  07.12.2011.  The 
respondent  did  not  assail  it  any  further  and  opted  for  the 
decision  of  his  suit  after  its  full-fledged  trial.  Nevertheless, 
W.P.No.26983-2012 
3 
not  only  the  suit  was  invigorated,  but  after  settlement  of 
issues, it was also fixed for 08.05.2012, when partial evidence 
of the respondent was available and Muhammad Rasheed, the 
marginal  witness  of  the  impugned  mutation,  would  again  be 
there  that  the  application  for  decision  of  suit  on  special  oath 
of    the  Holy  Quran  was  filed  through  a  counsel,  who 
happened  to  be  Hafiz  of  that  Holy  Book  and  might  be  well 
acquainted  with  the  import  and  veneration  of  such  an  oath 
than  any  other  ordinary  lawyer.  Such  like  offer  is  made  on 
behalf  of  a  party  on  the  supposition  that  the  adversary,  who 
will  accept  it  is  not  only  conscious  of  the  trust  of  this  Holy 
Book, but has a dynamic belief therein and while making the 
affirmation  thereon,  shall  deem  itself  to  be  before  its  maker 
and  certainly  deposed  the  truth  on  account  of  fear  of  wrath 
and  antagonism  of  Him.  This  offer  was  not  made  in  haste, 
rather the petitioner was confident that one of the witnesses to 
the  suit  mutation  had  already  deposed  against  him  and  was 
going to repeat it. The Court was also not in hurry to record 
the  reply  of  the  respondent  on  the  same  day,  rather 
proceedings  were  postponed  for  next  three  days  and  on 
11.05.2012,  the  respondent  came  prepared  to  administer  the 
special  oath,  then  application  was  filed  by  the  petitioner  to 
claim  right  of  resiling  from  the  solemn  offer,  which  had 
already been accepted, constituting a valid contract. Had there 
been  a  denial  on  the  part  of  respondent,  there  would  be  no 
occasion to make a request for resiling from the offer. In this 
regard,  the  contents  of  application  are  very  much  relevant 
narrating therein that he learnt from the people of village that 
the respondent would make a false statement on oath. Had it 
been so, there were two clear days available to the petitioner 
in  between  the  preceding  and  forthcoming  date  of  hearing, 
who  might  have  approached  the  Court  with  his  request  in 
W.P.No.26983-2012 
4 
those two days or on the day of hearing, the moment Judicial 
Officer  appeared  in  the  Court,  this  application  would  have 
been  tabled,  but  the  petitioner  kept  on  waiting  till  the  offer 
was  accepted  by 
the  adversary, 
thereafter  moved 
the 
application  when  much  water  had  already  flown  through  the 
bridge while accruing vested right to the other party. 
4. 
Sh. Naveed Shehryar, Advocate for the petitioner by 
and large while relying upon the dicta laid down in Mst. Asifa 
Sultana Vs. Honest Traders, Lahore and another(PLD 1970 
Supreme  Court  331)  accentuated  with  great  concern  that  a 
party offering to abide by a statement on oath can resile from 
such offer prior to administration of oath. I have meticulously 
scanned this illustrious judgment and come to the conclusion 
that it was left upon  the discretion of the Court dealing with 
such proposition to decide it on the facts and circumstances of 
each  case.  The  facts  of  the  case  in  hand  as  discussed 
hereinabove  compelled  me  to  exercise  my  discretion  in 
favour of the respondent, who had an important witness of the 
impugned  mutation  along  with  him,  which  being  substantial 
evidence  was  enough  to  splinter  the  genuineness  of  the 
mutation.  As  per  reported  judgments  of  the  apex  Court 
delivered in the following cases:- 
ii). 
 
i).   
 
 
(1974 SCMR 224) 
Muhammad Ali Vs. Major Muhammad  
Aslam and others (PLD 1990 SC 841) 
Saleem Ahmad Vs. Khushi Muhammad  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was authoritatively laid down that settlement to decide the 
Muhammad Mansha and 7 others Vs.  
Abdul Sattar and 4 others (1995 SCMR 795) 
Nasrullah Jan Vs. Rastabaz Khan 
 
iii). 
 
 
iv). 
 
 
(1996 SCMR 108) 
 
matter  on  oath  constituted  a  valid  agreement  from  which 
parties could not conveniently wriggle out until contract was 
ex  facie  shown  to  be  void  or  incapable  of  implementation, 
W.P.No.26983-2012 
5 
which is not the case of present petitioner. As such this Court 
is of the view that learned Addl. District Judge was justified 
in refusing to permit the petitioner to resile from his offer, but 
he was to abide by the same.  
5. 
The ultimate result of the discussion is failure of the 
connected  matters,  hence,  while  maintaining  the  impugned 
order/judgments/decrees,  instant Writ Petition  and  connected 
Civil Revision No.3112-2014 having no force are dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Syed Zameer 
 
          (Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir) 
     Judge 
 
 
 
 
         
 
           Approved for reporting  
   Judge 
 
 
