Stereo. HCJDA-38 
                                     Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
WP No.45165/2017 
 
Asghar Ali          vs       Tanvir Ahmad & others. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing 
09.04.2018 
Petitioners By 
Malik Noor Muhammad Awan, Advocate. 
Respondents By  Mehr Atta-ur-Rehman, Advocate. 
 
 
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J.    This  judgment  shall  dispose  of  WP 
No.56122/2017,  WP  No.56094/2017,  WP  No.56116/2017,  WP 
No.56119/2017,  WP  No.56125/2017,  WP  No.56140/2017,  WP 
No.49826/2017,  as  common  question  of  facts  and  law  are  involved  in 
these constitutional petitions. 
2. 
Through  this  constitutional  petition,  the  Petitioner  has  called  in 
question  judgment  dated  26.05.2017,  passed  by  learned  Additional 
District  Judge,  Lahore,  whereby  he  accepted  the  appeal  and  set  aside 
the  judgment  dated  31.03.2016  passed  by  learned  Rent  Tribunal  and 
directed  the  Petitioner  to  handover  the  vacant  possession  of  demised 
premises  to  the  Respondent/ejectment  petitioner.  These  at  variance 
judgments have been assailed through this constitutional petition. 
3. 
Arguments heard and record perused. 
 
WP No.45165/2017 
2 
4. 
It is reflected from perusal of record that the Respondent No.1 is 
lawful owner/landlord of Property No.N.E.XI-7-S-53-A measuring 01-
Kanal,  12  Marlas,  98  Sq  ft.  situated  at  Dilawar  Steet,  Chah  Miran 
Sultanpura, Lahore. The tenancy inter-se the parties is an oral regarding 
two  shops  of  aforementioned  property  since  long  at  monthly  rent  of 
Rs.500/- for each shop which subsequently was enhanced to Rs.1950/- 
per  month  to  be  paid  on  10th  of  every  month  to  the  Respondent  No.1.  
The  Petitioner  committed  default  in  the  payment  of  rent  from 
01.05.2009 to 01.04.2010.  The Respondent No.1 sought eviction of the 
Petitioner by filing an ejectment petition before learned Rent Tribunal, 
Lahore  on the ground  of  default in payment  of  rent and on  account of 
building being  in  dilapidated  condition  was  declared  to  be demolished 
by  the  Town  Municipal  Administration  Shalimar  Town,  Lahore.    The 
said  ejectment  petition  was  contested  by  the  Petitioner  by  filing  an 
application  for  leave  to  contest.    On  the  pleadings  of  the  parties,  the 
issues were framed.  The learned Rent Tribunal after hearing arguments 
and recording evidence of the parties, dismissed the ejectment petition 
vide order dated 31.03.2016.  Feeling aggrieved, the Respondent No.1, 
preferred  appeal  before  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore, 
which  was  allowed  and  impugned  order  was  set  aside  vide  judgment 
dated  26.05.2017.  It  was  the  case  of  the  Respondent  No.1  that  the 
Petitioner had prepared a forged rent agreement.  
5. 
In petition for leave to contest, it is the case of the Petitioner that 
property  belongs  to  Rahim  Bakhsh  and  the  Respondent  No.1  has  no 
title  in  aforesaid  property.    In  suit  titled  “Noor  Masjid  vs  Fazal 
 
WP No.45165/2017 
3 
Ahmad”, the ownership of Rahim Bakhsh, was admitted. The ejectment 
petition is supported by affidavits of Tanvir Ahmad (Exh.A/1) and Asif 
Kibriya (Exh.A/3).   
6. 
During  cross-examination,  Tanvir  Ahmad,  Respondent  No.1 
stated  that  it  is  true  that  he  is  getting  rent  from  Asghar  Ali  Petitioner, 
but he is not in memory the month and year.  He further deposed that he 
has been getting rent at the rate of Rs.1950/- per month and at the time 
of  receiving  rent  Asif  and  Pupo  were  also  present  there.    Regarding 
ownership,  he  asserted  that  he  and  his  other  brothers  and  sisters  are 
owners  of  the  suit  property.  From  the  cross-examination  of  Ch.  Asif 
Kibriya,  it  is  also  discernible  that  the  Petitioner  had  not  paid  the  rent 
12/14 months prior to the filing of ejectment petition and he did not go 
to get rent from the Petitioner but it was Tanvir who went to receive the 
rent.    His  statement  otherwise,  is  inline  with  the  statement  of  Tanvir 
Ahmad,  Respondent  No.1.  The  testimony  of  Petitioner  Asghar  Ali 
while  appearing  as  RW-1  is  corroborative  of  the  fact  wherein  he  has 
stated that it is true that copies of sale deed in favour of Rashida Begum 
and  sale  deed  in  favour  of  Tanvir  Ahmad  (Respondent  No.1)  annexed 
with  application  for  leave  to  defend  were  given  to  him  by  Iqbal.  Both 
sale deeds were shown to him whereon stamp of court dated 30.09.2005 
was affixed.  The shop which is part of property, its Property Tax bears 
No.53-A.  The  Petitioner  was  shown  receipt  of  property  tax  of 
Rs.33,750/-  and  was  inquired  whether  his  name  is  shown  as  owner  in 
the  receipt  or  otherwise,  he  replied  that  “He  is  in  possession  for  the 
last  fifty  years  and  he  has  six  brothers  and  four  sisters”.    During 
 
WP No.45165/2017 
4 
cross-examination,  the  Petitioner  further  deposed  that  he  is  not  in 
possession  of  documents  regarding  ownership  of  shop  in  dispute.   
He denied the suggestion that he is in possession of shop in dispute 
as  tenant  and  also  denied  that  he  is  paying  rent  at  the  rate  of 
Rs.1950 since May, 2009 per month.  He also denied the suggestion 
that in view of sale deed Ex.A-III and Ex.A-VII, he is owner of the 
shop in question. 
7. 
From  the  above  said  statement  of  the  Petitioner,  it  clearly  spelt 
out that he is not owner of the shop in dispute and in that eventuality the 
version  of  Respondent  No.1  seems  to  be  true  that  the  Petitioner  is  his 
tenant  and  he  has  committed  default  in  payment  of  rent.    Further,  the 
Petitioner  has  failed  to  prove  his  title  over  the  property  in  dispute 
through  any  cogent  and  confidence  inspiring  tangible  evidence.  
Further, to support the version taken in para-4 of the petition for leave 
to  contest,  the  Petitioner  has  not  produced  Raheem  Bakhsh  that  he  is 
owner  of  the  property  and  he  has  rented  out  the  same  to  him  or  he  is 
tenant under him.  It is also discernible from the perusal of record that 
the Petitioner while tendering his affidavit dated 16.04.2004 has sworn 
that he is tenant of Property No.A-53-S, he himself has to get it repair 
and got it repaired himself.  There is no danger of its demolition and if 
it  falls,  he  himself  would  be  responsible.  The  learned  Additional 
District  Judge  has  rightly  held  that  admitted  facts  need  no  proof, 
documentary  evidence  excludes  oral  evidence,  the  Petitioner  is 
estopped from denying his status as tenant.  The Respondent/Ejectment 
petitioner averred and deposed as AW-1 that the Petitioner is tenant qua 
 
WP No.45165/2017 
5 
demised  premises  and  the  same  has  also  been  proved  from  the 
statement  and  affidavit  sworn  by  the  Petitioner,  therefore,  the 
Respondent  No.1  has  succeeded  to  prove  relationship  of  landlord  and 
tenant, when the Petitioner himself has failed to prove his title over the 
suit property.     So for as the tenancy inter-se the parties is concerned, 
the  same  is  oral.  The  issue  of  oral  tenancy  is  already  settled  by  the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in Ahmad Ali alias Ali Ahmad vs 
Nasar-ud-Din and another  (PLD 2009  SC  453),  wherein  it has been 
held as under:- 
“In the impugned judgment the High Court has observed 
that  the  tenancy  had  not  been  created  by  the  written 
instrument.  This  Court  in  case  of  Shajar  Islam  v. 
Muhammad Siddique and 2 others (PLD 2007 SC 45) has 
laid down that tenancy would not be necessarily created 
by written instrument in express terms, rather might also 
be  oral  and  implied.    In  normal  circumstances,  in 
absence  of  any  evidence  to  the  contrary,  owner  of 
property  by  virtue  of  his  title  would  be  presumed  to  be 
landlord  and  person  in  passion  of  premises  would  be 
considered as tenant under the law.” 
 
Further in “Shajar Islam vs Muhammad Siddique and 2 others” 
(PLD 2007 SC 45) it has been held as under:- 
“The determination of the pivotal question related to the 
legal  status  of  the  parties  vis-à-vis  the premises and the 
nature of their relationship inter se, would certainly be a 
mixed question of law and fact to be decided in the light 
of the  evidence. The title of the  petitioner is not as such 
disputed and in absence of any evidence in rebuttal, there 
WP No.45165/2017 
6 
would  be  a  strong  presumption  of  existence  of  tenancy 
between the parties. 
 
This is settled proposition of law that a landlord may not 
be  essentially  an  owner  of  the  property  and  ownership 
may  not  always  be  a  determining  factor to  establish  the 
relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant  between  the  parties. 
However, in the normal circumstances in absence of any 
evidence  to  the  contrary,  the  owner  of  the  property  by 
virtue of his title is presumed to be the landlord and the 
person  in  possession  of  the  premises  is  considered  as 
tenant  under  the  law  or  the  tenancy  may  not  be 
necessarily  created  by  a  written  instrument  in  express 
terms rather may also be oral and implied.” 
 
 
In a recent case titled Standard Chartered Bank (Pakistan) Limited 
and others vs. Additional District Judge, Karachi and others (2016 
YLR 1750 (Sindh)), it has also been held that No bar exists in creating 
tenancy  either  verbally  or  in  writing  and  the  only  difference  between 
the two is with regard to period for which default has to be counted. 
 
8. 
In view of the above, it is established that a tenancy may not be 
necessarily  through  a  written  document  and  the  same  might  be  oral. 
However,  the  Punjab  Rented  Premises  Act,  2009  (the  “Act”)  does  not 
debar  entertainment  of  ejectment  petition  in  case  of  oral  tenancy.  The 
palpable  object  of  the  law  is  to  compel  the  parties  to  enter  into  a 
tenancy  agreement  within  the  purview  and  scope  of  the  provisions  of 
sections 5, 6 and 7 of the Act (read together). Therefore, a penalty has 
 
WP No.45165/2017 
7 
been  provided  by  the  law  for  the  breach  of  the  obligations,  envisaged 
thereby,  in  that,  where  the  tenancy  agreement  is  not  so  entered  and 
registered  and  a  landlord  or  the  tenant  approach  the  Tribunal  for  the 
enforcement of his right(s) under the Act, he has to pay a fine, the non-
registration  of  rent  agreement  or  oral  tenancy  is  an  irregularity  that 
entails penal consequences. The said petition can be entertained subject 
to  payment  of  fine  as  enshrined  in  Section  9  of  the  Act.  Reliance  is 
placed on Abdul Hamid Jalib vs Addl. District Judge, Lahore (PLD 
2013 Supreme Court 775).   
9. 
In  this  case,  it  is  evident  from  the  record  that  when  the 
Respondent filed the ejectment petition, on the direction of the Court on 
05.04.2010,  he  has  deposited  10%  of  the  penalty  on  21.04.2010.  
Already held by Hon’ble Apex Court in the above said judgment. The 
relevant paragraph of the Apex Court judgment is reproduced as under:- 
“In my view Sections 9 and, when both are read together 
alongwith the  provisions of Act, 2009 and the object and 
spirit of the said enactment, leads to no other reasonable 
construction  of  the  two  sections  (white  in  interaction), 
that  the  landlord/tenant  can  bring  the  existing  tenancies 
in conformity with the Act within two years period and in 
this  regard  Section  8  should  be  construed  independent 
and insulated from Section 9 and applied only in time with 
the  sole  object  of  bringing  the  tenancy  in  line  with  the 
provisions  of 
the 
applicant/petitioner  (landlord/tenant)  wants  to  avail  the 
remedy  of  that  law  (Act  2009),  and  exercise  his  right  to 
enforce the duties of the opposite side, he shall be obliged 
to  pay  the  fine  as  mentioned  in  Section  9  ibid  as  in  the 
case of future tenancies; notwithstanding it is an existing 
tenancy  or  otherwise.    In  this  behalf  no  exemption  or 
moratorium  etc.  on  the  basis  of  two  years  period 
mentioned in Section 8 shall be available to him.   And if 
the fine is not paid by the petitioner/applicant the fall out 
and the consequences of failure of the non- compliance as 
envisaged  by  Section  9  for  the  future  tenancy  cases,  as 
  But  where 
said  Act. 
the 
 
WP No.45165/2017 
8 
has been prescribed above, shall be duly attracted to such 
petition(s)/application(s) as well.”  
 
   It  is  a  settled  principle  of  law  that  once  a  tenant  is  always  a 
10. 
tenant.  During  the  subsistence  of  tenancy,  tenant  has  no  right  to 
challenge  the  title  of  landlord.  It  is  a  settled  proposition  of  law  that  a 
landlord may not be essentially an owner of the property and ownership 
may not always be a determining factor to establish the relationship of 
landlord  and  tenant  between  the  parties.  However,  in  the  normal 
circumstances in absence of any evidence to the contrary, the owner of 
the property by virtue of his title is presumed to be the landlord and the 
person  in  possession  of  the  premises  is  considered  as  tenant  under 
Ahmad  Ali  case  and  Shajar  Islam  case  supra.  Once  relationship  of 
tenancy is proved; at once Article 115 of the Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order, 
1984 (the “QSO”) will come into play.  Reliance is placed upon AMIN 
and others vs HAFIZ GHULAM MUHAMMAD and others (P L D 
2006  Supreme  Court  549).  The  principle  underlying  Article  115  of 
QSO was considered at great length and inter alia, the Privy Council in 
case  of  Kumar  Krishna  Prosad  Lal  Singha  Deo  vs  Baraboni  Coal 
Concern,  Ltd.,  and  others(  1937  AIR  (PC)  251)  :  (1937  (64)  L.R.-
I.A.311)  was  also  considered,  with  the  numerous  judgments  such  as 
Ahman  Shah  Muhammad  v.  Emperor  (AIR  1937  Lahore  243), 
Krupasighu  Routra  and  another  v.  Purna  Chandra  Misra  and  others 
(AIR  1973  Orissa  44),  Muhammad  Anwer 
through  his 
legal 
representatives  v.  Abdul  Shakoor  (1982  SCMR  1120),  Messrs 
Muhammad  Ismail  &  Bros.  V.  Malik  Muhammad  Tahir  and  others 
 
WP No.45165/2017 
9 
(1981 SCMR 139) and (Ismail Brothers v. Keval Ram (PLD 1981 SC 
545). 
 
In view of the above, the learned counsel for the Petitioners has 
failed to point out any illegality warranting interference by this court in 
its  constitutional  jurisdiction.  The  writ  petitions  being  devoid  of  merit 
are  hereby  dismissed.  The  impugned  judgment  and  decree  passed  by 
learned  Additional  District Judge, Lahore is upheld  leaving  the  parties 
to bear their own costs.  
 
                                                                                                    JUDGE 
ZAHOOR 
(JAWAD HASSAN) 
