     H C J D A 38 
       JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
          
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
     
 
   
  Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018. 
Adeel Ahmad Gaba   
    versus.     Special Judge Rent, etc. 
          
 J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T 
Date of hearing. 
           23.11.2018 
Petitioner(s) by 
Hafiz Ch. Muhammad Tahir, Advocate. 
Respondent(s) by  Mr. Akhtar Rana, Advocate  
 
SHAKIL-UR-REHMAN KHAN, J.:- Through the instant writ 
petition  the  Petitioner  /  Adeel  Ahmad  Gaba has  challenged  the  order 
dated  28.04.2018  passed  by  Respondent  No.  1  /  Special  Judge  Rent, 
hereinafter referred to as the  (“Rent Tribunal”) with the prayer that 
the  ejectment  petition  filed  by  Respondent  No.  2  be  dismissed  as 
barred  by  law  on  the  ground  that  the  said  learned  Rent  Tribunal, 
established  under  the  provisions  of  “The  Punjab  Rented  Premises 
Act,  2009”  hereinafter  referred  to  as  (“Act”)  has  no  jurisdiction  to 
entertain the same. 
2. 
The  necessary  facts  out  of  which  the  instant  writ  petition  has 
arisen  are  that  Respondent  No.  2  /  Malik  Bashir  Ahmad  filed  an 
ejectment  petition  against  the  Petitioner  on  10.05.2017  under  the 
provisions  of  Section  15  of  the  Act.  The  basis  of  the  relationship  as 
stated  in  the  petition  was  an  oral  agreement  said  to  be  dated 
01.5.2015, entered into by and between the parties in the presence of 
two  witnesses.  It  is  the  case  of  Respondent  No.  2  that  the  Petitioner 
had defaulted in payment of rent and that the oral rent agreement had 
expired. The fine equivalent to 10% of the annual value of the rent of 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               2 
 
the said premises under the provisions of clause (b) of Section 9 of the 
Act  was  deposited,  accordingly  the  learned  Rent  Tribunal  proceeded 
with the said petition. 
3. 
On  15.6.2017  the  Petitioner  filed  an  application  for  leave  to 
contest  the  same,  on  the  grounds,  amongst  others,  that  there  was  no 
relationship of landlord and tenant existing between the Petitioner and 
Respondent No. 2; that he has never defaulted in the payment of rent; 
that  Akbar  Ali  Malik  son  of  Malik  Bashir  Ahmad  is dealing  with  all 
the matters of his father; that he entered into a written rent agreement 
dated  20.10.2015  for  three  years  from  01.11.2015  to  30.10.2018  and 
monthly rent of Rs.55,000/- was fixed (copy of Rent Agreement was 
also attached); that he had also paid a sum of Rs.4,25,000/- in cash for 
the  construction  of  the  hall  and  a  sum  of  Rs.15,000/-  per  month  is 
being deducted from the monthly rent; refundable security in the sum 
of Rs.5,00,000/- has also been paid; that the rent agreement was from 
01.11.2015 to 30.10.2018, whereas monthly rent was enhanced as per 
agreement  between  the  parties  and  was  further  extendable  with  the 
consent of the parties; rent receipts were also attached with the reply 
along with that of the electricity bill for the month of April 2017; that 
the  business  at  the  rented  premises  is  well  established  and  the 
Petitioner  now  wants  to  blackmail  the  Respondent,  gain  benefit  of 
good  will  of  the  Respondent  and  also  to  violate  the  terms  and 
conditions of the agreement entered into by his son.  
4. 
On  22.06.2017  Respondent  No.  2  filed  his  reply  to  the 
application for leave to contest on various grounds, including, that he 
had attached a copy of the title deed with the ejectment petition; that 
his son  who had  allegedly  signed  the  said  tenancy  agreement had no 
right  or  entitlement  over  the  property,  nor  was  he  given  any 
authorization  in  this  regard;  that  said  document  was  prepared  by  the 
Petitioner  in  connivance  with  his  son;  that  a  suit  for  declaration  has 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               3 
 
been  filed  by  the  Respondent  No.  2  against  his  sons  who  were  bent 
upon to get his valuable property.  
5. 
The  learned  Rent  Tribunal  allowed  the  leave  to  contest  vide 
order dated 28.10.2017 and framed the following three (03) issues:- 
(1)  Whether there exists relationship of landlord and tenant between 
the parties? OPA 
(2) 
If  the  issue  No.1  is  proved  then  whether  the  Respondent  has 
committed default in payment of rent and since when? OPA 
(3) 
Relief. 
6. 
Subsequently, on 24.04.2018 the Petitioner filed an application 
for  rejection  of the  ejectment  petition  on the ground  that  the  same  is 
not maintainable in view of the provisions of the Act, on the grounds:- 
(A) 
that  a  tenancy  cannot  be  created  through  an  oral 
agreement  since  its  promulgation  and  that  the  instant 
ejectment  petition  has  been  filed  on  the  basis  of  an 
alleged  oral  agreement  dated  01-5-2015  is  incompetent, 
therefore, not maintainable; and   
(B) 
that  for  exercising  exclusive  jurisdiction,  the  case  must 
be  covered  by  the  provisions  of  the  Act,  whereas,  the 
ejectment petition does not fall within the purview of the 
said  Act, therefore, has  been  wrongly  entertained  by  the 
learned Rent Tribunal.  
In response to the same, learned counsel for  Respondent No. 2 opted 
not  to  file  reply  to  the  said  application  and  also  got  recorded  his 
statement  to  this  effect  on  24-4-2018  and  it  was  also  stated  that  the 
application is not maintainable and the same be decided after hearing 
arguments on the same. 
7. 
The  learned  Rent  Tribunal  after  hearing  the  arguments  of 
learned  counsel  for  the  parties  dismissed  the  said  application  vide 
impugned order dated 28-4-2018, hence the instant writ petition. 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               4 
 
8. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  argued  that  the  impugned 
order dated 28-4-2018  is liable to be  set  aside being  against  the  law, 
facts of the case, the record, as well as the precedents of the Hon’ble 
Superior  Courts.  He  further  contended  that  the  application  of  the 
Petitioner was dismissed by the learned Rent Tribunal without having 
applied  a  judicial  mind;  that  the  questions  of  jurisdiction  and 
maintainability,  can  be  taken  up  at  any  point  in  time  and  have  to  be 
decided first and the application could not have been dismissed on the 
ground  of  its  having  been  filed  at  a  belated  stage.  He  vehemently 
contended that the ejectment petition filed on the basis of alleged oral 
agreement as to the tenancy dated 01.05.2015 is clearly barred under 
the governing law. Explaining his stance further he stated that in view 
of  the  various  provisions  of  the  governing  Act,  a  tenancy  cannot  be 
created  through  an  oral  agreement,  and  therefore,  the  same  was 
incompetent, hence not maintainable, resultantly ejectment petition is 
liable to rejected and the impugned order dated 28.04.2018 is liable to 
be  set  aside.  Learned  counsel  further  contended  that  in  order  to 
exercise exclusive jurisdiction by the learned Rent Tribunal under the 
said Act, the case must be shown to be covered under the provisions 
of the said Act and not otherwise. He added that in view of the above 
facts  and  circumstances  of  the  instant  case,  the  same  being  not 
covered  under  the  provisions  of  the  Act,  therefore,  the  ejectment 
petition  was  wrongly  entertained  and  subsequent  proceedings 
thereupon are not  sustainable under  the  law.  Learned  counsel  for  the 
Petitioner also argued that the provisions of Section 8 and sub-section 
(2)  of  Section  9  of  the  said  Act  have  been  misconstrued,  whereas 
these provisions are time specific with respect to existing tenancies on 
promulgation  of  the  said  Act  and  do  not  apply  to  the  subsequent 
tenancies. Elaborating his arguments he read clause (m) of  Section 2 
of the said Act, which defines the “tenancy agreement”. Then, he read 
Section  4  of  the  Act,  which  declares  the  said  law  to  have  an  over-
riding effect on other laws. He then read sub-section (1) of Section 5 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               5 
 
of the Act and pointed out that all future tenancies are barred, which 
are not in writing. He then pointed out that intention of the legislature 
through Section 8 of the Act is related to the existing tenancies. After 
reading  Section  9  of  the  Act,  he  argued  that  his  case  does  not  fall 
within the purview of either of the Sections i.e. neither Section 8 nor 
Section  9 of  the said  Act, as  an  ‘existing  tenancy’  is  not  involved  in 
the case in hand. He next contended that in view of sub-section (4) of 
Section 16 of  the said  Act, if  a party  wishes to  get  benefit  under  the 
said  law,  it  has  to  fall  within  the  four  corners  of  the  statutory 
provisions,  otherwise  the  learned  Rent  Tribunal  would  have  no 
jurisdiction  or  authority  to  entertain  a  matter,  which  does  not  fall 
within  the  parameters  of  clause  (m)  of  Section  2  of  the  said  Act.  He 
then  contended  that  a  joint  reading  of  the  above  noted  provisions  of 
the  said  Act  clearly  provide  that  oral  tenancy  is  not  an  ‘existing 
tenancy’.  In  support  of  his  contentions,  learned  counsel  for  the 
Petitioner  placed  reliance  on 
the 
judgment  reported  as  Dr. 
MUHAMMAD  AFZAL  HUSSAIN  vs.  ADDITIONAL  DISTRICT 
JUDGE, LAHORE & 5 others. (PLJ 2015 Lahore 999). 
9. 
Learned counsel for Respondent No. 2 started his arguments by 
stating that it needs to be noted that as per record, Respondent No. 2 is 
the  admitted  owner  of  the  property  in  question.  He  added  that  the 
Petitioner  had  not  taken  this  ground  of  ‘oral  tenancy’  through  the 
application  for  leave to  contest.  He  further  contended  that  son of  the 
owner  of  the  said  property,  namely  Akbar  Ali  Malik,  entered  into  a 
fake 
tenancy  agreement  dated  20-10-2015.  He  added 
that 
unfortunately,  there  is  a  dispute  between  the  father  and  his  sons  and 
civil  litigation  is  pending  between  them  before  the  learned  Trial 
Court. He further stated that Akbar Ali Malik is a close friend of the 
Petitioner and in collusion with one another they have prepared a fake 
rent  agreement.  As  far  as,  various  provisions  of  the  said  Act,  as 
pointed  out  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner,  are  concerned, 
he  stated  that  an  ‘oral  tenancy’  has  not  been  declared  barred  under 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               6 
 
sub-section (5) of Section 5 of the said Act.  He argued that  as far as 
the provisions of Section 9 are concerned, the Petitioner has admitted 
before this Court that Respondent No. 2 has complied with the same 
and  has  deposited  the  requisite  fine.  In  support  of  this  contention, 
learned counsel relied upon clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 35 
of  the  said  Act  to  state  that  an  ‘oral  tenancy’  is  covered  under  the 
provisions  of  the  said  Act.  In  order  to  strengthen  his  arguments, 
learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgments reported as Rana 
Abdul  Hameed  Talib  vs.  Additional  District  Judge  Lahore  &  Others 
(PLD  2013  S.C.  775)  and  Mirza  Book  Agency  &  Others  vs. 
Additional District Judge Lahore & Others (2013 SCMR 1520). 
10. 
In  rebuttal  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  reiterated  his 
stance  that  the  question  of  jurisdiction  of  a  Court/Tribunal  and  the 
issue  of  maintainability  of  ejectment  petition  can  be  pointed  out  and 
challenged at any point of time. He added that provisions of  Sections 
35  and  36  are  not  applicable  for  the  reason  that  there  is  no  existing 
tenancy  so  to  speak;  hence  Respondent  No.  1  has  no  jurisdiction  to 
continue with the hearing of the ejectment petition. 
11.  Arguments heard. Record perused.  
12. 
In order to appreciate the arguments of learned counsel for the 
parties, it is imperative to first note the operative part of the impugned 
order dated 28.04.2018, which is as follows: - 
“4. 
Perusal of the record transpires that the applicant/respondent filed 
application  for  rejection  of  ejectment  petition  on  the  grounds  that  under 
the provisions of the Punjab Rented Premises Act, 2009 a tenancy cannot 
be created through an oral agreement since its promulgation and instant 
ejectment petition on the basis of an alleged oral agreement as to tenancy 
dated  01.05.2015  is  incompetent.  Record  shows  that  the  grounds  raised 
through the instant application have not been taken in petition for leave to 
contest.  Record  also  shows  that  by  considering  the  version  of  the 
applicant/respondent,  petition  for  leave  to  contest  has  been  allowed  vide 
order  dated  08.11.2017  and  evidence  of  ejectment  petitioner  has  been 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               7 
 
concluded. Record shows that the evidence of the applicant / respondent is 
yet  to  be recorded and obviously the applicant /  respondent shall have a 
right  to  prove  his  stance  by  producing  his  evidence.  Hence  instant 
application  is  not  maintainable  at  this  belated  stage  and  the  same  is 
hereby dismissed.” 
The  relevant  provisions  of  the  said  Act,  are  reproduced  below  for  ready 
reference:- 
Section 2.   Definitions. In this Act: 
 
(f)   
“premises” means a building or rented land not being an agricultural land 
or land subservient to agriculture; 
 
(l)    
“tenant”  means  a  person  who  undertakes  or  is  bound  to  pay  rent  as 
consideration  for  the  occupation  of  a  premises  by  him  or  by  any  other 
person on his behalf and includes; 
 
           (i) 
(ii)   
a  person  who  continues  to  be  in  occupation  of  the  premises  after 
the  termination  of  his  tenancy  for  the  purpose  of  a  proceeding 
under this Act; 
legal  heirs  of  a  tenant  in  the  event  of  death  of  the  tenant  who 
continue to be in occupation of the premises; and 
(iii)     a  sub-tenant  who  is  in  possession  of  the  premises  or  part  thereof 
with the written consent of the landlord; and 
 
(m)  
“tenancy agreement” means an agreement in writing by which a landlord 
lets out a premises to a tenant. 
 
Section  4.      Act  to  override  other  laws.  The  provisions  of  this  Act  shall  have 
effect notwithstanding anything contained in  any other law for the time being in 
force. 
 
Section 5.   Agreement between landlord and tenant. (1) A landlord shall not 
let out a premises to a tenant except by a tenancy agreement. 
 
(2) 
 
(3) 
A landlord shall present the tenancy agreement before the Rent Registrar. 
The Rent Registrar shall enter the particulars of the tenancy in a register, 
affix his official seal on the tenancy agreement, retain a copy thereof and 
return the original tenancy agreement to the landlord. 
 
(4) 
 
(5) 
 
(6) 
 
The entry of particulars of the tenancy shall not absolve the landlord or the 
tenant  of  their  liability  to  register  the  tenancy  agreement  under  the  law 
relating to registration of documents. 
A tenancy agreement entered in the office of a Rent Registrar or a certified 
copy thereof shall be a proof of the relationship of landlord and tenant. 
Any  agreement  which  may  be  executed  between  the  landlord  and  the 
tenant  in  respect  of  the  premises  shall  be  presented  before  the  Rent 
Registrar in the same manner as provided in sub-section (2). 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               8 
 
Section  8.      Existing tenancy. An existing landlord and tenant  shall, as  soon as 
possible  but  not  later  than  two  years  from  the  date  of  coming  into  force  of  this 
Act, bring the tenancy in conformity with the provisions of this Act. 
 
Section  9.      Effect  of  non-compliance.  If  a  tenancy  does  not  conform  to  the 
provisions of this Act, the Rent Tribunal shall not entertain an application under 
this Act: 
 
(a)  
on behalf of the tenant, unless he deposits a fine equivalent to five percent 
of the annual value of the rent of the premises in the Government treasury; 
and 
 
(b)   
on  behalf  of  the  landlord,  unless  he  deposits  a  fine  equivalent  to  ten 
percent of the annual value of the rent of the premises in the Government 
treasury. 
 
Section 16. Establishment of Rent Tribunal. –  
(1)  
(2) 
(3)  
(4)  
(5)  
The Government shall establish a Rent Tribunal in a district or an area as 
it may deem necessary.  
A Rent Tribunal shall consist of one or more Special Judges (Rent) to be 
appointed by the Government in consultation with the Lahore High Court.  
Subject to this Act, the Lahore High Court may empower a civil judge or a 
judicial magistrate to act as Rent Tribunal for a district or an area.  
The Rent  Tribunal shall  exercise exclusive jurisdiction over a case under 
this Act.  
If there are more than one Special Judges (Rent) in a district or an area, a 
Special Judge (Rent) designated by the Lahore High Court shall act as an 
Administrative Special Judge (Rent) in the district or the area. 
 
Section 35. Repeal and savings.  
(1) 
The  Punjab  Urban  Rent  Restriction  Ordinance,  1959  (VI  of  1959),  is 
hereby repealed. 
       
 
(2)    Notwithstanding the repeal of the Ordinance VI of 1959– 
             
(a) 
 
(b)  
 
(c)   
 
(d)  
a  proceeding  pending  before  a  Rent  Controller  shall  stand  transferred  to 
the Rent Tribunal of the district or the area and the same shall be decided 
by  the  Rent  Tribunal  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  repealed 
Ordinance; 
an  appeal  may  be  filed  against  an  order  passed  under  the  repealed 
Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Ordinance; 
an  appeal  pending  under  the  repealed  Ordinance  may  be  decided  in 
accordance with the provisions of the repealed Ordinance; and 
a  Rent  Controller  appointed  under  the  repealed  Ordinance  shall  exercise 
and perform the functions of a Rent Tribunal and a Rent Registrar till the 
appointment of a Special Judge (Rent) and a Rent Registrar for the district 
or the area under this Act. 
 
Section 36. Repeal and validation.  
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               9 
 
(1)  
The  Punjab  Rented  Premises  Ordinance  2007  (XXI  of  2007)  is  hereby 
repealed. 
 
(2)    Notwithstanding  anything  contained 
in  any 
law,  anything  done, 
proceedings or action taken, order or rule made, liability incurred or right 
acquired  under  the  Ordinance  XXI  of  2007  or  purported  to  have  been 
done,  taken,  made,  incurred  or  acquired  under  that  Ordinance,  from  the 
date  of  promulgation  of  the  Ordinance  till  the  coming  into  force  of  this 
Act, shall be deemed to have been done, taken, made, incurred or acquired 
under this Act. 
13.  The matter of oral tenancies came before the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  reported  as  Rana  Abdul  Hameed  Talib  vs. 
Additional  District  Judge  Lahore  and  others  (PLD  2013  S.C.  775). 
Here  the  issue  was  regarding  the  interpretation  and  effect  of  non-
compliance  of 
the  provisions  of  clause 
(b)  of  Section  9, 
independently, and  also  when  read in  the context  of  Section 8 of the 
said Act. The Hon’ble Supreme Court held as follows:- 
“From  the  object  clause  of  these  two  new  legislations  and  from  the 
parts/sections thereof (note:  which have been mentioned above or shall be 
referred  in  the  succeeding  part  of  the  judgment),  it  is  clear  that  all  the 
existing  tenancies,  may  be  oral  or  the  one  constituted  vide  registered  or 
unregistered  instruments,  or  for  that  matter,  even  statutory  tenancies,  in 
respect of which the disputes between the landlord and tenant had not yet 
even arisen, were also brought into the net and purview of  the Act, 2009 
and  made  amenable  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Rent  Tribunal  with 
immediate  effect  (a  specific  forum  created  under  the  Act,  2009  for  that 
purpose).  In  other  words  the  existing  tenancies  were  not  set  apart  or 
separated  or  saved  to  be  dealt  with  under  the  repealed  law,  except  the 
pending  matters.  Rather  in  relation  to  the  disputes  in  respect  of  the 
existing  tenancies  arising  in  future,  were  to  be  adjudged  under  the 
provisions of the Act, 2009, from the date of its enforcement. Resultantly 
in  order  to  keep  the  conformity  and  parity  with  respect  to  the 
class/category  of  cases  which  might  come  before  the  Rent  Tribunal  in 
future,  (obviously  under  Act  2009  now),  and  for  the  purpose  of  catering 
for  and  for  securing  the  rights  and  liabilities  of  the  landlord  (s)  and  the 
tenant(s) qua previous (existing) tenancy (ies), section 8 of the Act, 2009 
mandates as:- 
Existing tenancy.- An existing landlord and tenant shall, as soon as 
8. 
possible but not later than two years from the date of coming into force of 
this Act, bring the tenancy in conformity with the provisions of this Act. 
Thus,  from  the  above  stated  legal  position  and  the  factual 
9. 
backdrop, it is my candid opinion that the nature, the interpretation and the 
effect of section 9 in relation to the proposition in hand, (note: stated at the 
very outset of this judgment has to be reckoned and made, keeping in view 
the  aforementioned  object(s)  of  the  law,  not  only  with  respect  to  those 
tenancies  coming  in  being  in  future,  but  also  those  existing  (prior  to  the 
new law). And this has to be done on account of the collective reading of 
section  9,  as  also  the  other  provisions  of  the  Act  mentioned  earlier, 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               10 
 
including 5, 6, 7 ibid, and thus it should be determined and adjudged, as to 
whether the said Section 9 is a mandatory or a directory provision of law 
and the effect thereof….          
Reverting  to  the  proposition  in  hand,  it  seems  expedient  at  this 
10. 
stage to reproduce section 9 of the Act 2009, which reads as under:- 
“9.  Effect  of  non-compliance.-  If  a  tenancy  does  not  conform  to  the 
provisions of this Act, the Rent Tribunal shall not entertain an application 
under this Act--- 
(a)  on  behalf  of  the  tenant,  unless  he  deposits  a  fine  equivalent  to  five 
percent  of  the  annual  value  of  the  rent  of  the  premises  in  the 
Government treasury; and 
(b) on  behalf  of  the  landlord,  unless  he  deposits  a  fine  equivalent  to  ten 
percent  of  the  annual  value  of  the  rent  of  the  premises  in  the 
Government treasury.”     
Upon  the  unmistakable  reading  of  the  Section  and  especially  when 
conjointly  read  with  all  other  relevant  provisions  (referred  to  supra)  it 
seems  that  all  these  are  integrated  provisions,  having  nexus  to  the  very 
purpose of the Act as described above and the palpable object of the law is 
to compel the parties to enter into a tenancy agreement within the purview 
and scope of the provisions of sections 5, 6 and 7 of the Act, 2009 (read 
together). Therefore a penalty has been provided by the law for the breach 
of the obligations, envisaged thereby, in that, where the tenancy agreement 
is not so entered and registered and a landlord or the tenant approached the 
Tribunal for the enforcement of his right(s) under the Act, 2009 he has to 
pay a fine.” 
It was further held by the Hon’ble Supreme that:- 
“In my view section 9 and 8, when both are read together along with the 
provisions of Act, 2009 and the object and the spirit of the said enactment, 
leads  to  no  other  reasonable  construction  of  the  two  sections  (while  in 
interaction),  that  the  landlord/tenant  can  bring  the  existing  tenancies  in 
conformity with the Act within two years period and in this regard Section 
8  should  be  construed  independent  and  insulated  from  Section  9  and 
applied  only  in  time  with  the  sole  object  of  b  ringing  the  tenancy  in  line 
with  the  provisions  of  the  said  Act.  But  where  the  applicant/petitioner 
(landlord/te4nant)  wants  to  avail the  remedy  of  that  law  (Act,  2009)  and 
exercise  his  right  to  enforce  the  duties  of  the  opposite  side,  he  shall  be 
obliged  to  pay  the  fine  as  mentioned  in  Section  9  ibid  as  in  the  case  of 
future tenancies; notwithstanding it is an existing tenancy or otherwise. In 
this  behalf  no  exemption  or  moratorium  etc.  on  the  basis  of  new  years 
period mentioned in Section 8 shall be available to him. And if the fine is 
not paid by the petitioner/ applicant the fall out and the consequences of 
failure  of  the  non-compliance  as  envisaged  by  Section  9  for  the  future 
tenancy  cases,  as  has  been  prescribed  above,  shall  be  duly  attracted  to 
such petition(s)/application(s) as well.” 
14.  The  above  view  was  also  reiterated  in  the  case  reported  as 
Mirza Book Agency & Others vs. Additional District Judge Lahore & 
Others (2013 SCMR 1520), in the following terms:- 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               11 
 
“2. 
The question about  the effect  of  sections 8 and 9 of  the Act, 2009 
has come under consideration before a three member bench of this Court 
in Civil Appeal No. 679-L of 2012 and this Court  vide its judgment dated 
21-6-2013  has  held  that  the  provisions  of  section  9  of  the  Act,  2009  are 
mandatory not only  vis-à-vis the future tenancies, but also with respect to 
the  existing  tenancies.  And  if  a  landlord  or  a  tenant  who  agitates  before 
the Rent Tribunal for the exercise of his right and for the enforcement of 
the obligations of the opposite side, in terms of the provisions of the Act, 
2009 notwithstanding that a period of two years is available under section 
8  of  the  Act,  2009  to  bring  the  existing  tenancies  in  conformity  with  the 
Act, 2009, yet he is obliged to pay the fine/penalty under section 9 of the 
Act, 2009 at the time of filing the petition/application or as directed by the 
Rent  Tribunal,  as  has  been  held  in  judgment  afore-stated.  Otherwise  it 
shall  be  ridiculous  and  ludicrous  to  conceive  that  although  he  (the 
appellant) shall be entitled to  exercise his  right etc. under the Act, 2009, 
but is  not  obliged to  perform his  duty of paying  the fine under section 8. 
However, it has further been held in the said judgment that in those cases 
where  the  application(s)/petition(s)  (of  the  landlord  or  the  tenant)  have 
been  entertained  and  the  petitions  etc.  are  either  pending  before  the 
learned  Rent  Tribunal  or  even  if  finally  adjudicated  by  the  Tribunal  and 
are  pending  in  further  hierarchy  of  appeal  or  in  the  constitutional 
jurisdiction of the learned High Court or even before this Court; and the 
original applicant/petitioner has not paid the fine which he was required 
to  pay,  such  proceedings,  shall  be  halted  (emphasis  supplied)  and  the 
original  applicant/petitioner  shall  first  be  directed  to  pay/deposit  the 
amount of fine as per section 9  of the Act, 2009. The amount of fine and 
the  time  whereof  should  be  exactly  specified  by  the  Court,  seized  of  the 
matter  in  the  requisite  order;  and  in  the  case  of  failure  thereof,  the 
original application/petition should be dismissed as has been ordained in 
the judgment.”          
 
In  view  of  the  law  already  settled  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 
of  Pakistan  there  is  no  substance  in  the  grounds  raised  through  the 
instant  petition  as  it  has  already  been  held  that  the  provisions  of 
Section 9 will also apply to future tenancies. 
15.  Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  has  relied  upon  Dr. 
MUHAMMAD  AFZAL  HUSSAIN  vs.  ADDITIONAL  DISTRICT 
JUDGE, LAHORE  & 5 others. (PLJ 2015 Lahore 999). In this case 
the title of the landlord was in serious dispute. In view of the fact that 
civil  litigation  was  pending  before  Civil  Court  in  the  shape  of 
applications under sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure,  1908  and  in  such  view  of  the  matter  this  Court  while 
relying  upon  the  case  of  Rehmat  Ullah  vs.  Ali  Muhammad  and 
another  (1983  SCMR  1064)  held  that  the  ejectment  Petitioner  must 
first  establish  his  title  relating  to  the  property  beyond  any  doubt  and 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               12 
 
till that time he would not be competent to ask for eviction of persons 
occupying the premises. In this background it was held that in order to 
invoke  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Rent  Tribunal  under  the  said  Act,  a 
person  claiming  himself  to  be  the  owner  or  landlord  of  the  premises 
seeking  eviction of the  Respondent  in the  ejectment petition  must be 
equipped  with  a  tenancy  deed  registered  with  the  Rent  Registrar  and 
in  view  of  provisions  of  sub-section  (5)  of  section  5  of  the  Act,  it  is 
the exclusive document to establish their relationship of landlord and 
tenant  between  the  parties  to  such  ejectment  petition.  Having  found 
that  there  was  no  such  rent  deed,  this  Court  concluded  that  the 
eviction  petition  before  the  Rent  Tribunal  were  not  competent  thus 
were  not  entertainable.  This  case  clearly  does  not  support  the 
contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  as  the  same  is 
distinguishable  from  the  instant  case  on  the  ground  that  the  question 
of oral tenancy was neither raised nor considered in that case. It is also 
to  be  noted  that  the  purpose  and  intention  of  the  legislature  is  self-
evident  from  the  provisions  of  sub-section  (5)  of  section  5  and  the 
same  being  that  the  tenancy  agreement  entered  into  in  the  office  of 
Rent  Registrar  or  a  certified  copy  thereof  shall  be  the  proof  of 
relationship  of  landlord  and  tenant,  meaning  thereby  that  no  further 
proof  would  be  required  to  establish  the  said  relationship  in  view  of 
the said document. 
16.  There  is  one  other  aspect  of  the  matter  and  that  being  that  the 
intention  of  the  Legislature  has  to  be  gathered  by  reading  the  whole 
statute. In case the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner 
is accepted, that would mean that after the expiry of two years section 
8  as  well  as  9  would  have  become  redundant.  It  is  settled  law  that 
every attempt should be made to save the statute rather than to declare 
its  provisions  redundant.  Furthermore,  the  law  relating  to  mandatory 
and directory provisions of any given statute is well settled and it has been 
held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan that where legislature 
has provided penalty/consequences for non-compliance of a provision, 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               13 
 
such provision is mandatory in nature, however, if such consequences 
are not provided the provision is to be taken as directory. It has further 
been  held  that  the  complete  statute  is  to  be  read  to  determine  the 
nature of such provisions in a statute. Reliance in this regard is placed 
on Ghulam Hassan v. Jamshaid Ali and others (2001 S.C.M.R. 1001), 
Maulana Nur-ul-Haq v. Ibrahim Khalil (2000 SCMR 1305) and Niaz 
Muhammad Khan v. Mian Fazal Raqib (PLD 1974 SC 134). 
17. 
In this regard reference can also be made to the case reported as 
Waqar Zafar Bakhtawari and 6 others v. Haji Mazhar Hussain Shah 
and  others  (PLD  2018  S.C.  81).  The  question  before  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court was to the effect that Section 17 of the Islamabad Rent 
Restriction Ordinance, 2001 provides for the grounds on the basis of 
which  an  eviction  can  be  sought  by  the  landlord  and  there  was  no 
provision in the said section as to what will happen after the term of 
the tenancy expires. On the other hand Section 6 related to the tenure 
of  the  tenancy  but  no  reference  of  such  a  ground  was  contained  in 
Section  17  of  the  said  law.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  observed  as 
under:- 
“It  is  settled  that  while  interpreting  the  law,  a  specific  provision  of  any 
statute, which is independent in nature, cannot and should not ordinarily 
be  held  to  be  redundant,  especially  on  the  touchstone  of  another 
independent  provision  of  the  same  statute;  rather  all  possible  efforts 
should  be  made  to  apply  and  adhere  to  the  rules  of  purposive  and 
harmonious  construction,  so  that  the  allegedly  conflicted  provisions 
should be reconciled and saved. If some precedent law is required in this 
behalf,  reference  can  be  made  to  the  judgments  reported  as  Combined 
Investment  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  v.  Wali  Bhai  (PLD  2016  SC  730),  Lucky  Cement 
Ltd.  v.  Commissioner  Income  Tax,  Zone  Companies,  Circle-5,  Peshawar 
(2015  SCMR  1494),  Aftab  Shahban  Mirani  v.  Muhammad  Ibrahim  (PLD 
2008  SC  779),  Collector  of  Sales  Tax  and  Central  Excise  (Enforcement) 
and  another  v.  Messrs  Mega  Tech  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  (2005  SCMR  1166),  Mirza 
Shaukat Baig v. Shahid Jamil (PLD 2005 SC 530) and D.G. Khan Cement 
Company Ltd. v. Federation of Pakistan and others (2004 SCMR 456).” 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court further held as under:- 
“Thus,  we  conclude  that  as  after  expiration  of  the  tenancy  period,  a 
tenant,  though  can  continue  to  hold  over  the  possession  of  the  rented 
premises,  but  this  tenancy  is  rendered  invalid,  in  that,  it  has  come  to  an 
end and if there is no express consent of the landlord to extend the tenancy 
period  the  tenant  shall  be  guilty  of  having  infringed  the  conditions  of 
              Writ Petition No.210100 of 2018                                                                               14 
 
tenancy, rendering him liable to be evicted under section 17(2(ii)(b) of the 
Ordinance, 2001.” 
18.  Now turning to the impugned order dated 28.04.2018, I tend to 
agree  with  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  to 
the extent that said application could not have been dismissed for the 
reasons  mentioned  therein,  i.e.,  to  the  effect  that  such  a  ground  had 
not  been  taken  by  the  said  tenant  in  his  petition  for  leave  to  contest; 
that the evidence of the ejectment petitioner had been concluded and 
the petitioner will have the right to prove his stance by producing his 
evidence and lastly that the said application was not maintainable at a 
belated  stage.  As  noted  above,  the  only  question  raised  in  the 
application  submitted  by  the  petitioner  related  to  the  question  of 
jurisdiction  of  Rent Tribunal, therefore,  the said legal  question  could 
have  been  raised  at  any  stage  of  the  proceedings  before  the  Rent 
Tribunal.  However,  as  detailed  above  and  for  the  reasons  noted 
herein,  the  Rent  Tribunal  has  the  jurisdiction  to  hear  the  matter. 
Resultantly,  the  instant  writ  petition  being  devoid  of  any  merit  is 
dismissed. 
 
 
      (SHAKIL-UR-REHMAN KHAN) 
                         JUDGE 
 
Iqbal/* 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
                  JUDGE 
 
