 
 
1 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.29246 of 2017 
(Naseem Akhtar v. Ex-Officio Justice of Peace etc.) 
and 
Writ Petition No.29468 of 2017 
(Dr.Mudassar Rasool v. Ex-officio Justice of Peace etc.) 
 
    J U D G M E N T 
 
Date of hearing. 
Petitioner by: 
State by 
Respondent by  
 
          29.06.2018 
 
Syed Nadeem Abrar, Advocate.   
 
Mrs.  Shazia  Ashraf,  Assistant  Advocate  General, 
Punjab.  
Mr. Muhammad Ahmad Pansota, Advocate.  
 
Ch. Abdul Aziz, J:-    This  single  judgment  shall  dispose of 
Writ Petitions No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 as both are arising out of 
order  dated  18.05.2017  passed  by  Ex-officio 
Justice  of 
Peace/Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Gujranwala,  whereby  he  directed 
SHO,  Police  Station  Civil  Lines,  Gujranwala  (respondent  No.2)  to 
record  the  statement  of  Muhammad  Zaheer  (respondent  No.3)  and 
then  to  proceed  further  in  terms  of  para  No.27  of  order  dated 
22.08.2016 passed by Punjab Healthcare Commission.   
2. 
Precisely  stated  the  background,  in  which  the  instant  writ 
petitions  are  filed,  is  to  the  effect  that  Muhammad  Zaheer 
(respondent No.3) initially approached Station House Officer, Police 
Station Civil Lines, Gujranawala with an application for registration 
of FIR against petitioners, with the allegation of having contributed 
to  the  death  of  his  brother  Muhammad  Azeem  through  medical 
negligence.  Since  this  application  failed  to  set  law  into  motion  in 
terms  of  Section  154,  Cr.P.C.,  hence,  Muhammad  Zaheer 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
(respondent  No.3)  opted  to  invoke  the  jurisdiction  of  learned  Ex-
officio Justice of Peace, Gujranwala through a petition under Section 
22-A,  Cr.P.C.  which  came  up  for  hearing  before  learned  Ex-officio 
Justice of Peace on 19.08.2013 and was disposed of in the following 
terms:- 
“It seems that application of the petitioner is pre-mature. I am not 
inclined to pass the direction for lodging FIR in  this case at this 
stage.  Petitioner  is  required  to  approach  Pakistan  Medical  and 
Dental  Council  who  is  competent  to  look  into  the  professional 
conduct of doctors.”  
 
 
Thereafter,  Muhammad  Zaheer  moved  an  application  for  the 
redress  of  his  grievance  before  the  Chief  Minister,  Punjab,  which 
was  forwarded  to  Punjab  Healthcare  Commission.  While  taking 
cognizance  of  the  issue  under  Section  4  of  the  Punjab  Health  Care 
Commission  Act,  2010  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Act  XVI  of 
2010”),  Punjab  Healthcare  Commission  gave 
its  verdict  on 
22.08.2016  and  held  responsible,  the  petitioners  guilty  of  medical 
negligence.  Subsequent  thereto,  Muhammad  Zaheer  (respondent 
No.3)  again  approached  learned  Ex-officio  Justice  of  Peace, 
Gujranwala  through  a  petition  under  Section  22-A,  Cr.P.C.  on 
15.10.2017,  which  was  finally  decided 
through  order  dated 
18.05.2017 (hereinafter referred to as “Impugned Order”) with the 
following observation:- 
“Keeping in view para No.27 of order dated 22.08.16 passed by 
Chief Operating Officer Punjab Healthcare Commission wherein 
said  commission  has  found  negligence  of  various  medical 
personnel of Civil Hospital, Gujranwala. This petition is disposed 
of  in  terms  with  direction  to  respondent  S.H.O  to  record 
statement of petitioner and keeping in  view para No.27 of order 
dated  22.08.16  passed  by  Punjab  Healthcare  Commission  to 
proceed  further in  accordance with  law. A copy  of this order be 
sent  to  respondent  S.H.O  for  information  and  compliance, 
whereas, record of this petition be consigned to record room.” 
 
 
Feeling  aggrieved  from  the  Impugned  Order,  the  petitioners 
have approached this Court through their respective writ petitions.  
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
3. 
It  is  contended  on  behalf  of  petitioners  that  from  the 
accusations  in  question,  no  cognizable  offence  warranting  the 
registration of FIR is made out; that the learned Ex-officio Justice of 
Peace  passed  Impugned  Order  in  a  mechanical  manner  without 
adverting  to  the  facts  of  the  case  and  law  on  the  subject;  that  the 
wrong,  if  any,  committed  by  the  petitioners  is  amenable  to  the 
jurisdiction  of  Punjab  Healthcare  Commission  blessed  upon  it  by 
virtue  of  Act  XVI  of  2010;  that  since  the  petitioners  have  already 
undergone 
the  wrath  of  facing 
the  proceedings  before 
the 
Commission, hence, cannot be prosecuted before a criminal court as 
it  amounts  to  double  jeopardy  which  is  barred  by  Article  13  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (hereinafter 
referred to as the “Constitution”); that even otherwise, Muhammad 
Azeem  (deceased)  was  never  subjected  to  autopsy,  hence  the  cause 
of  his  death 
is  unascertainable  and 
in  such  circumstances, 
registration  of  FIR  will  be  an  effort  in  futility.  With  these 
submissions,  it  was  urged  on  behalf  of  the  petitioners  that  the 
issuance of impugned direction was uncalled for.  
4. 
Conversely, 
learned  counsel 
for  Muhammad  Zaheer 
(respondent  No.3)  along  with  learned  Assistant  Advocate  General, 
Punjab has strongly controverted the arguments  advanced on behalf 
of petitioners and submitted that the Impugned Order suffers from no 
legal infirmity, hence, needs not to be disturbed; that the decision of 
Punjab Healthcare Commission can, in no manner, be considered as 
a hurdle for the initiation of criminal proceedings as the law through 
which  it  was  created,  from  its  very  genesis  is  civil  in  nature;  that 
Article 13 of  the  Constitution  comes  in  operation  if  an  accused  has 
already  faced  the  ordeal  of  criminal  proceedings;  that  it  emerged 
from the investigation conducted by Punjab Healthcare Commission 
that  the  negligence  of  petitioners  resulted  into  the  death  of 
Muhammad Azeem, thus is giving rise to a criminal offence; that by 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
now it is settled that on receipt of information about the commission 
of  cognizable  offence,  the  officer  in-charge  of  Police  Station  is 
bound  to  proceed  in  terms  of  Section  154,  Cr.P.C.  and  that  since 
Impugned Order is passed in accordance with law, hence, needs not 
to be interfered with by this Court. 
5. 
6. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
A  wade  through  the  accusation  reveals  that  Muhammad 
Zaheer  (respondent  No.3)  has  burdened  the  petitioners  with  the 
allegation  of  having  contributed  towards  the  death  of  his  brother 
Muhammad  Azeem  through  medical  negligence.  According  to  the 
detail of  allegations,  Muhammad  Azeem  (deceased)  was  brought to 
Civil Hospital Gujranwala on 04.06.2013 at about 4:00 p.m. with the 
complaint of acute abdominal pain. Though after administering him 
some  medicines,  Muhammad  Azeem  (deceased)  was  kept  under 
observation  for  about  three  hours  in  hospital,  however,  he  felt  no 
relief  from  the  pain  and  the  doctors  failed  to  diagnose  its  causes. 
Resultantly, Muhammad Azeem was admitted in hospital for further 
treatment.  To  be  precise,  according 
to  Muhammad  Zaheer 
(respondent  No.3),  the  doctors  and  medical  staff  of  Civil  Hospital, 
Gujranwala paid no heed to the miseries of his brother (Muhammad 
Azeem)  and  treated  him  apathetically.  The  stance  of  Muhammad 
Zaheer  (respondent  No.3)  can  be  summarized  to  the  effect  that  his 
brother fell prey to the medical negligence of the petitioners and met 
his death on 06.06.2013 at about 8:45 a.m.  
7. 
It  further  emerges  from  the  review  of  record  that  after  the 
dismissal of his first petition under Section 22-A, Cr.P.C. by learned 
Ex-officio  Justice  of  Peace,  Muhammad  Zaheer  (respondent  No.3) 
moved an application before Chief Minister Punjab for redress of his 
grievance.  The  application  was  forwarded  to  Punjab  Healthcare 
Commission  (hereinafter  referred 
to  as 
the  “Commission”), 
constituted  under  the  Act  XVI  of  2010.  The  Commission  took 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
cognizance of the matter under Section 4 of the Act XVI of 2010 and 
conducted  a  detailed  investigation,  during  which  both  sides  were 
provided due opportunities to put forth their respective versions. The 
Commission  through  its  decision  dated  22.08.2016  held  the 
petitioners  responsible  of  medical  negligence.  For  the  just  decision 
of the instant petitions, it would be in fitness of things to reproduce 
the  opinion  of  Commission  embodied  in  paras  No.26  &  27  of 
decision dated 22.08.2016, which is as under:- 
“26.  Keeping in view all evidence, clinical record, testimonies, 
investigations, expert’s opinion and critical assessment of 
all documents, the Commission is of the opinion that: 
(a)  There  is  administrative  failure  on  part  of  MS  DHQ 
Teaching  Hospital  Gujranwala.  MS  tried  to  hide  the 
facts  of  the  First  Inquiry  Report  conducted  by  Dr. 
Captain  (Retd)  Arif-ur-Rehman  submitted  to  him  by 
Dr.  Captain  (Retd)  Arif-ur-Rehman  on  19.06.2013, 
while  second  Inquiry  Committee  was  revised  by  MS 
on 18.06.2013. There is also administrative failure on 
part  of  Dr.Nadeem  Aslam,  HOD  Ward  No.7  as  no 
evening or night rounds were conducted in Ward No.7 
even  Dr.  Nadeem  Aslam  and  his  AP  Dr.  Liaqat  Ali 
Zia didn’t examine patient Muhammad Azeem during 
his  admission  in  Ward  No.7  from  04.06.2013  to 
06.06.2013. Charge Nurse Mst. Sauya Kausar did not 
inform in writing to Dr. Mubashir, first on call doctor 
when the patient developed pain on night 05.06.2013. 
She also did not inform about LAMA of patient from 
Ward No.7 to  anybody.  There is tempering of record 
of  patient  Muhammad  Azeem  as  acknowledged  by 
charge  nurse  Mst.  Naseem  Akhtar.  Patient  was  not 
diagnosed  properly  at  the  initial  stage.  Investigation 
reports  were  overlooked  and  patient  was  not  re-
evaluated  by  the  senior  doctors.  Dr.  Maria  left  ward 
No.7  at  3.30  pm  on  05.06.2013.  There  is  lack  of 
diagnostic  facilities  during  night  at  DHQ  Teaching 
Hospital  Gujranwala.  Post-mortem  of  the  deceased 
should  have  been  performed  to  arrive  at  the  exact 
cause of death of patient Muhammad Azeem. 
27. 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Not  having  diagnostic  facilities  at  night  even  for 
After thorough deliberations and taking into consideration 
the record and the above noted findings/observations, the 
Board decides as follows:- 
A fine of Rs.100,000/- is imposed on HCE for: 
(i) 
emergency cases. 
(ii) 
06.06.2013 by Charge Nurse Naseem Akhtar. 
Disciplinary  action  be  taken  against  MS,  DHQ  Teaching 
Hospital, Gujranwala for: 
Tempering  of  patient’s  vital  signs  record  on 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(i) 
(ii) 
Not having any SOPs for the HCE. 
No MOs on duty in Ward No.7 and 8. 
 
 
(c)  Warning  be  issued  to  Dr.  Nadeem  Aslam,  HOD  Ward 
No.7  and  Dr.  Liaqat  Ali  Zia,  Assistant  Professor  Ward 
No.7  for  not  preparing  SOPs  for  the  ward  and  for  not 
examining the patient during his stay in the ward. 
Disciplinary  action be taken against Dr.  Zafar  Latif MO, 
Dr.  M.  Ikram,  SMO  and  Dr.  Mudassir  Rasool,  SR  Ward 
No.7 for: 
(i) 
Not  informing  their  seniors  about  the  critical 
condition of the patient.  
(d) 
(ii)  Not  ensuring  the  requisite  investigations  of  the 
(iii) 
patient. 
Their  failure  to  carry  out  initial  management  of 
patient in ER and the ward. 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
 
 
 
to 
implement 
The  HCE  be  directed  to  hold  an  inquiry  against  Staff 
Nurses  Sauya  Kausar  and  Naseem  Akhtar  and  inform 
PHC about the action taken as a result of the inquiry. 
The  HCE  be  directed 
immediately.  
The  Government  is  advised  to  provide  the  following  at 
the newly established medical colleges:- 
(i) 
(ii) 
The  above  is  the  true  &  attested  copy  of  the  decision  of 
the Board.”  
HR 
Physical infrastructure improvement. 
the  MSDS 
  
 
 
It  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  here  that  the 
Commission is established under  Section 3 of the Act XVI of 2010 
and  its  functions  and  powers  are  defined  in  Section  4.  It  is  further 
evident from Section 4 (7) that the Commission can investigate into 
allegations of maladministration, malpractice or failure on the part of 
healthcare  service  provider  or  its  employee.  On  the  conclusion  of 
such investigation, if the healthcare service provider is found guilty 
of  medical  negligence,  he  can  be 
imposed  with  fine  upto 
Rs.500,000/-  under  section  28  of  the  Act  XVI  of  2010.  Since 
Muhammad  Zaheer  (respondent  No.3)  has  saddled  the  petitioners 
with  the  accusation  of  acting  negligently  while  imparting  medical 
treatment  to  his  deceased-brother,  hence  the  moot  question  in  this 
regard is how the term medical negligence is defined in the Act XVI 
of 2010. The term “medical negligence” is referred to in Section 19 
of  the  Act  XVI  of  2010.  According  to  foregoing  provision,  a 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
healthcare service provider can be held guilty of medical negligence 
in the following two forms:- 
(a)  the  healthcare  establishment  does  not  have  the  requisite 
human  resource  and  equipments  which  it  professes  to  have 
possessed; or 
(b) he or any of his employee did not, in the given case, exercise 
with  reasonable  competence  the  skill  which  he  or  his 
employee did possess. 
   
From  the  findings  of  the  Commission  referred  above  and  in 
accordance  with  the  provision  of  Section  19,  it  reasonably  evinces 
that the medical staff of Civil Hospital, Gujranwala acted negligently 
while attending a patient who was suffering from abdominal pain as 
none  of  them,  apparently,  exercised  reasonable  competence  or 
utilized  the  skill  he  possessed.  It  is,  prima  facie,  obvious  from  the 
afore-referred findings of the Commission that the doctors made no 
serious  effort  to  have  resort  to  diagnostic  approach  and  instead 
restricted  themselves  to  temporary  measures  of  providing  relief  to 
the patient by administering pain-killer injections only. I do not feel 
appropriate  to  embark  any  further  upon  merits  of  case  lest  it  may 
prejudice the case of either party at some later stage. As a necessary 
corollary  to  the  finding  of  the  Commission,  question  arises  as  to 
whether  the  canvassed  conduct  of  medical  staff  gives  rise  to  any 
criminal offence or is amenable to the civil jurisdiction of law only. 
Though the  learned counsel for  the  complainant obsessively  argued 
that the petitioners have committed qatl-i-amd of his brother and are 
liable  under  Section  302  PPC,  however,  this  Court  is  not  in 
agreement  with him. In order to bring  a  case  within the  purview  of 
Section  302  PPC,  the  aggrieved  person  has  to  demonstrate  beyond 
any  shred  of  ambiguity  that  the  accused  was  having  intention  and 
knowledge to cause the death of deceased which in the instant case is 
missing.  In  the  considered  view  of  this  Court,  the  projected 
negligence  of  the  petitioners,  apparently,  comes  within  the  purview 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
of  ‘Qatl-bis-Sabab’  as  defined  in  Section  321,  PPC.  For  advantage 
sake, the foregoing provision is being reproduced which is as under:- 
“321.  Qatl-bis-Sabab.  Whoever,  without  any  intention  to  cause 
death  of,  or  cause  harm  to,  any  person,  does  any  unlawful  act 
which becomes a cause for the death of another person, is said to 
commit qatl-bis-sabab.” 
 
It divulges from the plain view of Section 321, PPC that in order 
to attract its mischief, the attribution of mens rea to wrong doer is not 
condition precedent and  instead the  actus  reus of such person is  made 
culpable.  It  further  surfaces  from  the  above  referred  penal  provision 
that it attracts to an “unlawful act” which leads to the death of person. 
As  a  necessary  consequence,  it  exudes  that  what  in  law  the  term 
“unlawful  act”  means.  Admittedly,  the  expression  is  not  defined  in 
Pakistan  Penal  Code  or  in  any  other  legislation  pertaining  to  criminal 
law.  In  such  circumstances,  while  following  the  basic  principle  of 
interpretation,  this  Court  is  constrained  to  consult  the  dictionary 
meaning of “unlawful act”. While doing so, this Court is guided by the 
observation of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan expressed in the 
case  reported  as  Chairman  Pakistan  Railway  Government  of  Pakistan 
v.  Shah  Jehan  Shah  (PLD  2016  Supreme  Court  534)  wherein  the 
Hon’ble Apex Court held as under:- 
“When a word has not been defined in the statute, its ordinary 
dictionary meaning was to be looked at.” 
 
While  following  the  rule  of  interpretation  laid  down  by  the 
Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  above  case,  the  dictionary 
meaning  of  “unlawful  act”  is  looked  into  by  this  Court.  In  Black’s 
Law  Dictionary,  Ninth  Edition,  word  “unlawful  act”  is  defined  as 
under; 
“Conduct  that  is  not  authorized  by  law;  a  violation  of  a  civil  or 
criminal law.” 
 
 
Keeping  in  view  the  meaning  of  “unlawful  act”  defined  in 
Black’s Law Dictionary as any civil or criminal wrong, it manifests 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
that  the  allegations  of  Muhammad  Zaheer  (respondent  No.3)  are, 
prima  facie,  attracting  the  provision  of  Section  322,  PPC,  which 
according  to  the  second  Schedule  of  Criminal  Procedure  Code  is 
cognizable  in  nature.  It  needs  no  mention  that  on  receipt  of  such 
information,  the  Officer  In-charge  of  Police  Station  is  obliged  to 
proceed  in  terms  of  Section  154,  Cr.P.C.  The  truth  or  otherwise  of 
the  accusation  can  best  be  thrashed  during  the  process  of 
investigation, which follows the registration of a criminal case. It is 
felt expedient to observe here that each case of death during medical 
treatment  does  not  warrant  the  registration  of  a  criminal  case.  No 
doubt, on occasions patients are brought to medical care centres with 
looming  danger  of  losing  life  and  death  of  such  person  does  not 
make  vulnerable  a  doctor  to  criminal  prosecution,  yet  even  in  such 
cases  negligence  in  extending  medical  care  is  intolerable.  In  all 
fairness,  even  in  such  cases,  medical  care  provider  is  required  to 
have resort to investigatory and diagnostic approach for ascertaining 
the nature of ailment. For initiating criminal proceedings, in cases of 
medical negligence, the complaining person is required to show that 
the death was due to gross negligence or recklessness of the doctor. 
Reference  in  this  respect  can  be  made  to  a  case  from  Indian 
jurisdiction  reported  as  Dr.  Suresh  Gupta  v.  Government  of  NCT 
Delhi and another (AIR 2004 SC 4091) wherein it was held that:- 
“21. Thus, when a patient appears to go for medical treatment or 
surgical operation, every careless act of the medical man cannot 
be  termed  as  ‘criminal’.  It  can  be  termed  ‘criminal’  only  when 
the medical man exhibits a gross lack of competence or inaction  
and  wanton  indifference  to  his  patient’s  safety  and  which  is 
found  to  have  arisen  from  gross  ignorance  or  gross  negligence. 
Where a patient’s death results merely from error of judgment or 
an  accident,  no  criminal  liability  should  be  attached  to  it.  Mere 
inadvertence  or  some  degree  of  want  of  adequate  care  and 
caution  might  create  civil  liability  but  would  not  suffice  to  hold 
him criminally liable.” 
 
 
It will not be out of context to reproduce an excerpt from the 
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of United Kingdom reported as 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Montgomery v. Lanarkshire Health Board (2015 SCMR 663), which 
is as under:- 
“In  Sideway’s  case  this  question  was  approached  by  the  members  of 
the House in different ways, but with a measure of overlap. At one end 
of  the  spectrum  was  Lod  Diplock,  who  considered  that  any  alleged 
breach of a doctor’s duty of care towards his patient, whether it related 
to diagnosis, treatment or advice, should be determined by applying the 
Bolam test: 
“The  merit  of  the  Bolam  test  is  that  the  criterion  of  the  duty  of  care 
owed by a doctor to his patient is whether he has acted in accordance 
with a practice accepted as proper by a body of responsible and skilled 
medical  opinion…..  To  decide  what  risks  the  existence  of  which  a 
patient  should  be  voluntarily  warned  and  the  terms  in  which  such 
warning,  if  any,  should  be  given,  having  regard  to  the  effect  that  the 
warning  may  have,  is  as  much  an  exercise  of  professional  skill  and 
judgment as any other part of the doctor’s comprehensive duty of care 
to  the  individual  patient,  and  expert  medical  evidence  on  this  matter 
should  be  treated  in  just  the  same  way.  The  Bolam  test  should  be 
applied.” 
 
  
8. 
Though  it  was  contended  with  vehemence  on  behalf  of 
Dr.Mudassar Rasool (petitioner in W.P.No.29468 of 2017) that he is 
enjoying  great  repute  in  medical  strata  and  making  him  susceptible 
to criminal investigation is likely to mar his career. Such arguments 
can  best  be  responded  through  the  observation  of  Wilmot,  CJ 
expressed in case of Wilkes v. Wood (1769) 19 St.Tr.1406 which is 
as under:- 
“The  law  makes  no  difference  between  great  and  petty  officers; 
thank God, they are all amenable to justice.”   
 
9. 
It  is  obvious  from  record  that  earlier,  the  petitioners  faced 
proceedings before the Commission under the Act XVI of 2010 and 
on  the  strength  of  which,  it  was  projected  that  registration  of  a 
criminal case will amount to double jeopardy. This Court is swayed 
to  hold  that  such  argument  is  not  the  correct  exposition  of  double 
jeopardy as enshrined in Article 13 of the Constitution as well as in 
Section  403,  Cr.P.C.  It  needs  no  mention  that  the  rule  of  double 
jeopardy  has  its  roots  in  maxim  “Nemo  bis  debet  puniri  pro  uno 
delicto” which stands for “no one should be subjected to peril twice 
for  the  same  offence”.    The  plea,  either  of  autrefois  acquit  or  of 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
autrefois  convict  arises  only  if  a  person  is  acquitted  or  convicted 
after  prosecution.  It  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  here  that 
Article  13  (a)  of  the  Constitution  prohibits  the  dual  prosecution  or 
punishment  for  the  same  offence.  It  will  not  be  out  of  context  to 
reproduce Article 13 (a) which is as under:- 
“13. No person— 
(a)  shall  be  prosecuted  or  punished  for  the  same  offence  more  than 
once;” 
 
 
An  in-depth  view  of  Section  403,  Cr.P.C.  wherein  it  is 
contemplated that person once convicted or acquitted cannot be tried 
again for the same offence, reveals that the rule embodied therein is 
in  consonance  with  Article  13  of  the  Constitution.  To  grasp  the 
proposition, it is essentially required to see what prosecution means. 
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Muhammad 
Ashraf and others v. The State (1995 SCMR 626) while expounding 
upon the expression “prosecution” held as under:- 
“By  prosecution  is  meant  a  trial  followed  by  judgment  of 
acquittal  or  punishment.  It  includes  the  entire  proceedings 
starting  with  taking  cognizance  of  an  offence  by  the  Court, 
followed  by  examination  of  evidence,  addressing  of  arguments 
and ending with the pronouncement of judgment.” 
 
10.  So  far  as,  the  proceedings  before  the  Commission  under  the 
Act XVI of 2010 are concerned, by no stretch of interpretation, these 
can  be  held  as  criminal  in  nature.  While  holding  so,  this  Court  has 
peeped through the preamble of the Act XVI of 2010, from which it 
alludes  that  it  was  enacted  for  improving  the  quality  of  healthcare 
services  and  to  prohibit  quackery  in  all  its  forms.  The  Act  XVI  of 
2010 from its very genesis can, in no manner, be termed as Criminal 
Legislation.  While  restricting  myself  to  the  extent  of  medical 
negligence cases, it is observed that the Act XVI of 2010 at the most 
is  aimed  at  providing  some  mechanism  for  ascertaining  the 
negligence of healthcare service provider. The Act XVI of 2010 is a 
provincial legislation which to some extent is substitute of  Pakistan 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
Registration  of  Medical  and  Dental  Practitioners  Regulations,  2008 
in so far as it relates to medical negligence. In the same stretch, it is 
deemed  appropriate  to  hold  that  a  case  law  referred  on  behalf  of 
petitioners  reported  as  Shifa  International,  Hospitals  Ltd.  through 
Chairman  and  C.E.O.  v.  Pakistan  Medical  and  Dental  Council 
(PMDC)  and  3  others  (2011  CLC  463)  is  distinguishable  from  the 
facts  of  this  case.  In  the  afore-mentioned  case,  a  complaint  of 
medical  negligence  was  referred  to  PMDC  for  probing  the  conduct 
of doctor as is evident from the following extract:- 
“It  is  also  established  principle  of  law  that  special  enactments 
always  prevail  over  the  general  laws  and  in  the  present  case, 
special  laws  to  deal  with  the  negligence  of  the  practitioners  is 
there and, therefore, without exhausting that remedy, no criminal 
proceedings  can  be  initiated.  Once  it  is  held  by  the  PMDC  that 
practitioner  was  guilty  of  negligence  and  professional 
misconduct,  criminal  law  as  well  as  civil  law  can  be  set  into 
motion against them.” 
 
 
For  the  just  decision  of  the  controversy  in  hand,  it  appears 
imperative  to  have  a  glance  over  another  case  reported  as 
Dr.Taqdees  Naqash  v.  Senior  Superintendent  of  Police  and  others 
(2015  P  Cr.  L  J  1628)  hailing  from  the  jurisdiction  of  Hon’ble 
Islamabad High Court, wherein quashing of FIR against doctors for 
medical  negligence  was  refused  due  to  the  fact  that  PMDC,  after 
appropriate probe had held that death of the patient occurred due to 
medical negligence.  
11.  As regards the objection of non-holding of autopsy, suffice it 
to say that it is not essentially required to be conducted for initiating 
criminal proceedings, if otherwise, cause of death is determinable. If 
any  reference  in  this  regard  is  needed,  it  can  be  made  to  the  cases 
reported as Abdur Rehman v. State (PLJ 1999 SC 86) and Sikandar 
v. State & another (PLJ 2007 SC 4).   
12. 
In the afore-mentioned circumstances, the impugned order  is 
perused  and  found  not  be  suffering  from  any  illegality,  which  may 
warrant interference of this Court. Before parting with this judgment, 
W.P.No.29246 & 29468 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
it  is  considered  beneficial  to  embark  upon  another  issue  which 
pertains  the  arrest  of  an  accused  during  investigation.  Keeping  in 
view the scheme of things provided in criminal law, which needs not 
be  dilated  upon  in-depth,  it  is  observed  that  during  investigation 
arrest  of  an  accused  is  not  incumbent  upon  the  police  officer.  If 
otherwise,  investigation  can  be  concluded,  the  police  officer  is  not 
required  to  deprive  a  person  of  his  liberty.  In  arriving  at  such 
conclusion, this Court is enlightened from the wisdom expressed by 
the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  reported  as  Sarwar 
and  others  v.  The  State  and  others  (2014  SCMR  1762).  In  this 
backdrop, it is expected that the task to investigate instant case will 
be  assigned  to  some  senior  police  officer  who  will  accomplish  it 
without  causing  any  undue  harassment  to  the  persons  complained 
against. It is further expected that arrest of the accused if any will be 
made  only  if  it  is  deemed  expedient  for  the  completion  of 
investigation.  Likewise,  the  provisions  of  Section  157  (2)  and  169, 
Cr.P.C. read with Rule of 24.4 of Police Rules, 1934 will be kept in 
mind. 
13.  The petitions are dismissed in the above terms.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
Najum* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(CH. ABDUL AZIZ) 
 
JUDGE 
(CH. ABDUL AZIZ) 
 
JUDGE 
