 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Stereo. H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No.320-J of 2010 
Mst. Saira Bibi 
 
versus  
The State etc. 
Criminal Appeal No.1912 of 2010 
Muhammad Qasim  
versus  
The State etc. 
 
 
 
Criminal Revision No.824 of 2010 
 
Malik Muhammad Yar  versus  
 
Date of hearing 
 
 
 
The Appellants by  
 
The Complainant by  
 
The State by 
======= 
 
Muhammad Qasim etc. 
28.03.2019 
M/s Malik Rab Nawaz,  Mian 
Shahid Mehmood & Tahir 
Mahmood Mughal, Advocates. 
M/s Muhammad Asif Hayat & Mian 
Muhammad Sikandar Hayat, 
Advocate. 
Syed Muhammad Anees, District 
Public Prosecutor with Qalab ASI. 
 
 
 
Asjad Javaid Ghural, J.     Through  this  common  judgment,  I  intend 
to decide the titled criminal appeals under Section 410 Cr.P.C. preferred by 
appellants  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  and  Muhammad  Qasim,  whereby  they  have 
challenged  the  vires  of  judgment  dated  29.06.2010  passed  by  the  learned 
Additional Sessions Judge, Chiniot in case FIR No.593 dated 12.07.2009, in 
respect  of  offences  under  Sections  302  &  34  PPC,  registered  at  Police 
Station, City Chiniot whereby they were convicted and sentenced as under:- 
 
Under Section 302(b) PPC 
Imprisonment  for  life  each  and  to  pay  the  compensation  of  Rs.2,00,000/-  each  to 
the  legal  heirs  of  the  deceased,  in  default  thereof,  to  further  undergo  simple 
imprisonment for six months each. 
 
     
They were held entitled to the benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. 
2. 
Complainant Malik Muhammad Yar has preferred Criminal Revision 
No.824 of 2010 seeking enhancement of sentence of respondents No.1 & 2 
shall be decided through this common judgment. 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
2 
3. 
The  prosecution  story  unfolded  in  the  crime  report  (Ex.PA/1) 
registered  on  the  complaint  of  Muhammad  Yar  (PW-2)  is  that  his  son 
Muhammad  Ramzan  (deceased)  was  married  with  Mst.  Saira  Bibi 
(appellant) and  they had two daughters out of the wedlock.  In the preceding 
night  of  12.07.2009,  the  complainant  alongwith  his  family  slept  on  the 
rooftop whereas his married son namely, Muhammad Ramzan alongwith his 
family slept on the rooftop of adjacent house, at 04:30 a.m. Mst. Saira Bibi 
woke  the  complainant  and  his  son  and  disclosed  that  Muhammad  Ramzan 
was  not  available  at  his  cot  and  the  Bathak  was  bolted  from  inside.    The 
complainant  alongwith  his  son  Jehangir  alighted  from  the  rooftop  and  on 
inspection  of  the  dead  body  of  deceased  Muhammad  Ramzan  lying  on  the 
floor, there was injuries at the left side of his chest, left flank, left wrist and 
on the back with sharp edged weapon.  
4. 
Sarfraz  Hussain  Shah  Inspector  (PW-10)  visited  the  place  of 
occurrence,  on  the  following  morning  i.e.  12.07.2007,  prepared  injury 
statement,  inquest  report  and  sent  the  dead  body  to  the  mortuary.    He 
secured  blood  stained  earth  from  the  place  of  occurrence,  prepared  rough 
site plan and recorded statements of the witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C.  
He  recorded  the  supplementary  statement  of  the  complainant  made  on 
23.07.2009.  On 25.07.2009 he took into possession snap of Mst. Saira Bibi, 
Mobile  Phone,  three  blisters  of  medicine  Atione  and  two  letters  from  the 
room  of  Mst.  Saira  Bibi.  He  arrested  the  appellants  on  04.08.2009. 
Muhammad  Qasim  disclosed  and  led  to  the  recovery  of  Churra  on 
11.08.2009.  
5. 
Dr.  Mushtaq  Bashir  (PW-8)  held  autopsy  on  the  dead  body  of 
deceased  Muhammad  Ramzan  on  12.07.2009  and  observed  the  following 
injuries:- 
No.1 
Stab  wound  5  cm  x  1  cm  on  the  left  iliac  fossa,  intestine 
coming out from the wound. 
No.2 
Stab  wound  4  cm  x  1  cm  on  the  front  of  left  chest  outer  part 
with cut present on the vest. 
No.3 
Stab wound 3 cm x 1 cm of left chest with cut present on the 
vest. 
No.4  
Stab  wound  1  cm  x  1  cm  below  the  injury  No.3  with  cut 
present on the vest. 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
3 
No.5 
Incised  wound  ½  cm  x  ½  cm  on  the  front  back  of  left  elbow 
joint. Wound was muscle deep. 
No.6 
Incised wound ½ cm  x ¼ cm into skin deep on the back of left 
ring finger of hand. 
No.7 
Incised  wound  7  cm  x  2  cm  on  the  front  of  left  forearm 
underneath muscle was cut. 
No.8 
Incised wound 2 cm x 1 cm on the outer part of left upper arm 
lower part wound was muscle deep. 
No.9 
Stab wound 4 cm x 1 cm on the back middle and inner side of 
left chest near vertebral column. 
No.10   Stab wound 1 cm x 1cm on the back of right chest inner side 
near vertebral column.  
 
The cause of death was due to hemorrhage and shock due to injuries No.1, 2, 
3,  4,  9  and  10  which  were  ante-mortem  in  nature  and  sufficient  to  cause 
death in ordinary course of nature.  The probable duration between injuries 
and  death  was  immediate,  whereas  between  death  and  post  mortem 
examination 5½ to 10½  hours.  
6. 
At  the  commencement  of  the  trial,  learned  trial  Court  had  framed  a 
charge against the appellants to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed to 
be tried.  
7. 
The  prosecution  examined  11-witnesses  besides  the  reports  of 
Chemical  Examiner  and  that  of  the  Serologist  (Ex.PL  &  Ex.PM).  The 
appellants,  in  their  statements  recorded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.,  had 
denied and controverted all the allegations of fact leveled against them. The 
appellants neither opted to make statement under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C. nor 
produced any witness in their defence.  
8. 
Learned  trial  Court,  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial  convicted  and 
sentenced  the  appellants,  as  stated  above.  Hence,  these  criminal  appeals  as 
well as the connected revision petition.  
9. 
Learned counsels for the appellants have submitted in unison that the 
appellants  are  quite  innocent  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  alleged 
occurrence;  that the appellants were convicted and sentenced on the basis of 
confessional  statement  made  by  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  at  belated  stage  after 
completion  of  prosecution  evidence,  which  has  no  evidentiary  value  to 
maintain  the  conviction  and  sentence;  that  learned  trial  Court  had  no 
authority to record statement of accused under Section 304 PPC at that very 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
4 
stage;  that  earlier  appellant  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  had  not  pleaded  guilty  and 
thereafter  before  her  statement  recorded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  an 
application  was  preferred  on  behalf  of  appellant  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  for 
recording  her  confessional  statement;  that  learned  trial  Court‟s  jurisdiction 
qua recording of Mst. Saira Bibi‟s statement under Section 304 PPC which 
could  only  be  made  in  the  cases  of  Qisas  and  Diyat;  that  the  statement  of 
appellant  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  was  neither  true  nor  voluntarily  recorded  and  the 
same  was  not  in  consonance  with  the  medical  evidence;  that  on  receiving 
first  dagger  blow,  accused  Muhammad  Qasim  and  the  deceased  grappled 
with  each  other,  which  stood  negated  by  the  prosecution‟s  own  stance  that 
appellant Mst. Saira Bibi had provided intoxicated pills to the deceased prior 
to his death; that no evidence is available with the prosecution to connect the 
appellants  with  the  alleged  crime;  that  the  Investigating  Officer  collected 
Call Data Record of the deceased and the appellants but no connection had 
been established amongst them; that only the confessional statement cannot 
become basis to maintain the conviction and sentence of the appellant unless 
the prosecution proves  its case  beyond  shadow  of  reasonable doubt.  At the 
end, prayer for acceptance of the appeals has been made.  
10.  Conversely, learned District Public Prosecutor appearing for the State 
assisted  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  has  vehemently 
contended that  the deceased was brought  into the Bethak by appellant Mst. 
Saira Bibi and then she alongwith her companion murdered him;  that none 
else but appellant Saira Bibi was available in the house  at the relevant time 
and  she  was  responsible  for  the  said  murder;  that  the  complainant  had  no 
enmity or ill-will against his daughter-in-law prior to alleged occurrence to 
falsely  implicate  her in  the  murder of his real  son  while letting  off  the  real 
culprits; that co-convict Muhammad Qasim  being brother-in-law of brother 
of  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  had  free  access  in  her  house;  that  the  confessional 
statement of Mst. Saira Bibi has much relevancy with the crime in issue; that 
trial Court had given sufficient time to Mst. Saira Bibi to think over prior to 
make her confessional statement but she remained insisted for the same and 
ultimately, she made the statement and confessed her guilt and she reiterated 
her stance in her statement recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C. as well; that 
the  confessional statement  made by  Mst. Saira  Bibi  was true and  volunteer 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
5 
without  any  duress  and  coercion  from  any  corner;  that  the  circumstances 
also  support  her  statement  i.e.  the  recovery  of  weapon  of  offence,  extra 
judicial confession, time, date, place, mode and manner of the occurrence in 
addition  to  medical  evidence.  Finally,  he  has  prayed  for  dismissal  of  the 
appeals  and  enhancement  of  the  appellants‟  sentence  to  the  capital 
punishment.  
11. 
I  have  heard  learned  counsels  for  the  appellants,  learned  District 
Public Prosecutor appearing for the State assisted by learned counsel for the 
complainant and perused the record.  
12.  The  case  of  prosecution  hinges  upon  the  circumstantial  evidence 
comprising  of  extra-judicial  confession,  recovery  of  weapon  of  offence  i.e. 
Churra and the judicial confession made by appellant Mst. Saira Bibi before 
the trial Court.  Complainant Muhammad Yar (PW-2) got lodged the crime 
report against unknown accused persons stating that on 12.07.2009 at about 
4:30 a.m., Mst. Saira Bibi, the wife of his son namely, Muhammad Ramzan 
woke them and told that her husband was not available on the cot, they went 
down, opened the outer door of the Baithak and found his dead body lying 
on the floor having incised wounds at the left side of his chest, left buttock, 
left wrist and back.  He and his son Jahangir had deposed only to the extent 
of seeing the dead body, which was lying in their Bethak and nothing else.  
13.  The  complainant  had  further  deposed  that  after  about  11-days  of  the 
Qul  Khawani  of  the  deceased,  Muhammad  Afzal  and  Muhammad  Khalid 
told  him  that  when  they  were  sitting  in  the  Bethak  of  Muhammad  Afzal, 
appellants Muhammad Qasim and Mst. Saira Bibi came there and confessed 
their  guilt  with  regard  to  the  murder  of  Muhammad  Ramzan.    Muhammad 
Afzal  (PW-4)  supplemented  the  complainant  to  the  extent  of  extra-judicial 
confession deposing that the appellants, after eleven days of the occurrence, 
came  to  them  when  he  alongwith  Muhammad  Khalid  (given  up  PW)  was 
sitting in his Bethak, they made confession that they fell in love, wanted to 
marry each other and planned to remove the hurdle i.e. Muhammad Ramzan, 
Mst.  Saira  Bibi  called  Muhammad  Qasim  inside  the  Bethak  and  got 
committed her husband‟s murder. Thereafter, the said witness contacted the 
complainant to disclose the factum of extra-judicial confession and also got 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
6 
recorded  his  statement  before  the  police.  During  cross-examination  he 
admitted  that  both  the  accused  persons  jointly  confessed  their  guilt  while 
sitting  in  his  Bethak.    He  further  admitted  that  he  had  never  contested  the 
election  of  councilor  nor  Nazim  neither,  he  was  Lumberdar  of  the  vicinity 
nor  member  of  any  association  of  Punchayat.    He  admitted  that  many 
members  of  his  family  were  appointed  as  doctors  and  they  were  man  of 
authority, no other person was associating the accused persons at the time of 
alleged  confession.  He  did  not  try  to  apprehend  the  accused  because  the 
accused were armed with firearm weapon at the time of their confession.  It 
is  against  the  human  psyche  and  norms  of  our  society  to  confess  the  guilt 
before  the  person  relating  to  the  deceased  family  just  to  invite  trouble  for 
himself.    The  unnatural  conduct  of  both  the  witnesses  of  extra  judicial 
confession for not apprehending the appellants neither giving information to 
the  complainant  nor  the  police  despite  having  mobile  phones  with  them, 
shows  that  the  story  of  alleged  extra  judicial  confession  had  been 
maneuvered  and  cooked-up  afterwards  to  manage  the  false  implication  of 
the appellants.  Even otherwise, the evidentiary value of joint extra judicial 
confession  has  been  disapproved  by  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in 
many  a  judgments  including  in  case  titled  “SHAHID  HUSSAIN  alias 
MULTANI versus THE STATE and others” 2011 SCMR 1673) wherein at 
page No.1675 it has been held as under:-  
“The learned Additional Prosecutor-General, Punjab appearing 
for  the  State  has,  however  remained  unable  to  contradict  that 
the  alleged  extra-judicial  confession  is  a  joint  confession  and 
even the alleged recoveries are joint recoveries and, thus, their 
evidentiary worth may be next to nothing.”  
Furthermore,  it  was  a  sole  statement  of  the  aforesaid  witness  and  the 
prosecution withheld the material witness namely, Muhammad Khalid, who 
accompanying  Muhammad  Afzal  at  the  time  of  making  extra-judicial 
confession  by  the  appellants,  had  not  been  produced  before  learned  trial 
court  to  supplement  Muhammad  Afzal  for  the  reasons  best  known  to  the 
complainant.  The only inference could be drawn according to Article 129-g 
of Qanoon-e-Shahadat Ordinance, 1984 that “had he been produced before 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
7 
the learned trial court, he would not have supported the prosecution version 
qua the extra judicial confession”.   
14.  Safdar  Hussain  Shah,  Inspector  (PW-10)/I.O.  claimed  that  he  had 
recovered  the  weapon  of  offence  i.e.  Churri  from  appellant  Muhammad 
Qasim  during  investigation  but  the  said  recovery  was  shown  from  the 
residential house of the complainant where beside the complainant his other 
family  members  were  also  residing.  He  had  stated  that  at  the  time  of 
recovery,  it  was  blood-stained  and  the  place  of  recovery  (Bethak)  was  not 
owned by Muhammad Qasim.  When the accused led them for the purpose 
of  recovery, door of Bethak  was open  and in  the  said house, at the time  of 
recovery, the complainant and his sons were residing. Admittedly, the Churri 
was not sent to the office of Chemical Examiner and Serologist to  verify as 
to  whether  it  was  stained  with  human  blood  or  not.    In  this  backdrop,  the 
recovery of weapon of offence from appellant Muhammad Qasim remained 
inconsequential.  
15.  Another piece of evidence was recovery of different articles from the 
room  belonging  to  the  deceased  and  his  wife  i.e.  pictures  of  Muhammad 
Qasim and Mst. Saira Bibi connected with safety-pin, a cell phone where the 
name (Qasim) was reflecting at the screen, 3 leaves of tablets “Ativan” and 
two leaves of letter written upon them “love you QS”.  Learned counsel for 
the complainant has much emphasis that these articles establish direct link of 
love between both the appellants and due to this very reason, they killed the 
deceased.  These articles were neither recovered in the presence of appellant 
Mst. Saira Bibi nor in pursuance of her disclosure, so it would be unsafe to 
connect the said articles against the appellants with the murder in issue.  So 
far as the recovery of cell phone is concerned, it has nowhere been brought 
on  record  that  the  same  was  under  the  use  of  appellant  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  or 
someone else.  However, in her confessional statement, she made clear that 
the cell phone was given to her by her real brother.  The prosecution has also 
failed  to  make  any  connection  of  three  leaves  of  tables  “Ativan”  with  this 
murder.    Though  it  has  been  alleged  that  the  appellant  had  intoxicated  the 
deceased with tables yet it stood negated during the cross examination of the 
appellant  conducted  by  learned  counsel  of  her  co-accused  while  deposing 
that  “on  receiving  the  first  dagger  blow,  appellant  Muhammad  Qasim  and 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
8 
the  deceased  grappled  with  each  other”.  The  question  arises,  if  he  was 
unconscious after taking pills then how he was in a position to come down 
from  the  rooftop,  went  inside  the  Baithak  and  grappled  with  appellant 
Muhammad  Qasim.  Meaning  thereby,  the  deceased  was  not  given  any 
intoxicated  pills  prior  to  his  murder  and  even  no  such  element  of 
intoxication came on surface in postmortem examination report. The tablets 
allegedly  recovered  from  the  house  of  deceased  could  not  be  used  against 
the appellants in any manner.   
16.  Two leaves of letter containing “love you QS” were produced by the 
prosecution  (P-4/1-2)  in  order  to  establish  that  the  appellants‟  had  love 
contact prior to the occurrence.  Amazingly, these leaves were not sent to the 
Hand-Writing  expert  and  without  getting  expert  report,  how  could  it  be 
linked  with  the  said  appellant.    All  these  articles  being  common  pattern 
could easily be maneuvered and arranged just to show that the appellant had 
love-contact  prior  to  this  murder.    The  prosecution  has  failed  to  make 
connection of all these articles with the murder in issue.  
17.  The  most  crucial  and  substantive  piece  of  evidence  was  that  the 
appellant Mst. Saira Bibi made confessional statement before the trial Court 
and took the same plea in her statement recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C.  
It has been observed that at the verge of recording statement under Section 
342  Cr.P.C.,  learned  counsel  for  appellant  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  made  an 
application seeking permission to make her confessional statement under the 
impulsion  of  her  inner  conscious.  Learned  trial  Court  recorded  the  said 
statement  on  22.06.2010  with  the  observation  that  no  specific  stage  for 
recording  confessional  statement  under  the  provisions  of  Section  364 
Cr.P.C.  &  Section  304  PPC  has  been  provided  under  the  Statute.  Before 
making  any  comment  upon  the  legality  of  confessional  statement,  Section 
304 PPC is reproduced hereunder for ready reference:- 
(1)  Proof  of  qatl-i-amd  liable  to  qisas  shall  be  in  any  of  the  following 
forms, namely:-- 
(a) 
(b) 
The  accused  makes  before  a  court  competent  to  try  the 
offence a voluntary and true confession of the commission 
of the offence; or  
By the evidence as provided in Article 17 of the Qanoon-e-
Shahadat, 1984 (P.O. No.10 of 1984). 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
9 
(2) 
The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to 
a hurt liable to qisas. 
Though the case was adjourned to reconsider the mater yet the fact remains 
that under what provision of law and at which stage, the said statement could 
be recorded. The appellant neither opted to confess her guilt before learned 
Magistrate under Section 164 Cr.P.C. during investigation nor did she plead 
guilty at the time of framing of charge under Section 265-E Cr.P.C.   At the 
advance  stage  of  trial  when  the  evidence  of  prosecution  was  complete  and 
the case was going to be fixed for recording the statement of accused under 
Section  342  Cr.P.C., filing  of  application  on  behalf  of  appellant  Mst.  Saira 
Bibi  through  her  learned  counsel  for  making  confessional  statement  was 
beyond imagination. At the time of framing of charge under Section 265-D 
Cr.P.C.  the trial Court may convict an accused if he pleads guilty under sub-
section (2) of Section 265-E Cr.P.C. and once he pleads not guilty the trial 
Court should record the prosecution evidence as envisaged in Section 265-F 
Cr.P.C. and thereby the statute has safeguarded the right of an accused to be 
dealt with in accordance with law.   
18.  The  procedure  adopted  by  the  learned  trial  Court  in  recording  the 
confessional  statement  under  Section  304  PPC  at  the  verge  of  recording 
statement  of  accused  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.,  cannot  be  perpetuated  by 
this  court  because  the  provisions  of  Section  304  PPC  can  only  be  put  into 
force  in  cases  of  Qisas  and  Diyat  and  if  the  same  is  found  to  be  true, 
volunteer and confidence inspiring the accused should be liable to Qisas and 
Diyat  and  not  Ta’zir.    Learned  trial  Court  while  disbelieving  the  extra-
judicial  confession,  convicted  and  sentenced  the  appellants  merely  on  the 
basis  of  the  aforesaid  judicial  confessional  and  that  too,  recorded  at  the 
belated stage.  It is established principle of law that if the judicial confession 
is recorded with undue delay, the same shall have no legal consequences as 
has been held in case titled “Muhammad Riaz versus The State (PLD 1994 
Peshawar 102)” as under:- 
“There  is  a  string  of  authorities  that  if  there  is  undue  delay  in  the 
recording  of  the  judicial  confession  as  it  is  in  the  instant  case,  no 
evidentiary value can be placed thereon.” 
 
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
10 
19. 
It  was  the  duty  of  the  prosecution  to  prove  the  case  beyond  any 
shadow of reasonable doubt and when the prosecution fails to establish the 
charge,  the  accused‟s  statement  cannot  become  basis  for  recording 
conviction and sentence.  The law is very much clear at the point that if the 
prosecution  fails  to  prove  its  case  against  an  accused,  the  statement  of 
accused recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C. should be taken in its entirety as 
enshrined  in  cases  titled  “Waqar  Ahmed  versus  Shaukat  Ali  and  others” 
(2006 SCMR 1139) and “Azhar Iqbal versus The State” (2013 SCMR 383).  
The relevant portion of the later judgment at page No.384 is reproduced as 
under:- 
“It  has  straightaway  been  observed  by  us  that  both  the  learned 
courts  below  had  rejected  the  version  of  the  prosecution  in  its 
entirety  and  had  then  proceeded  to  convict  and  sentence  the 
appellant  on  the  sole  basis  of  his  statement  recorded  under 
Section  342  Cr.P.C.  wherein  he  had  advanced  a  plea  of  grave 
and  sudden  provocation.    It  had  not  been  appreciated  by  the 
learned courts below that the law is quite settled by now that if 
the prosecution fails to prove its case against an accused person 
then the accused person is to be acquitted even if he had taken a 
plea and had thereby admitted killing the deceased.”   
In the case in hand the prosecution had completely failed to establish guilt of 
the  appellants  to  the  hilt.    Appellant  Mst.  Saira  Bibi  posed  herself  as  an 
accomplice  stating  that  her  co-accused  had  murdered  the  deceased.    How 
such  statement  can  be  relied  upon  against  her  co-accused  namely, 
Muhammad Qasim without any independent connecting material.  
20.  From the aforesaid discussion, it is concluded that the prosecution has 
failed to substantiate the charge of murder against the appellants to the hilt. 
The  witness  of  extra-judicial  confession  has  already  been  discarded  by  the 
learned  trial  Court  and  the  recovery  of  weapon  of  offence  i.e.  Churri 
remained  inconsequential  as  discussed  in  the  preceding  paragraph.    The 
recovery of other articles i.e. pictures of the appellants 01-each, one mobile 
phone,  three  Ativan  tablets  and  two  love  letters  containing  „love  you  QS‟   
from the appellant‟s house by the investigating officer on 28.07.2009 during 
inspection of her room was nothing but an abortive attempt of the police to 
establish  love-contact  between  both  the  appellants.    All  these  articles  were 
neither recovered on the disclosure nor pointing out by any of the appellants.  
Crl. Appeal No.320-J/2010 
Crl. Appeal No.1912/2010 
Crl. Revision No.824/2010 
 
 
 
11 
The Call Data Record of cell phones of the deceased and both the appellants 
could  not  establish  any  nexus  amongst  them.    The  practice  adopted  by  the 
trial court in recording the confessional statement of accused other than the 
proof  of  qisas  and  diyat  was  neither  legal  nor  in  the  interest  of  natural 
justice,  which  alone  cannot  be  made  basis  to  maintain  the  conviction  and 
sentence  of  the  appellant.  During  cross-examination  appellant  Mst.  Saira 
Bibi had stated that she was not allowed to meet with her daughters and time 
and again the impression was given that she could only be allowed to see her 
daughters if she makes confession.  
21.  The  epitome  of  above  discussion  is  that  Crl.  Appeals  No.320-J  & 
1912 of 2010 are allowed, the conviction and sentence of the appellants are 
set aside and they are acquitted of the charge by giving the benefit of doubt 
to them.  They are directed to be released from jail forthwith, if not required 
to be detained in connection with any other case.  
22.  For the reasons recorded hereinabove, Crl. Revision No.824 of 2010 
seeking  enhancement  of  sentence  of  respondents  No.1  &  2  is  without  any 
merit, the same stand dismissed in limine.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                                   (Asjad Javaid Ghural) 
 
                    Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sadheer Ahmed*   
Approved for reporting. 
Judge 
