     JUDGMENT SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Writ Petition No.34972 of 2015 
Bashir Ahmad  Vs. 
 
     Addl. District Judge, etc. 
 
   JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing: -    
 
06.11.2018 
Petitioner by: - 
           
 Masood A. Malik, Advocate.  
Respondents No. 2 to 4 by:-   Rao M.I. Zafar Khan, Advocate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SHAHID  WAHEED,  J:-    Challenge  in  this  constitutional 
………. 
petition is to the order dated 03.06.2015 whereby the Revisional Court by 
setting  aside  the  order  dated  01.07.2014  of  the  Trial  Court  allowed  the 
application filed by the plaintiffs (respondents No.2 to 4) under Order VI 
Rule 17 CPC seeking amendment in the plaint. 
2. 
This constitutional petition has arisen in the background that 
the plaintiffs i.e. respondents No.2 to 4 in the year 1990 instituted a suit 
for  permanent  injunction  which  was  later  on  got  amended  by  them  and 
thereby sought decree for declaration of title in respect of land measuring 
170-  kanals  17-marlas  with  the  plea  that  their  father  Major  Samiullah 
Khan gifted the same to them vide mutation No.1866 dated 24.04.1974. 
It was also maintained in the plaint that sale deed bearing No.601 dated  
06.07.1986,  in  respect  of  suit  land,  executed  by  respondents  No.5  to  7 
and one Memal son of Sami Singh in favour of present petitioner, which 
was subsequently recorded in the revenue record vide mutation No.2430 
dated  07.03.1999  was  result  of  fraud.  The  suit  was  contested  by  filing 
written  statement.  On  pleadings  issues  were  framed  and  evidence  was 
led. After making final arguments in the case the plaintiffs (respondents 
No.2  to  4)  filed  an  application  under  Order  VI  Rule  17  CPC before  the 
Trial  Court  seeking  amendment  in  the  plaint  with  the  following 
assertion:-  
W.P. No.34972 of 2015 
 
2 
“That  at  the  ends  of  para  1-B,  the  same  is  inadvertently 
written that the father of the plaintiff made Hibba Nama in 
favour of the plaintiffs, actually the plaintiffs purchased the 
suit  land  from  one  Muhammad  Azam  who  was  attorney  of 
Mst. Sughri, Momal, Malooki, Shakoori and that is why the 
mutation no.1866 was sanctioned in favour of plaintiffs and 
in Mutation No.1866 the sale transaction is  mentioned and 
the  plaintiff  purchased  the  suit  land  in  consideration  of 
Rs.5000/-.  Copy  of  Sale  Mutation  is  already  annexed  and 
exhibited  with  the  plaint.  However,  the  word  of  Hiba  has 
been written mistakenly, in fact, it was the Sale Transaction 
and  the  same  is  result  of  typing  mistake  and  due  to  over 
sight it was not corrected earlier, that it will meet the ends 
of  justice,  to  allow  the  plaintiff  to  amend  the  plaint  by 
substituting  the  word  of  “Sale”  in  the  plaint  instead  of 
Hibba and the contents of Para No.2 of the application may 
kindly  be  allowed  to  insert  at  the  ends  of  1-B  of  the  plaint 
and  the  same  may  also  be  allowed  in  the  prayer  clause  of 
the plaint also.” 
 
The  above  application  was  resisted  by  the  present  petitioner.  On 
consideration  of  the  matter,  the  Trial  Court  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  application  under  Order  VI  Rule  17  CPC  was  not  only  belated  but 
would  also  bring  change  in  the  claim  of  the  plaintiffs.  On  the  basis  of 
said  conclusion  the  application  seeking  amendment  in  the  plaint  was 
dismissed  vide  order  dated  01.07.2014.  The  respondents  No.2  to  4 
thereupon  filed  an  application  under  Section  115  CPC  before  the  Addl. 
District Judge, Lahore and sought revision of the order dated 01.07.2014. 
The  Revisional  Court  reversed  the  findings  of  the  Trial  Court  and 
allowed  the  application  in  revision  vide  order  dated  03.06.2015  on  the 
ground  that  proposed  amendment  would  not  bring  any  change  in  the 
nature  of  the  pleading  and  relief  claimed  by  the  plaintiffs.  So,  this 
petition.  
3. 
Objecting  to  the  findings  of  the  Revisional  Court,  the 
petitioner’s counsel submits that at the fag end of the trial of the suit the 
plaintiffs  (respondents  No.2  to  4)  could  not  be  allowed  to  make  any 
amendment in the plaint which was inconsistent with the statement made 
by  the  witnesses  before  the  Trial  Court.  Responding  to  said  objection 
learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  plaintiffs,  i.e.  respondents 
No.2  to  4  submits  that  the  plaintiffs  claimed  declaration  of  title  on  the 
basis of mutation No.1866 dated 24.04.1974 through which the suit land 
W.P. No.34972 of 2015 
 
was transferred in their favour by way  of oral sale but inadvertently the 
transaction  was  recorded  in  the  plaint  as  gift  and  thus  this  clerical  error 
was required to be rectified and would not bring any change in the nature 
3 
and complexion  of the suit. 
4. 
After hearing, I have found substance in the objection raised 
by  petitioner’s  counsel.  The  plaintiffs  (respondents  No.2  to  4)  through 
their  suit  sought  declaration  of  title  in  respect  of  the  suit  land  with  the 
plea that their father Major Samiullah Khan transferred the same to them 
through gift. The Trial Court  made the said claim as part of issue No.2, 
(i.e.whether  the  disputed  land  was  transferred  to  the  plaintiffs  by  their 
father through Hibba and since then they are in cultivating possession of 
the same?) The onus to prove issue No.2 was upon the plaintiffs. Being 
conscious of the claim set up in the plaint and onus to prove issue No.2, 
one  of  the  plaintiffs,  Mst.  Saira  Khanum  (respondent  No.2),  appeared 
before the Trial Court as PW-6. She in her examination-in-chief stated as 
follows:-
                                       
یھت ی
وہ ہبھ
ئ
 ماً ے ر اوہ ںیه
۳۷۹۵
 
 دادی
ئاج ہی
 
This  witness  again  appeared  before  the  Trial  Court  in  rebuttal  evidence 
and stated as follows:- 
                                              یھت ی
ئ
وہ ہبھ ماً ےراوھ یضارا ہی ںیه
 
۳۷۹۵
 ل اس
 
During cross examination she stated as follows:- 
          
   
دادی
ئ  اج  ہی  ےً  ںوہًا  ہکًویک  ے
ھت  ںیہً
  ےیل  سا  کلاه  ےک  دادی
  ئاج  سا  دلاو  ےر  اوہ
 ےر اوھ ےس ىا ہک اہک دوخ زا۔۔
۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔
۔یھت
ی 
ئ اورک ہبھ ماً ےک ںوٌہب
 
ںوٌیت نھ
           
     
 لاقتًا اک ہبھ
 
یھب یھبک ماً ےک ى ایع ده ہک ےہ طلغ
 ہی
۔    
۔۔۔۔۔۔۔یھت
ی 
ئ وھ ہبھ ا
  تویق ماً
 ہخروه ےس تلادع یک بحاص رادلیصحت ہک ےھ ہً نلع ےھجه
 ۔ 
۔۔۔۔۔۔
۔۔۔۔۔
۔اھت اوھ ہً قیدصت
         
                             
اھت اوھ جراخ ہبھ لاقتًا ۔اھت اوھ
 جراخ وک
۳۷۹۲
 
۴۲۔۴۲۔
 
The  other  witness,  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  plaintiffs,  was  Allah 
Yar (PW-1). This witness in his examination-in-chief stated as follows:- 
           یھت یک ہبھ وک ںویٹیب یٌپا يیهز ہی ےً سا ۔ںیھ ںایٹیب يیت یک
للہ ا عیوس رجیه
 
 
The  second  witness  produced  by  the  plaintiffs  was  Mukhtar  Ali  PW-2. 
He in his statement stated to the following effect: 
 ےک ہبھ ۔اھت للہ ا عیوس رجیه ماً اک ىا۔یھت ید ہبھ روطب ےً دلاو ےک ىا يیهز وک ىایع
ده
               ایگ ایک وک ہٌه ٓا روا يیہ اش
نًاخ ٍر
۔ 
ئ اس ہبھ ۔اید ےد وک نًاخ ٍرئ
 اس ہضبق تقو
 
W.P. No.34972 of 2015 
 
The  third  witness  was  Meraj  Din  PW-3.  His  statement  was  to  the 
4 
following effect: 
 ہی۔۔یھت یک ہبھ ےً للہ ا عیوس دلاو ےک ىا ہبھ ہی۔یھت یله ےعیرز ےک ہبھ يیهز وک ىایعد
ه
                                                                                 اھت اوھ لبق لاس
۴۲ 
 ہبھ
 
Upon  perusal  of  statements  made  by  the  witnesses  who  appeared  on 
behalf  of  the  plaintiffs  it  becomes  clear  that  the  plaintiffs  claimed 
declaration  of  title  in  respect  of  the  suit  land  on  the  basis  of  oral 
transaction of gift and thus they could not be allowed to urge on the basis 
of unsanctioned Mutation No.1866 that in fact transaction of transferring 
the suit land was sale but inadvertently in the plaint it was written as gift 
(Hiba).  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  suit  was  one  for  declaration  and 
after the proposed amendment it would continue to be a declaratory suit. 
In  that  sense, there would  be  no  change  in  the  character  of  the  suit, but 
the  character  of  plaintiffs’  claim  would  be  totally  changed.  Thus, 
amendment sought to be made, at the fag end of the trial particularly after 
making  final  arguments  and  at  the  stage  of  announcement  of  judgment, 
could not be allowed to be made as it would totally change the character 
of the plaint and basis of claim qua suit land, though not character of the 
suit,  and  such  amendment  would  certainly  prejudice  the  defendant 
(present  petitioner)  in  his  defence  which  he  had  already  filed  in 
pursuance of the case set up by the plaintiffs in their plaint. This aspect of 
the matter was not considered by the Revisional Court and thus it fell into 
error while passing the impugned order dated 03.06.2015.  
5. 
In 
the  sequel 
this  petition 
is  accepted,  order  dated 
03.06.2015  passed  by  Addl.  District  Judge  is  set  aside  and  declared  to 
have  been  passed  without  lawful  authority  and  of  no  legal  effect  and 
consequently the order of the Trial Court  dated 01.07.2014 is restored.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
M.R.Shad* 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
 
     
 
Judge 
 
 
 
(SHAHID WAHEED) 
 
 
  JUDGE 
   
 
