 
Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR 
            (JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
 
Case No.  Writ Petition No.7195 of 2018 
 
Umar Hameed etc. 
Versus       Presiding  Officer/Special 
Judge  Anti 
Terrorism Court, etc. 
 
 
Sr.No.of order/ 
Proceedings 
Date of order/ 
Proceedings 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, 
where necessary. 
 
  
27.08.2018  Ch.  Riaz  Ahmad,  and  Sardar  Zafar  Iqbal  Tareen, 
 
 
 
Advocates for the petitioners. 
Ch. Saeed Ahmed, AAG for the State. 
Ch.  Manzoor  Ahmed  Warraich,  Advocate  for 
respondents. 
 
 
 
Through  this  constitutional  petition  under  Article 
======= 
the 
199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973,  petitioners  Umar  Hameed,  Asad  Aslam  and 
Salman  being  accused  of  case  FIR  No.341  dated 
25.07.2018,  in  respect  of  offences  under  Sections  382, 
506-B,  427,  148  &  149  PPC  and  Section  7  of  the  Anti-
Terrorism Act, 1997, registered at Police Station City A-
Division  Rahimyarkhan  have  challenged  the  legality  of 
orders  dated  28.07.2018  and  11.08.2018  passed  by  the 
learned  Duty  Judge  Anti-Terrorism  Court,  Bahawalpur 
Division, Bahawalpur  whereby  their  request  for deletion 
of  offence  under  Section  7  of  the  Anti-Terrorism  Act, 
1997  at  remand-stage  was  turned  down  and  thereafter 
their  application  under  Section  23  of  the  Act  ibid  for 
transfer  of  the  aforesaid  case  to  the  Court  of  ordinary 
jurisdiction was dismissed.   
2. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submits  that 
from  bare  perusal  of 
the  crime  report  and 
the 
investigation  conducted  so  far,  no  element  of  causing 
intimidation,  awe,  fear  or  insecurity  in  the  public  or 
society  or  the  mens  rea  and  actus  reus  as  specified  in 
Section 6 of the Act ibid, is attracted in the case in hand; 
that  the  investigation  process  is  still  under-way  and  the 
challan has not yet been submitted before the learned trial 
      Writ Petition No.7195/2018 
 
2 
 
court;  that  offence  under  Section  7  of  the  Act  ibid  has 
been  deleted  to  the  extent  of  nominated  co-accused 
namely Muhammad Ismaeel and Muhammad Waqas vide 
order dated 31.07.2018; that the learned Court below has 
passed  both  the  impugned  orders  at  pre-mature  stage 
beyond  jurisdiction  and  the  same  are  not  sustainable  in 
the eyes of law, which otherwise amounts to hamper the 
investigation process.   
3. 
Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent 
No.3 defends the impugned orders while submitting that 
the  petitioners  alongwith 
their  co-accused  have 
committed  an  offence,  which  falls  under  the  ambit  of 
Section 6(2)(m)(n) of the Act ibid.   
4. 
Learned  Law  Officer  has  half-heartedly  opposed 
this petition.  
5.  We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners, 
learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.3,  learned  Assistant 
Attorney  General  appearing  for  the  State  and  have 
perused the available record with their able assistance.  
6. 
After 
taking  cognizance  of 
the  matter, 
the        
Anti-Terrorism Court is empowered under Section 23 of 
Anti- Terrorism Act, 1997 to transfer the case for trial of 
such  offence  to  the  Court  of  ordinary  jurisdiction,  if  it 
does  not  come  within  the  ambit  of  scheduled  offences.  
For  ready  reference,  Section  23  of  Anti-  Terrorism  Act, 
1997 is reproduced as under:- 
 “ Power to transfer cases to regular Courts.—
Where,  after  taking  cognizance  of  the  offence, 
Anti-Terrorism  Court  is  of  opinion  that  the 
offence  is  not  a  scheduled  offence,  it  shall 
notwithstanding  that  it  has  no  jurisdiction  to  try 
such  offence,  transfer  the  case  for  trial  of  such 
offence to any Court having jurisdiction under the 
Code,  and  the  Court  to  which  the  case  is 
transferred  may  proceed  with  the  trial  of  the 
offence  as  if  it  had  taken  cognizance  of  the 
offence.” 
 
The  aforementioned  provisions  of  law  clearly  and 
7. 
without  any  ambiguity  provide  that  the  Anti-Terrorism 
Court is empowered to transfer the case into the Court of 
      Writ Petition No.7195/2018 
 
3 
 
ordinary  jurisdiction  only  when  it  has  taken  cognizance 
of  the  matter.  The  petitioners  alongwith  their  five         
co-accused  were 
implicated 
in 
this  case 
through 
supplementary  statement, they  were  arrested in  this  case 
on  27.07.2018  and  the  investigating  officer  made  an 
application  before  the  learned  trial  court  seeking  their 
physical  remand  for  15-days  wherein,  vide  impugned 
order  dated  28.07.2018,  the  learned  court  had  given  a 
specific  observation  that  offence  under  Section  7  of  the 
Act  ibid  attracts  to  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the 
case  and  granted  the  physical  remand.  Thereafter,  they 
were sent to judicial lockup vide order dated 11.08.2018 
by  the  said  court.  On  the  same  day  i.e.  11.08.2018, 
application submitted by the petitioners under Section 23 
of the Act ibid to transfer the case to the court of ordinary 
jurisdiction was dismissed by the said court. Admittedly, 
the  investigation  process  is  underway  and  complete  or 
incomplete  report under  Section 173  Cr.P.C.  has  not  yet 
been  submitted  before  the  learned  trial  court.    Learned 
Court  below  has  expressed  his  view  while  granting 
physical  remand  of  the  accused  under  Section  167 
Cr.P.C.,  which 
is 
totally  against  the 
law  causing 
prejudice  to  the  case  of  either  side  and  also  amounts  to 
hamper  the  investigation  process.    The  petitioners  made 
application  under  Section  23  of  the  Act  ibid  before  the 
same  learned  court  before  taking  cognizance  of  the 
matter, which has been decided by the said court without 
taking into consideration that it was premature.  Learned 
Court below was neither authorized to express such view 
at  the  stage  of  physical  remand  nor  decide  the  aforesaid 
application  seeking  transfer  of  case  to  the  court  of 
ordinary  jurisdiction  before  taking  cognizance  of  the 
matter.   
8. 
In  view  of  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the 
petition in hand is allowed, both the impugned orders are 
set  aside  with  the  observation  that  the  petitioners  may 
 
 
 
      Writ Petition No.7195/2018 
 
4 
approach  the  learned  trial  court  seeking  the  selfsame 
relief at appropriate stage, if so advised.  It is made clear 
that such application, if filed, shall be decided on its own 
merits strictly in accordance with law.  
 
 
 
    (Jawad Hassan)                   (Asjad Javaid Ghural) 
   Judge                                         Judge 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
Ramzan 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Judge 
