FORM No.HCJD/C-121. 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Crl.Misc.No.196096-H/2018 
Haider Abbas Bhindar         Vs                    DPO, etc. 
S.No. of order/ 
proceedings 
Date of order/ 
proceedings 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where 
necessary. 
12.04.2018  Syed  Tanvir  Ahmad  Hashmi,  Advocate  for  the 
 
petitioner. 
This  is  second  petition,  earlier  the  petitioner  filed 
Crl.Misc.No.192413-H/2018  but  the  same  was  dismissed  as 
withdrawn  on  05.04.2018  and  now  this  petition  has  been  filed 
without any cogent reason. 
2. 
It  is  argued  by  learned  counsel  that  the  petitioner  got 
married  with  Mst.  Naila  Shahzadi  on  08.01.2018,  but  as  the 
said marriage was contracted without the blessings of parents of 
Mst. Naila Shahzadi, therefore, on 26.03.2018, respondent No.3 
(father  of  the  girl),  respondent  No.4  (brother  of  the  girl)  and 
respondents No.5 and 6 (paternal uncles of the girl) came to the 
house  of  the  petitioner  and  forcibly  took  Mst.  Naila  Shahzadi 
(wife of the petitioner) with them. 
 
 
3. 
Heard. 
4. 
It has become a trend in our society, rather it has shaped 
into  a  well  thought  out  practice  that  girls  come  out  of  their 
houses  for  couple  of  hours  on  any  pretext  whatsoever;  enter 
into  marriage  without  the  consent  of  their  parents;  file  a 
complaint  alleging  harassment  to  them  and  their  husbands; 
return  back  to  their  parental  home  and  thereafter,  the  entire 
above exercise is followed by filing of petitions, like the instant 
one, before this court. All above is managed with a view to use 
this  court  as  a  stage  of  “Rukhsati.”  This  is  prime  time  for  the 
courts to notice and as far as practicable to plug such indecent 
activity nothing less than menace, which is not only destroying 
 
charter of our youth; it is also stigmatizing and diminishing our 
moral values.    
5. 
For  the  purposes  of  proceedings  under  section  491 
Cr.P.C. this court has observed that no evidence has been cited 
by  the  petitioner  to  lend  support  to  his  assertion  about 
immediate  and  forcible  abduction  of  Mst.  Naila  Shahzadi, 
otherwise,  it  is  not  expected  that  a  major  girl  is  forcibly 
abducted but none from the locality gets even a glimpse of the 
incident  or  does  not  even  hear  the  hullaballoo.  Although  it  is 
alleged  in  the  petition  that  petitioner  was  telephonically 
informed  by  Mst.  Naila  Shahzadi  about  her  forcible  detention, 
but  no  cellular  or  landline  number  has  been  given  to  establish 
the said factum.  
6. 
It  is  admitted  by  the  petitioner  himself  that  Mst.  Naila 
Shahzadi  is  now  with  her  parents.  This  Court  in  the  case 
“MUKHTAR  AHMAD  versus  GHAFOOR  AHMAD  and  3 
others” (PLD 1990 Lahore 484), held that:- 
“………any restraint placed on the movements of a son or 
a daughter by a father out of concern for his or her welfare 
and  to  prevent  ill-advised  action  by  him  or  her  cannot  be 
termed  illegal  or  improper  detention  unless  such  a 
restraint  is  patently  unjust,  cruel  and  obviously  not  in  the 
best interest of the son or daughter so restrained; or if the 
general  attitude  and  the  usual  treatment  of  the  son  or 
daughter by the father is such that it may attract the penal 
provisions  of  law.  Otherwise  it  is  accepted  by  every 
civilized society and duly approved of by every moral code 
and  sanctioned  by  every  religion,  that,  within  limits 
prescribed, a parent has the right to restrain from, and  to 
admonish in respect of, and to give practical expression to 
his or her disapproval of, the conduct unbecoming in his or 
her judgment, of a son or daughter.” 
 
 
 
 
Similar  view  was  taken  by  this  Court  in  the  case  “IRFAN 
AHMAD  versus  SHO  and  6  others”  (2011  P.Crl.L.J.  597)  and 
“MUHAMMAD  JAVED  SAGAR  versus  STATION  HOUSE 
OFFICER  and  2  others”  (2011  P.Crl.L.J.  674),  holding  that 
custody  of  a  girl  with  her  parents  (father,  mother,  brothers) 
cannot be termed as illegal or improper.  
 
7. 
In  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  this  case,  this  court  is 
not persuaded that a case for handing over the custody of Mst. 
Naila Shahzadi to the petitioner is made out, nor shall this court 
allow its jurisdiction under section 491 Cr.P.C. to be invoked to 
effect  a  “Rukhsati”,  especially  keeping  in  mind  that  the 
petitioner has appropriate and specific remedy to file a suit for 
restitution  of  conjugal  rights  before  the  Family  Court  and  it  is 
requirement of law that before proceeding further the said court 
shall  summon  both  the  parties  for  reconciliation    proceedings 
and at that stage if the alleged abductee admits her Nikah with 
the petitioner, she may join the petitioner.  
8. 
For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  this  court  is 
convinced that apart from the fact that the custody of Mst. Naila 
Shahzadi with her parents is not illegal, even the ingredients of 
section 491 Cr.P.C. also do not exist in this case. Consequently, 
the  instant  petition  is  dismissed.  The  petitioner  is  however,  at 
liberty  to  seek  alternate  remedies  in  proper  form  at  the 
appropriate forum. 
                                                            JUDGE. 
  (MUHAMMAD QASIM KHAN) 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
Javed* 
