CJDA 38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
(Shamshad Ali vs. The State etc.) 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
(The State vs. Shamshad Ali) 
Date of hearing: 
12.11.2018 
Appellant: 
State: 
Barrister  Salman  Safdar  &  Ms. 
Sheeba Qaiser, Advocates. 
Ch.  Zubair  Ahmad  Farooq, 
Additional Prosecutor General. 
Complainant: 
Mr. Asghar Ali Gill, Advocate. 
 
 
FAROOQ  HAIDER,  J.:  Through  this  single  judgment 
Crl. Appeal No.705/2012, filed by Shamshad Ali (appellant) against 
judgment  dated  31.3.2012  passed  by 
learned  Additional 
Sessions Judge, Narowal, whereby Shamshed Ali (appellant) has 
been convicted and sentenced under Section 302 (b) PPC to death 
alongwith  payment  of  fine  Rs.2,00,000/-  to  the  legal  heirs  of 
deceased  Hafiz  Shahid  under  Section  544-A  Cr.P.C.  and  in 
default thereof to further undergo one year S.I. as well as under 
Section  394  PPC  to  undergo  ten  years  Rigorous  Imprisonment 
alongwith payment of fine Rs.50,000/- and in default thereof to 
further  undergo  six  months  S.I.  with  benefit  of  Section  382-B 
Cr.P.C. 
  Both 
the  sentences  were  ordered 
to  be  run 
concurrently,  and  Murder  Reference  No.194/2015  sent  by  learned 
trial Court under Section 374 Cr.P.C. for confirmation of death 
sentence  awarded  to  Shamshad  Ali  appellant  through  above 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
2 
mentioned  judgment,  are  being  decided  together  because  both 
these matters have arisen out of one and same judgment. 
2. 
Brief facts, as per written complaint (Ex.PJ) submitted by 
Shabbir Ahmad complainant/PW-19, are that he was posted as 
Laboratory  Assistant  in  Government  Boys  High  School, 
Sankathra  and  resident  of  Mouza  Shahabdikay  Tehsil  and 
District Narowal while his brother Hafiz Shahid Mehmood was 
Incharge  of  Utility  Store  No.1  Narowal  city.    On  29.6.2008 
afternoon  he  alongwith  his  paternal  cousin  Muhammad 
Munawar on Honda 70-CC motorcycle came at Narowal city in 
order  to  purchase  articles  of  daily  use  and  before  returning  to 
their  village,  they  went  to  the  Store  of  his  brother  Shahid 
Mehmood  where  audit  of  the  store  was  being  done.    At  9.00 
p.m. Shahid Mehmood was spared, therefore, he (complainant) 
alongwith his above named cousin on one motorcycle whereon 
Shahid  Mehmood  on  his  motorcycle  No.SKC-6328  moved 
towards  their  village  and  when  at  9:30  p.m  they  reached  at 
metallic  road  of  leading  to  Domala  Ahlu-Lal  near  the  area  of 
Village Kesowali, motorcycle of his brother (Shahid Mehmood) 
was  15/20  yards,  ahead  of  them,  suddenly  four  unknown 
persons  armed  with  pistols,  in  prosecution  of  their  common 
intention intercepted the motorcycle of Shahid Mehmood upon 
which  Shahid  Mehmood slow down  his motorcycle  and  out of 
accused  persons,  one  accused  person  with  half  face  muffled 
made  a  straight  pistol  fire  at  Shahid  Mehmood  hitting  at  his 
right  portion  of  abdomen,  as  a  result  of  which,  Shahid 
Mehmood  fell  down from  the  motorcycle in injured  condition.  
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
3 
The other accused persons asked his companion to run away as 
the  needful  had  been  done,  therefore,  all  the  accused  persons 
while making firing made their good escape towards fields.  On 
the  hue  and  cry  of  the  complainant,  the  accused  persons  also 
made  firing  towards  them  but  they  luckily  saved.    All  four 
accused persons were young, healthy and of average height, out 
of  which,  two  were  half  muffled  while  two  were  with  naked 
faces,  who  could  be  identified  if  brought  before  them.    The 
complainant and his above named cousin Muhammad Munawar 
witnessed  the  occurrence  in  the  light  of  motorcycles.    On 
happening  this  occurrence, the  complainant  made  a  phone  call 
to  his  home  from  his  mobile  phone  whereupon  after  few 
minutes, his brother Abdul Rehman Advocate alongwith others 
arrived  at  the  place  of  occurrence  on  car,  etc.    They  brought 
Shahid  Mehmood  in  a  severe  injured  condition  at  DHQ 
Hospital Narowal where he was given first aid and then referred 
to  Mayo  Hospital  Lahore,  where  he  was  operated  upon.  
Thereafter  the  complainant  came  at  Police  Station  Sadder 
Narowal  and  reported  the  matter  to  the  Station  House  Officer 
through  his  written  complainant  Ex.PJ.    On  the  basis  of  said 
complaint,  formal  F.I.R  No.234/2008  dated  1.7.2008  under 
Sections 324/34 PPC (Ex.PJ/1) was registered.  Later on injured 
Shahid  Mehmood  succumbed  to  the  injury  in  Mayo  Hospital 
Lahore, as such, Sections 302, 394 and 511 PPC were added in 
the F.I.R. 
3. 
On 
the  conclusion  of 
the 
investigation,  appellant 
Shamshad  Ali  alongwith  two  other  co-accused  were  challaned 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
4 
to  the  Court.    He  was  formally  charged  under  Sections  394, 
302, 34 PPC, to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 
 
The  prosecution  at  trial  examined  it’s  twenty  witnesses.  
It  has  also  tendered  in  evidence  the  report  of  the  Chemical 
Examiner  Exh.PZ  and  that  of  Forensic  Science  Laboratory 
Exh.PAA and Serologist Exh.PBB, and closed its evidence.  
4. 
Statement of the accused was recorded under Section 342 
Cr.P.C.  and  in  reply  to  question  16  that  why  this  case  against 
you and why PWs deposed against you? He replied as under:- 
“I  am  innocent  and  have  no  direct  or  indirect 
connection  with  the commission  of  this offence.    I 
have been implicated in this case falsely with mala 
fide  intention  for  ulterior  motive  and  designs.    In 
fact  on  14.8.2008  one  and  half  month  after  this 
incident  a  scuffle  took  place  between  me,  my  co-
accused  on  one  side  and  PW-8  Ahsan  Karim  and 
PW-10  Muhammad  Yousaf  on  the  other  side  at 
village Balay Kay in a kabaddi match where harsh 
words  and  threats  of  dire  consequences  were 
exchanged  between  us  and  the  above  said  PWs.  
Some people in the kabaddi match intervened and 
settled  the  dispute.    But  the  said  PWs  with 
connivance  of  the  complainant  nursed  the  grudge 
against us due to which they roped us in this case 
to  satisfy  their  nefarious  designs.  The  PWs  are 
related  to  the  deceased  so  are  interested  and  due 
to this reason they have deposed against me. I am 
innocent” 
 
He, however, did not opt to depose on oath under Section 340 
(2)  Cr.P.C.  in  disproof  of  the  allegations  made  against  him, 
however,  produced  Liaquat  Ali  as  DW-1  and  Muhammad 
Ashraf as DW-2 in his defence. 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
5 
5. 
PW-6  Dr.  Saadat  Ali,  Medical  Officer,  DHQ,  Hospital, 
Narowal  medically  examined  Shahid  Mehmood  in  injured 
condition and found following injuries on his body: 
i) 
A circular wound 1 x 1 cm on right lower abdomen 
just above inguinal canal. 
ii)  A  circular  wound  1½  x  1½  cm  on  back  of  right 
side of lumber region. 
 
Said  PW-6  opined  that  the  duration  between  the  injury  and 
medical examination was within six hours. 
After  death  of  Shahid  Mehmood,  PW-5  Dr.  Amjad 
Irshad,  Medical  Officer,  DHQ,  Hospital,  Narowal  has 
conducted  the  autopsy  on  his  dead  body  and  found  the 
following injuries on it: - 
i) 
ii) 
A  surgical  wound  on  front  of  abdomen  from 
xiphesternum  to  pubic  area  30  cm  in  length  4 
stitches were in placed. 
The skin on right side of the body including chest 
and  abdomen  and  upper  part  of  thigh  up  the 
muscle was removed surgically. 
iii)  A circular wound on the back of right side lumber 
region.  Injury No.1 present in MLR No.566/08 is 
within  the  debrided  area  just  above  the  right 
inguinal region. 
He  has  stated  injury  No.1  to  have  been  caused  with  firearm 
weapon and the same to be ante mortem in nature which leads 
to  extensive  damage  of  abdominal visceras, sufficient  to  cause 
death by septicemia, toximea and shock which lead in ordinary 
course of life.  The probable time between said injuries and the 
death as described by him was 48 hours and between the death 
and the postmortem examination within six to twelve hours. 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
6 
6. 
The  learned  trial  court  after  conclusion  of  the  trial  has 
convicted and sentenced appellant  Shamshad Ali as mentioned 
above. 
7. 
Learned counsel for the appellant submits that impugned 
judgment  is  against  the  law  and  liable  to  be  set  aside. 
Conversely  learned  Additional  Prosecutor  General  assisted  by 
the  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  has  supported  the 
impugned judgment. 
8.  We have observed that following are the vital aspects of 
the case:- 
i) 
Registration of case and supplementary statement.  
ii)  Ocular Account and Identification of the accused. 
iii)  Extra Judicial Confession. 
iv) 
Judicial Confession.  
v) 
Recovery. 
vi)  Medical Evidence.  
vii)  Motive. 
REGISTRATION  OF  CASE  AND  SUPPLEMENTARY 
STATEMENT.  
 
 
This  case  was  got  registered  by  Muhammad  Shabbir 
Ahmad  (PW-19)  who  is  brother  of  the  deceased,  by  moving 
application  (Exh.PJ)  in  the  police  station;  no  accused  was 
nominated  in  the  same;  thereafter  according  to  Muhammad 
Afzal  S.I/Investigating  Officer 
(PW-18)  on  15.08.2008 
Muhammad  Shabbir  Ahmad  (PW-19)  complainant  appeared 
before him along with Muhammad Yousaf (PW-14) and Ahsan 
Kareem (PW-15) at Police Post, Domala and produced written 
application  (Exh.PO)  before  him  while  nominating  Shamshad 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
7 
Ali (present appellant), Shahid Mehmood (died during the trial 
of  the  case)  and  Mudassar  (who  has  been  separately  tried  as 
juvenile)  as  accused  persons  in  the  case.  In  this  way,  through 
the supplementary  statement, three  accused  were  nominated  in 
this  case.  Perusal  of  application  (Exh.PO)  reveals  that  it  was 
simply  mentioned  therein  that  on  14.08.2008  Muhammad 
Yousaf  and  Ahsan  Kareem  have  told  him  that  Hafiz  Shahid 
Mehmood  was  murdered  by  Shamshad  Ali,  Shahid  and 
Mudassar  during  dacoity.  Perusal  of  said  supplementary 
application clearly shows that it was not mentioned therein that 
how  it  has  come  into  their  notice  and  knowledge  that 
aforementioned  three  accused-persons  have  committed  murder 
of Hafiz Shahid during dacoity.  Any source was not mentioned 
in  said  supplementary  application  in  this  regard  although  said 
application was moved about 1 ½ month after registration of the 
case. Hence this supplementary application is of no evidentiary 
value  in  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case  particularly 
when  testimony  of  both  said  Muhammad  Yousaf  and  Ahsan 
Kareem PWs have not been relied by learned trial Court in the 
judgment.  
 
Another important aspect which needs consideration here 
is  that  according  to  Exh.  PJ  i.e.  application  on  the  basis  of 
which  FIR  was  got  registered,  it  was  a  targeted  murder  but 
through  this  supplementary  application  Exh.PO  entire  mode 
and mechanism of the occurrence has been changed, it has been 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
8 
turned into murder during dacoity, and number of accused has 
been reduced from four to three. 
 
Nutshell  is  that  very  registration  of  the  case  and 
nomination of the accused is of no help to the prosecution and 
this vital aspect of the case which lays basis of a criminal case, 
has  lost  its  efficacy,  and  same  is  fatal  for  the  case  of 
prosecution.  
OCULAR  ACCOUNT  AND  IDENTIFICATION  OF  THE 
ACCUSED. 
 
 
Ocular account in this case was based upon Muhammad 
Shabbir  Ahmad  (PW-19)  and  Muhammad  Munawar  (who  was 
not  produced  by  the  prosecution).  It  is  important  to  note  here 
that  though  Muhammad  Shabbir  Ahmad  complainant  claimed 
himself eye witness of the case but from a considerable distance 
comprising  upon  44  feet  and  that  too  in  the  darkness  of  night 
i.e.  at  9:30  p.m  and  only  in  the  lights  of  motorcycle  it  is  not 
possible to see or identify the assailants, reference in this regard 
is placed upon case reported as “Abid alias Rana vs. The State.” 
(2016 S C M R 1515). It is quite understandable that head light 
of  motorcycle  does  not  shower  rays  of  light  at  the  face  of  a 
standing  person  rather  it  only  throws  light  upon  to  its  own 
height from the ground i.e. two to three feet and so such source 
of light cannot be termed as sufficient for seeing the faces of the 
accused-persons.  Furthermore  when  in  Exh.PJ  (i.e.  application 
moved  by  Muhammad  Shabbir  Ahmad  complainant  for 
registration  of  the  case)  it  is  categorically  mentioned  that  two 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
9 
accused-persons  were  having  their  faces  half  muffled  and  the 
accused  who  has  allegedly  fired  sole  firearm  shot  at  the 
deceased  was  also  having  his  face  half  muffled  then  it  is 
absolutely  impossible  to  see  faces  of  those  accused-persons  in 
the peculiar circumstances of the case mentioned above.  
 
In  application  Exh.PJ  it  was  mentioned  that  all  the  four 
unknown  accused  were  healthy,  young  and  of  average  height 
but  specific  features  of  said  accused-persons  were  not 
mentioned therein i.e. complexion, shape of  the  face  including 
face  cuts,  etc.,  were  not  mentioned  therein,  meaning  thereby 
that  no  specific  feature  were  available  with  prosecution  which 
could  be  made  basis  for  subsequent  identification  of  the 
accused-persons.  
 
Nutshell  is  that  neither  there  was  any  chance  for 
identification  of  the  accused  at  the  place  of  occurrence  nor 
subsequently.  In  this  case,  no  identification  parade  was  held.  
So far as claim of the prosecution regarding identification of the 
accused-persons in Court is concerned, it is of no avail at all in 
peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case  as  mentioned  above, hence, 
identification  of  the  accused  in  this  case  could  not  be  proved 
and this aspect ipso facto smashed the case of the prosecution; 
Muhammad  Shabbir  Ahmad  (PW-19)  though  claimed  himself 
to  be  the  eye  witness  but  non  mentioning  of  his  name  in  the 
medico-legal report (Exh.PH) of Shahid Mehmod in the column 
of  “Name  of  accompanying  person  and  relationship”  casts 
doubt upon his claim of being eye witness.  
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
10 
 
Mobile  phone  and  motorcycle  of  the  deceased  remained 
there at the place of occurrence, motorcycle of the complainant 
and  household  articles  statedly  purchased  by  him  have  never 
been  produced  during 
investigation 
and 
furthermore 
accompanying  of  Abdul  Rehman  another  brother  of  Shahid 
Mehmood  with  him  at  the  time  of  medico-legal  examination 
and  not  of  Muhammad  Shabbir  Ahmad  complainant  negates 
presence of Muhammad Shabbir at the time of occurrence. The 
evidence  of  Muhammad  Shabbir  Ahmad  (PW-19)  even  could 
not  be  corroborated  by  Muhammad  Munawar  who  is  paternal 
brother  of  deceased  and  complainant  but  not  produced  and 
inference would go against the prosecution under Article 129(g) 
of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  It  is  also  important  to 
mention here that complainant did not receive any injury during 
the  occurrence  although  four  assailants  armed  with  weapon, 
were  alleged  to  have  made  firing  and  furthermore  no  empty 
could be secured from the place of occurrence, which fact also 
goes against the claim of Muhammad Shabbir Ahmad (PW-19) 
qua his presence at the spot.  It shows that either said spot is not 
place  of  occurrence  or  complainant  was  not  present  there,  and 
even otherwise complainant in the circumstances appears to be 
a  chance  witness.  Hence,  ocular  account  is  of  no  help  to  the 
case of prosecution. 
EXTRA JUDICIAL CONFESSION. 
 
Extra  judicial  confession  in  this  case  was  introduced  by 
the  prosecution  through  Naseer  ud  Din  (PW-12),  Asghar  Ali 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
11 
(PW-13),  Muhammad  Yousaf  (PW-14)  and  Ahsan  Kareem 
(PW-15).  Extra  judicial  confession  is  week  type  of  evidence 
and is usually introduced by the prosecution to protect its case, 
but  in  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  this  case  when  accused-
persons  made  extra 
judicial  confession 
they  were  not 
apprehended  and  even  no  attempt  was  made  in  this  regard, 
witnesses  of  so  called  extra  judicial  confession  were  not  of 
status  or  authority,  and  evidence  of  witnesses  of  extra  judicial 
confession  in  the  case  is  of  poor  quality  of  deposition.  This 
piece  of  evidence  has  even  been  introduced  at  much  belated 
stage and one set of witnesses of extra judicial confession PW-
14 and PW-15 have already not been relied by the learned trial 
Court in its judgment. Even otherwise, extra judicial confession 
introduced by the prosecution seems to be improbable and thus 
of no evidentiary value.  
JUDICIAL CONFESSION. 
 
In this case statement of Shamshad Ali accused/appellant 
has been got recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. before Sohail 
Anjum,  Judicial  Magistrate  PW-20  on  20.08.2008,  which  was 
recorded  on  oath  and  thus,  of  no  evidentiary  value,  reliance  is 
placed  upon  case  of  “Azeem  Khan  and  another  vs.  Mujahid 
Khan” (2016 S C M R 274). Even otherwise it was exculpatory 
in nature and retracted also. Furthermore weight is to be given 
to  the  statement  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  as  compared  to 
statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and in this regard reliance 
is  placed  upon  case  of  “Nasir  Mehmood  and  another  Vs.  The 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
12 
State,” (2015 S C M R 423). Hence this piece of evidence is of 
no help to the prosecution.  
RECOVERY. 
 
So far as recovery of pistol from Shamshad Ali, appellant 
is concerned, it is of no help to the prosecution case because no 
empty  was  secured  from  the  place  of  occurrence  and  report  of 
Forensic  Science  Laboratory  Exh.PAA  is  only  regarding 
working  order  of  the  pistol,  which  is  of  no  help  to  the  case  of 
the prosecution.    
MEDICAL. 
   
It is trite of law that medical evidence can only tell about 
seat  of  injury,  its  nature  and  weapon  use  for  causing  the  same 
but cannot identify its author, so in the peculiar circumstance of 
the  case,  medical  evidence  is  of  no  help  to  the  case  of 
prosecution.  
MOTIVE. 
 
Prosecution  firstly  claimed  it  as  a  targeted  killing  and 
thereafter murder during dacoity and thus, in this scenario this 
aspect  i.e.  motive  loses  its  significance.  It  is  particular  to 
mention  here  that  even  no  motive  was  mentioned  in  the  FIR. 
Even  while  considering  subsequent  version  of  the  prosecution 
that  it  was  a  murder  during dacoity, it  is  important  to  mention 
here  that  no  article  or  thing  has  allegedly  been  even  looted  or 
taken away. It is also particular to mention here that it has also 
 
 
Murder Reference No.194/2012 
Criminal Appeal No.705/2012 
13 
come  on  record  that  one  brother  of  deceased  was  already 
murdered. 
9.  
It is trite of law that prosecution has to stand on its own 
legs for proving the charge beyond any shadow of doubt but in 
the instant case prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond 
shadow of doubt, against the appellant.  
10. 
In  view  of  above,  instant  criminal  appeal  No.  705  of 
2012 filed by Shamshad Ali, (appellant) is hereby accepted and 
conviction  and  sentenced  awarded  to  the  appellant  vide 
judgment  dated:  31.03.2012  by  learned  Additional  Sessions 
Judge, Narowal is hereby set-aside. Murder Reference No. 194 
of  2012  answered 
in  negative.  The  appellant  shall  be 
immediately released if not involved in any other case.  
 
 
(Ch. Musthaq Ahmad) 
 
                            Judge 
 
 
    (Farooq Haider) 
 
     Judge 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
                            Judge 
 
 
 
 
     Judge 
 
*Atiq A.Nasir* 
 
