JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, 
MULTAN  
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Revision No. 42 of 2010 
(Liaqat Masih v. The State) 
 
DATE OF 
HEARING 
Petitioner 
by: 
State by: 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
18.12.2018 
Ch. Umar Hayat, Advocate  
Mr. Muhammad Ahsan-ul-Haq, Deputy 
District Public Prosecutor  
TARIQ  SALEEM  SHEIKH,  J.  –  This  revision  petition 
under  Sections  435/439  Cr.P.C.  is  directed  against  judgment  dated 
16.1.2010 passed by  the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Sahiwal, 
whereby  conviction  and  sentence  awarded  to  the  Petitioner  by  the 
learned  Magistrate  Section  30,  Sahiwal,  in  case  FIR  No.  365/1998 
dated 8.11.1998 registered at Police Station Harappa, District Sahiwal, 
for offences under Sections 320, 279, 427 PPC was upheld.   
2.  
Brief facts of the case are that on 8.11.1998 Liaqat Ali/ASI 
(PW-6) along with other police officials was present near the Harappa 
Railway  Station  when  Muhammad  Irshad  (PW-1)  made  a  statement 
before him  to  the effect that on the same  day  at  about 11:50  a.m. he 
along with Iftikhar Ahmad (PW-2) and Muhammad Siddique (PW-3) 
was present at Chowk 4/10-L, Harappa By-pass. In the meanwhile, his 
cousin Mukhtar Ahmad came from village on his Yamaha motorcycle 
No.SLH-9702  and  went  towards  Chowk 4/10-L. He had  gone  only  a 
few  paces  when  Hilux  Pick-up  No.SLF-5696,  which  was  being 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
2 
 
 
negligently  and  rashly  driven  by  Petitioner  Liaqat  Masih,  collided 
with him. As a result, Mukhtar Ahmad fell on the road and sustained a 
head  injury  and  his  motorcycle‟s  front  portion  was  totally  smashed. 
The Petitioner sped away from the scene. The Complainant and PWs 
Iftikhar  Ahmad  and  Muhammad  Siddique  rushed  him  to  the  Civil 
Hospital  Sahiwal  but  he  succumbed  to  his  injury  on  the  way.  Liaqat 
Ali/ASI  (PW-6)  reduced  the  Complainant‟s  statement  to  writing 
(Exh.PA)  and  despatched  the  same  to  police  station  through  Zakir 
Hussain  937/C  for  registration  of  case.  Muhammad  Amjad  1056/C 
(PW-7)  received  the  said  complaint  and  drew  up  FIR  No.365/1998 
(Exh.PA/1) the same day at 1:50 p.m. 
3.  
The investigation of the case was also entrusted to Liaqat 
Ali/ASI (PW-6). He reached the place of occurrence, prepared Injury 
Statement  and  Inquest  Report  of  Mukhtar  Ahmad  deceased  and 
despatched  the  death  body  for  autopsy.  Then  he  secured  motorcycle 
P-1  vide  Recovery  Memo  Exh.PB,  prepared  rough  site  plan  of  the 
place of occurrence Exh.PF and recorded statements of the witnesses 
under Section  161  Cr.P.C. On  11.11.1998, the  Petitioner surrendered 
before  him  and  also  produced  Hilux  Pick-up  P-2  which  he  took  into 
possession  vide  Recovery  Memo  Exh.PC.  During  the  investigation 
Liaqat  Ali/ASI  found  that  the  Petitioner  had  committed  the  offence. 
Report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. was submitted accordingly.  
4.  
On  12.9.2000,  the  learned  Magistrate  indicted  the 
Petitioner under Sections 279, 320 & 427 PPC. He denied the charge 
and claimed trial. In order to prove its case the prosecution examined 
seven  witnesses.  Complainant  Muhammad  Irshad  (PW-1),  Iftikhar 
Ahmad (PW-2) and Muhammad Siddique (PW-3) provided the ocular 
account.  Arshad  Ali  (PW-4)  testified  about  the  seizure  of  Yamaha 
motorcycle  No.  SLH-9702  and  Hilux  Pick-up  No.  SLF-5696.           
Dr. Muhammad Tahir Mehmood (PW-5) furnished medical evidence. 
The Investigating Officer, Liaqat Ali/ASI (PW-6), gave details of his 
investigation  and  the  evidence  he  collected  in  this  case.  Muhammad 
Amjad  1056/C  (PW-7)  was  a  formal  witness.  On  the  close  of  the 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
3 
 
 
prosecution  evidence  the  Petitioner  was  examined under  Section 342 
Cr.P.C.  He  denied  the  allegations  and  stated  that  he  did  not  know 
anything about the incident. He neither got his statement recorded on 
oath  under  Section  340(2)  Cr.P.C.  nor  produced  any  evidence  in  his 
defence.  On  the  conclusion  of  the  trial,  vide  judgment  dated 
15.5.2009,  the  learned  Magistrate  acquitted  the  Petitioner  of  the 
charge under Section 427 PPC holding that the prosecution could not 
produce  any  evidence  in  that  respect.  However,  he  convicted  and 
sentenced him under Sections 279 & 320 PPC as under: 
           
a)  Under Section 279 PPC:  
 
 
 
 
 
Sentenced to simple imprisonment for three months.  
b)  Under Section 320 PPC:  
 
Sentenced to simple imprisonment for two years and to pay Diyat (as 
per law) to the legal heirs of Mukhtar Ahmad deceased.  
  Both  the  sentences  were  ordered  to  run  concurrently  and  benefit  of 
Section 382-B Cr.P.C. was extended to the Petitioner.  
5.  
The  Petitioner  preferred  appeal  against 
the  above-
mentioned  judgment  while  the  Complainant  filed  a  revision  petition 
for  enhancement  of  his  sentence.  The  learned  Additional  Sessions 
Judge,  Sahiwal,  dismissed  both  the  appeal  and  the  revision  petition 
and  maintained  the  conviction  and  sentence  handed  down  to  the 
Petitioner by the learned Magistrate. Hence, this petition.  
6.  
The learned counsel for the Petitioner contended that there 
was  not  an  iota  of  evidence  which  could  prove  that  it  was  the 
Petitioner who was driving the Hilux Pick-up when the accident took 
place. At the time when FIR Exh.PA/1 was registered it was inchoate. 
Space was left blank for the name of the accused which was filled in 
subsequently  with that  of  the  Petitioner. This  reflected  mala fides on 
the  part  of  the  prosecution  and  showed  that  he  had  been  falsely 
implicated  in  this  case.  He  further  contended  that  Complainant 
Muhammad  Irshad  (PW-1),  Iftikhar  Ahmad  (PW-2)  and  Muhammad 
Siddique  (PW-3)  were  not  the  eyewitnesses  of  the  accident  and  the 
prosecution had planted them. Lastly, even if it was assumed that the 
Petitioner  was  at  the  wheel  at  the  time  of  accident  there  was  no 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
4 
 
 
evidence that he was driving the pick-up rashly or negligently which 
was  the  basic  ingredient  of  the  offences  under  Sections  279  and  320 
PPC.  The 
learned  counsel  emphasized 
that 
there  was  gross 
misreading/non-reading  of  evidence  by  the  Courts  below  which  had 
caused miscarriage of justice. In support of his submissions he relied 
upon  Terence  Anthony  D’  Casta  v.  The  State  (1969  PCr.LJ  1228), 
Muhammad  Bakhsh  v.  The  State  (1976  PCr.LJ  405),  Muhammad 
Akhtar  v.  The  State  (1980  PCr.LJ  103),  and  Muhammad  Sarwar  v. 
The State (1995 PCr.LJ 1152).  
7.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  learned  Deputy  District  Public 
Prosecutor  vehemently  opposed  this  petition  and  supported  the 
judgments passed by the Courts below.  
8.  
9.  
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
The  accident  in  which  Mukhtar  Ahmad  lost  his  life  took 
place  near  Chowk  4/10-L,  Harappa  By-pass,  at  about  11:50  a.m.  on 
8.11.1998. The prosecution case is that it all happened because of rash 
and negligent driving of the Petitioner. The learned courts below have 
recorded  a  conviction  against  him  under Section  279  PPC as  well  as 
Section 320 PPC. The first question before this Court is whether  this 
is legally correct.  
10.  
Section 279 PPC reads as under: 
 
279. Rash driving or riding on a public way: Whoever drives any 
vehicle, or rides, on any public way in a manner so rash or negligent 
as  to  endanger  human  life  or  to  be  likely  to  cause  hurt  or  injury  to 
any  other  person,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  either 
description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  two  years  or  with  fine 
which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both. 
This section is attracted where – 
i)  a person drives a vehicle or rides on a public way;  
ii)  such driving or riding must be rash or negligent, and  
iii) it should endanger human life or is  likely to  cause hurt or injury to 
any person.  
On the other hand, Section 320 PPC stipulates: 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
5 
 
 
 
320.  Punishment  for  qatl-i-khata  by  rash  or  negligent  driving: 
Whoever  commits  qatl-i-khata  by  rash  or  negligent  driving  shall, 
having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, in addition 
to  Diyat,  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a 
term which may extend to ten years. 
This section is attracted where – 
i)  a  person  causes  the  death  of  some  other  person  either  by  some 
mistake as contemplated in Section 318 PPC; 
ii)  there  is  no  intention  to  cause  the  death  of  the  said  person  or  cause 
him harm, and  
iii) the death is caused by rash or negligent driving.  
11.  
A  bare  reading  of  the  above-mentioned  two  provisions 
would show that they apply to two different situations. An offence is 
committed under Section 279 PPC where the rash or negligent driving 
or ride on a public way endangers human life but where such driving 
causes  death  of  a  person,  Section  320  PPC  would  be  attracted.  The 
offender cannot legally be convicted under Sections 279 PPC and 320 
PPC  simultaneously.  In  Santa  Prasad  Singh  v.  Thakur  Harkishore 
Prasad  Singh  (AIR  1939  Patna  389),  a  Division  Bench  of  the  Patna 
High Court ruled that “imposition of separate sentences would not be 
justified  where  the  acts  constituting  two  different  offences  form  part 
of  the  same  transaction  against  the  same  accused.”  The  dictum  laid 
down  in  the  Ragho  Prasad‟s  case  was  followed  in  Badshahzada  v. 
The  State  (1993  PCr.LJ  699),  Haris  Khan  v.  The  State  (PLD  1993 
Peshawar  146),  and  Muhammad  Hanif  v.  The  State  (1984  PCr.LJ 
746).   In the  instant  case, since the  accident took  place  and Mukhtar 
Ahmad was killed, Section 279 does not apply and the offence would 
squarely  fall  within  the  ambit  of  Section  320  PPC.  Therefore,  the 
Petitioner‟s conviction and sentence under Section 279 PPC is illegal.  
12.  
Before I proceed to examine the other questions that arise 
in  this  case  it  is  necessary  to  notice  the  law  relating  to  rash  and 
negligent driving.  
13.  
Merriam-Webster‟s  Dictionary  of  Law  (2nd  Printing 
Harrisonburg, VA December 2016) defines “negligence” as “failure to 
exercise the degree of care expected of a person of ordinary prudence 
in  like  circumstances  in  protecting  others  from  a  foreseeable  and 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
6 
 
 
unreasonable risk of harm in a particular situation.” The Corpus Juris 
Secundum (Volume 65, pp. 281-82) writes: 
 
is  characterized  by 
“Negligence 
inadvertence,  heedlessness, 
thoughtlessness,  inattention,  and  the  like.  It  is  a  wrong  which 
constitutes a ground of legal liability. While negligence is predicated 
on  want  of  care,  and  liability  therefor  is  based  on  a  want  of  proper 
care, negligence is not the want of all care. Negligence may result in 
a variety of ways, but it is ordinarily the result of carelessness, and is 
characterized  chiefly  by  inadvertence,  thoughtlessness,  inattention, 
and the like. Negligence is inconsistent with the exercise of ordinary 
care….  Negligence  is  not  a  fact  in  itself  but  is  the  legal  result  of 
certain facts. It need not arise from ownership, operation, or control; 
it  can  arise  from  breach  of  duty  towards  the  plaintiff….  Liability 
rests  not  on  the  ground  of  danger  but  on  the  ground  of  negligence. 
Danger  of  itself  is  not  negligence,  and  the  fact  that  one  performs  a 
dangerous act does not legally result in the conclusion that such act 
was negligent.” 
14.  
The Corpus Juris Secundum further states that in criminal 
law  “culpable  negligence”  involves  a  reckless  disregard  for  the  lives 
or  safety  of  others  and  is  negligence  of  a  higher  degree  than  that 
required to establish liability on a mere civil issue. To make a case of 
culpable  negligence  in  a  criminal  prosecution,  simple  negligence  is 
not sufficient; there must be that degree of negligence or carelessness 
which  is  denominated  as  “gross”  and  which  constitutes  such  a 
departure from what would be the conduct of an ordinarily careful and 
prudent person under the same circumstances as to furnish evidence of 
indifference  to  consequences.”  It  adds:  “  „culpable  negligence‟  and 
„gross negligence‟ are not necessarily synonymous although culpable 
negligence  might  be gross negligence  and  gross negligence  might be 
culpable negligence. The difference between culpable negligence and 
gross  negligence  is  that  culpable  negligence  is  more  than  gross 
negligence while both are very high degrees of negligence, the former 
involves  the  idea  of  recklessness  and  the  latter  does  not.”  (pages    
294-95). 
15.  
Halsbury‟s Laws of England (Fourth Edition), Volume 34, 
(p.3), explains “negligence” as follows: 
 
“Negligence in any given circumstances is the failure to exercise that 
care which the  circumstances demand. What  amounts to negligence 
depends  on  the  facts  of  each  particular  case.  It  may  consist  in 
omitting  to  do  something  which  ought  to  be  done  or  in  doing 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
 
 
7 
something which ought to be done either in a different manner or not 
at  all.  Where  there  is  no  duty  to  exercise  care,  negligence  in  the 
popular  sense  has  no  legal  consequence.  Where  there  is  a  duty  to 
exercise  care,  reasonable  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  acts  or 
omissions  which  can  be  reasonably  foreseen  to  be  likely  to  cause 
physical injury to persons or property. The degree of care required in 
the  particular  case  depends  on  the  surrounding  circumstances,  and 
may vary according to the amount of the risk to be encountered and 
to the magnitude of the prospective injury. The duty of care is owed 
only to those persons who are in the area of foreseeable danger; the 
fact that the act of the defendant violated his duty of care to a third 
person does not enable the plaintiff who is also injured by the same 
act  to  claim  unless he is  also  within the area of  foreseeable danger. 
The  same  act  or  omission  may  accordingly  in  some  circumstances 
involve liability as being negligent, although in other circumstances 
it will not do so. The material considerations are the absence of care 
which  is  on  the  part  of  the  defendant  owed  to  the  plaintiff  in  the 
circumstances  of  the  case  and  damage  suffered  by  the  plaintiff, 
together  with  a  demonstrable  relation  of  cause  and  effect  between 
the two.”  
16.  
In contrast, a “rash” act is defined as an over-hasty act. It is 
“doing  something  quickly  and  without  thinking  carefully  about  what 
will happen as a result”.11It is used in contra-distinction to a deliberate 
act and is usually reckoned as a synonym of “reckless” and “careless”. 
In  Muhammed  Aynuddin  alias  Miyam  v.  State  of  Andhra  Pradesh 
(AIR 2000 SC 2511), the Supreme Court of India observed:  
 
“A  rash  act  is  primarily  an  over  hasty  act.  It  is  opposed  to  a 
deliberate act. Still a rash act can be a deliberate act in the sense that 
it was done without due care  and caution. Culpable rashness lies in 
running  the  risk  of  doing  an  act  with  recklessness  and  with 
indifference  as  to  the  consequences.  Criminal  negligence  is  the 
failure  to  exercise  duty  with  reasonable  and  proper  care  and 
precaution  guarding  against  injury  to  the  public  generally  or  to  any 
individual  in  particular.  It  is  the  imperative  duty  of  the  driver  of  a 
vehicle to adopt such reasonable and proper care and precaution.” 
17.  
In  Empress  of  India  v.  Idu  Beg  [1881  (3)  All  776], 
Straight  J.  explained  the  meaning  of  criminal  rashness  and  criminal 
negligence in the following words: “Criminal rashness is hazarding a 
dangerous or  wanton  act  with  the knowledge  that it is  so, and  that  it 
may cause injury but without intention to cause injury, or knowledge 
that it will probably be caused. The criminality lies in running the risk 
of  doing  such  an  act  with  recklessness  or  indifference  as  to  the 
consequences.  Criminal  negligence  is  the  gross  and  culpable  neglect 
or failure to exercise that reasonable and proper care and precaution to 
                                           
1.1
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
8 
 
 
guard against injury either to the public  generally or to an individual 
in  particular  which,  having  regard  to  all  the  circumstances  out  of 
which the charge has arisen, it was the imperative duty of the accused 
person  to  have  adopted.”  This  meaning  of  criminal  rashness  and 
criminal negligence is widely accepted even today.  
18. 
The legal principles for determining culpability in cases of 
rash and negligent driving are more or less well-established. Some of 
the  doctrines  falling  in  the  realm  of  accidental  civil  or  tortuous 
jurisprudence are also applicable to crimes. They may be summarized 
as follows:*2 
 
 
 
 
 
i) 
ii) 
Rash  and  negligent  driving  has  to  be  examined  in  the  light  of  the 
facts  and  circumstances  of  a  given  case.  It  is  a  fact  incapable  of 
being construed or seen in isolation. It must be examined in the light 
of the attendant circumstances. A person who drives a vehicle on the 
road  is  liable  to  be  held  responsible  for  the  act  as  well  as  for  the 
result. [2]3 
Speed  of  a  vehicle  may  not  always  be  the  determining  factor  to 
prove rashness and negligence. A person driving a motor vehicle at 
the  speed  of  say  20  miles  an  hour  on  a  road  on  which  children  of 
small  ages  are  running  about  would  be  rash  and  negligent.  But  the 
same would not be true  in  the case of  a highway even if he was to 
drive at the speed of 70 miles an hour. The criterion, in nutshell, in 
all such cases is  whether upon the evidence on record a person can 
be  said  to  have  been  driving  with  due  care  and  caution  or  else  had 
been negligent i.e. had omitted to do something which a reasonable 
man,  guided  by  the  considerations  which  ordinarily  regulate  the 
conduct  of  human  affairs  would  do,  or  done  something  which  a 
prudent and reasonable man would not do.[3]4 
iii) 
In determining the question of negligence or contributory negligence 
the  Court  should  apply  the  parameter  of  “reasonable  care”.  The 
doctrine  of  reasonable  care  imposes  an  obligation  or  a  duty  upon  a 
person (for example a driver) to care for the pedestrians on the road 
and this duty attains a higher degree when the pedestrians happen to 
be children of tender years.[4]5 
iv)  When two persons on the highway are so moving in relation to one 
another as to involve risk of collision, each owes to the other a duty 
to  move  with  due  care,  and  this  is  true  whether  they  are  both  in 
control of vehicle or both proceeding on foot, or whether one is  on 
foot and the other controlling a moving vehicle.[5]6 
v)  Drivers of vehicles or riders should keep well to the left side of the 
highway  unless  road  signs  or  markings  indicate  otherwise,  or  they 
                                           
* reproduced in the language of the court/author. 
2. Ravi Kapur v. State of Rajasthan (AIR 2012 SC 2986 =2013 SCMR 480). 
3. Terence Anthony D‟ Casta v. The State (1969 PCr.LJ 1228), State through Advocate General, N.W.F.P. v. Mohib Gul 
[PLJ 1974 Cr.C. (Pesh) 586], Muhammad Akhtar v. The State (1980 PCr.LJ 103), Muhammad Sarwar v. The State 
(1995 PCr.LJ 1152), Ali Muhammad v. The State (2001 YLR 3313), Farman Ullah v. The State and others (2007 
PCr.LJ 1393).   
4.Ravi Kapur v. State of Rajasthan, ibid.  
5.Halsbury‟s Laws of England (Fifth Edition) Volume 78 p.64 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
9 
 
 
 
 
are about to overtake or turn right, or have to pass stationary vehicles 
or pedestrians in the road. If two motor vehicles collide in the centre 
of the road, the inference is, in the absence of evidence enabling the 
court to draw any other conclusion, that both drivers were equally to 
blame; and it is not a proper decision to hold that, in the absence of 
evidence enabling the blame to be fixed upon one driver or the other, 
no sufficient case has been established against either.[6]7 
vi)  There is an obligation to take special care at cross roads. The driver 
of a vehicle which approaches a major road from a side road ought 
to  give way to  traffic on the major road, but  the driver of a vehicle 
on  the  major  road  is  not  absolved  from  the  duty  of  taking  care  to 
avoid  collision  with  a  vehicle  emerging  from  a  side  road.  Where 
there  is  a  collision  at  cross  roads  of  equal  status,  there  is  a  guiding 
rule that the vehicle which has the other on its right hand side must 
give way. The driver of a vehicle in general owes no duty to traffic 
entering  a  light-controlled  crossing  against  the  lights.  However,  a 
driver has no absolute right to enter a road junction merely because 
the lights  have turned in his  favour; he is  bound  to  ensure that it is 
safe for him to do so.[7]8 
vii)  Driving a defective vehicle where the defect might reasonably have 
been discovered is  a negligent  act.  It  is  negligent to  leave a vehicle 
unattended either on a slope where it runs down of itself, or in such 
special circumstances that the mischievous intervention of a stranger 
to  restart  it  should  have  been  foreseen.  To  leave  a  horse  and  cart 
unattended on the highway may be evidence of negligence. To leave 
a  vehicle  without  lights  in  a  dark  road  is  prima  facie  evidence  of 
negligence.[8]9 
            viii)  It is a wrong presumption that for any motor accident negligence of 
the  driver  should  be  presumed.  An  accident  of  such  a  nature  as 
would prima facie show that it cannot be accounted to anything other 
than  the  negligence  of  the  driver  of  the  vehicle  may  create  a 
presumption  and  in  such  a  case  the  driver  has  to  explain  how  the 
accident happened without negligence on his part.[9]10  
 
 
 
ix) 
x) 
In appropriate cases the doctrine of res ipsa loquitor may be pressed 
into  service.  This  principle  which  is  a  rule  of  evidence  determines 
the onus of proof in actions relating to negligence. The said principle 
has  application  only  when  the  nature  of  the  accident  and  the 
attending  circumstances  would  reasonably  lead  to  the  belief  that  in 
the absence of negligence the accident would not have occurred and 
the  thing  which  caused  injury  is  shown  to  have  been  under  the 
management and control of the alleged wrongdoer. [10]11 
In order to be held to have acted negligently, it is not necessary that 
the actor be fully aware of a perceived risk and recklessly disregard 
it; it is only required that, under the circumstances, the actor should 
have been aware of the risk and that his or her failure to perceive it 
was  a  gross  deviation  from  the  care  a  reasonable,  prudent  person 
would have exercised under those circumstances.[11]12 
xi)  An intentional, willful, or wanton violation of a statute or ordinance, 
designed for the protection of human life or limb, which proximately 
                                           
6. Halsbury‟s Laws of England (Fifth Edition) Volume 78 p.65  
7. Halsbury‟s Laws of England (Fifth Edition) Volume 78 p.67  
8. Halsbury‟s Laws of England (Fifth Edition) Volume 78 p.68 
9.Mohammad Aynuddin alias Miyam v. State of Andhra Pradesh (AIR 2000 SC 2511).   
10. Mohammad Aynuddin alias Miyam v. State of Andhra Pradesh (AIR 2000 SC 2511) and Ravi Kapur v. State of    
Rajasthan (AIR 2012 SC 2986).  
11. Corpus Juris Secundum (Edition:2010) Volume 65A p.913. 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
 
 
10 
results in injury or death, is culpable negligence, as is an inadvertent 
violation  of  a  prohibitory  statute  or  ordinance  accompanied  by 
recklessness  of  the  probable  consequences  of  a  dangerous  nature, 
when  tested  by  the  rule  of  reasonable  prevision,  amounting 
altogether  to  a  thoughtless  disregard  of  the  consequences  or  a 
heedless  indifference  to  the  safety  of  others,  if  injury  or  death 
proximately ensue.[12]13  
19.  
In  the  context  of  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code,  1860,  Section 
318 defines Qatl-i-Khata as an offence where one causes the death of 
another  either  by  mistake  of  act  or  by  mistake  of  fact  without  any 
intention  to  cause  or  harm  to  that  person.  Section  320  provides 
punishment for  Qatl-i-Khata by rash or negligent driving. As against 
this,  Qatl-bis-Sabab  has  been  defined  by  Section  321  as  an  offence 
where  the  one  responsible  for  the  death  of  another  had  no  intention 
but  it  was  occasioned  as  a  result  of  his  unlawful  act.  It  follows  that 
where the accused does not possess a valid licence he would be acting 
unlawfully  if  he  drives  a  vehicle.  Therefore,  if  he  causes  death  of 
anybody by negligently or rashly while driving, the offence would fall 
within  the  ambit  of  Section  320.  The  position  would,  however,  be 
different where he has the licence and in that eventuality Section 322 
would be attracted. Reference in this regard may be usefully made to 
Munir Hussain v. The State (1994 PCr.LJ 406) and Atta Muhammad 
v.  The  State  (2005  PCr.LJ  1648).  It  may  be  added  that  the  offence 
would fall in the category of Qatl-i-Amd if a person hits another with 
his  vehicle  with  the  intention  of  causing  death  or  drives  on  a  public 
way rashly or negligently with the knowledge that such driving is so 
dangerous  that  it  would  in  all  probability  cause  an  accident  and  it 
results  in  death.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Abdullah  v.  The  State  (2001 
PCr.LJ  1548)  and  Muhammad  Latif  v.  The  State  and  others  (PLD 
2018 Lahore 423).   
20.  
It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  here  that  in  our 
country  it  is  quite  frequent  that  after  the  accident  the  driver  of  the 
vehicle  who  is  responsible  for  it  manages  to  flee  from  the  scene.  In 
such cases the investigating agency should not only trace him but the 
prosecution should prove his identity during the trial.  
                                           
12. Corpus Juris Secundum (Edition:2010) Volume 65 p.295. 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
 
 
21.  
Now I turn to the case in hand. The ocular account of the 
11 
accident  was  furnished  by  Complainant  Muhammad  Irshad  (PW-1), 
Iftikhar  Ahmad  (PW-2)  and  Muhammad  Siddique  (PW-3).  They 
deposed that on 8.11.1998 at 11:50 a.m.  they were present at Chowk 
4/10-L,  Harappa  By-pass,  when  Hilux  Pick-up  No.  SLF-5696  driven 
by the Petitioner collided with the motorcycle of Mukhtar Ahmad who 
sustained  head  injury.  The  Medical  Officer,  Dr.  Muhammad  Tahir 
Mehmood  (PW-5),  confirmed  that  the  cause  of  his  death  was  that 
injury.  It  is  observed  that  the  accident  took  place  on  8.11.1998  at 
11:50  a.m.  Complainant  Muhammad  Irshad  (PW-1)  reported  the 
matter to the police at 1:20 p.m. and FIR No. 365/1998 Exh.PA/1 was 
registered at 1:50 p.m. Keeping in view the fact that the police station 
was  nine  kilometres  from  the  crime  scene,  the  FIR  was  lodged  quite 
promptly.  However,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  contends 
that space was initially left blank for the name of the accused and the 
Petitioner‟s name was inserted later on. This contention has weight for 
a  number  of  reasons.  Firstly,  FIR  Exh.PA/1  shows  interpolations 
which  are  visible  even  to  the  naked  eye.  Secondly,  perusal  of  the 
Inquest  Report  Exh.PE  reflects  that  when  the  Investigating  Officer 
drew  it  up  the  identity  of  the  person  who  drove  Hilux  Pick-up  No. 
SLF/5696  which  hit  Mukhtar  Ahmad  deceased  was  still  not  known. 
The  Inquest  Report  is  prepared  under  Chapter  25,  Rule  35  of  the 
Police Rules, 1934, in every case of unnatural death and has immense 
importance  which  was  appreciated  by  this  Court  in  Ahmad  Nawaz 
and  others  v.  The  State  and  others  (2016  PCr.LJ  1267)  and  the 
Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  Muhammad  Ilyas  v. 
Muhammad Abid alias Billa and others (2017 SCMR 54). It not only 
provides a resume of the case and an overview of the crime scene but 
helps  check  subsequent  fabrication  of  record.  Thirdly,  it  is  the 
prosecution‟s own case that the delinquent driver fled from the scene 
immediately after the collision. Admittedly, he was not known to the 
Complainant  and  PWs  Iftikhar  Ahmad  and  Muhammad  Siddique. 
There  is  no  evidence  how  they  learnt his  name.  None  of  the  persons 
who may have given them information was examined at the trial. All 
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
12 
 
 
these  factors  create  serious  doubt  about  the  involvement  of  the 
Petitioner in this case.  
22.  
The presence of Complainant Muhammad Irshad and PWs 
Iftikhar Ahmad and Muhammad Siddique at the place of occurrence at 
the  relevant  time  is  also  not  free  from  doubt.  The  Complainant 
deposed  that  they  all  owned  land  near  Chowk  4/10-L  and  had 
gathered in his field. However, neither during the investigation nor at 
the trial the witnesses produced any document which could prove that 
they had any property there. They did not disclose the purpose of their 
assembly either. More importantly, there are material contradictions in 
the  prosecution  evidence.  The  Complainant  deposed  that  he  along 
with  PWs  Iftikhar  Ahmad  and  Muhammad  Siddique  rushed  Mukhtar 
Ahmad  to  the  hospital  after  the  accident.  In  their  cross-examination 
the  PWs  denied  having  accompanied  him.  Further,  the  Complainant 
testified that Mukhtar Ahmad died on way to the hospital. In contrast, 
Dr.  Muhammad  Tahir  Mehmood  (PW-5)  stated  that  his  death  was 
instantaneous  because  the  entire  brain  matter  had  come  out.  This  is 
not  all.  The  conduct  of  the  witnesses  was  contrary  to  normal  human 
behaviour. It was unnatural for PWs Iftikhar Ahmad and Muhammad 
Siddique  not  to  accompany  the  victim  to  the  hospital  and  for  the 
Complainant  to  turn  back  half-way  on  discovering  that  he  had 
expired.  
23.  
Lastly, the factum of rash and negligent driving is also not 
proved. The witnesses only alleged that the Hilux Pick-up was being 
driven  at  a  high  speed.  There  is  no  evidence  that  when  the  incident 
happened,  the  condition  of  the  traffic  or  the  road  was  such  that  the 
driver  was  required  to  drive  the  vehicle  slowly. Moreover, it  has  not 
been shown that he had violated any traffic rules. In this view of the 
matter,  even  if  it  is  admitted  that  the  driver  was  driving  it  at  a  high 
speed, no  element  of  rashness  or  negligence  in  his  conduct  has  been 
established.  
Crl.Rev.No.42/2010 
 
 
24.  
For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  I  hold  that  the 
13 
prosecution has  failed to prove its  case  against  the  Petitioner beyond 
reasonable  doubt.  Resultantly,  this  revision  petition  is  accepted.  His 
conviction and sentence are set aside and he is acquitted of the charge. 
During  the  pendency  of  this  petition  his  sentence  was  suspended  by 
this  Court  and  he  was  released  on  bail  vide  order  dated  21.4.2010 
passed in Crl.Misc. No.2/2010. His surety is discharged.  
 
 
      
(TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH) 
      JUDGE  
 
 
ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON ___________  
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
JUDGE  
Judge  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      *M.Khalid* 
 
