 
Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
(Saeed Akbar Khan vs. The State, etc.) 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing: 
 
 
 
31.05.2018       
 
Appellant by: 
Mr. Shahid Azeem, Advocate  
State by: 
Ch.  Muhammad  Jahangir  Wahla, 
Deputy Attorney General. 
Complainant by: 
Mr.  Muhammad  Ahsan  Bhoon, 
Advocate. 
SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI, J:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saeed  Akbar  Khan  son  of  Ghulam  Akbar  Khan,  caste  Balouch, 
resident  of  village  Niwani,  Tehsil  and  District  Bhakkar,  appellant 
along with Dr. Ayyaz Ahmed Gulzar (since acquitted) was involved in 
case FIR No.193/2002, dated 02.11.2002, offence under Sections 468, 
471,  474,  476,  PPC,  read  with  Section  82  of  the  Representation  of 
People Act, 1976, registered at Police Station City Bhakkar. He was 
tried  by  learned  Sessions  Judge  Bhakkar  under  the  afore-mentioned 
offences.  The  learned  trial  court  seized  with  the  matter  in  terms  of 
judgment dated 21.01.2014  convicted and sentenced the appellant as 
under:- 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
2 
 
  Under  Section  468,  PPC,  sentenced  to  undergo  R.I.  for 
five years with fine of Rs.5,00,000/- and in case of default 
in payment of fine, to further undergo S.I. for six months. 
  Under  Section  471  read  with  Section  465,  PPC, 
sentenced  to  undergo  R.I.  for  two  years  with  fine  of 
Rs.1,00,000/-  and  in  case  of  default  in  payment  thereof, 
to further undergo S.I. for two months. 
  Under  Section  82  read  with  Section  78  of 
the 
Representation  of  People  Act,  1976,  sentenced 
to 
undergo R.I. for three years with fine of Rs.5,000/- and in 
case  of  default  in  payment  thereof  to  undergo  S.I.  for 
fifteen days. 
  All  the  sentences  inflicted  upon  the  appellant  were 
directed  to  run  concurrently and benefit of Section  382-
B, Cr.P.C. was also extended in his favour. 
2. 
 
Feeling  aggrieved  by  the  judgment  of  the  learned  trial 
court, the appellant has assailed his conviction and sentence through 
filing the instant appeal. 
3. 
 
Prosecution  story  as  portrayed  in  the  FIR  (Exh.PD) 
lodged on the complaint (Exh.PA) of Ghazanfar Abbas Chheena (PW-
8) is that to contest General Elections 2002 the appellant had filed his 
nomination papers on 24.08.2002 as a Candidate for PP-49, Bhakkar-
III.  The  nomination  papers  filed  before  the  Returning  Officer  were 
accompanied by a fake B.A. degree under Roll No.48567 of the year 
1976  having  registration  No.76-z-224.  The  complainant,  however, 
averred  that  the  total  strength  of  students  appearing  in  the  B.A. 
Examination  in  1976  was  31230  while  registration  No.76-z-224  was 
allotted  to  one  Ishfaq  Ahmed.  The  complainant  alleged  that  Saeed 
Akbar  was  having  qualification  of  F.A.  while 
the  copy  of 
fake/fictitious  degree  was  attested  by  Dr.  Ayyaz  Ahmed  Gulzar, 
District  Officer  (Livestock),  Bhakkar  with  his  connivance  while 
accused  Ghulam  Ali  resident  of  Haider  Abad,  Tehsil  Mankera, 
District  Bhakkar  was  proposer  while  accused  Ghulam  Qamber 
resident  of  Haider  Abad,  Tehsil  Mankera,  District  Bhakkar  had 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
3 
 
supported him. On 26.08.2002, the complainant moved an application 
before  the  Returning  Officer  on  which  the  accused  withdrew  his 
nomination  papers.  Subsequently  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge 
passed direction for registration of the case.  
4. 
 
The  complainant  along  with  his  complaint  and  original 
letters  No.442/A  and  443/A  dated  31.10.2002  of  learned  Additional 
Sessions Judge, appeared before Makhdoom Altaf Hussain, Inspector 
(PW-2)  DPO  Office,  Bhakkar,  who  after  endorsing  police  karvai 
transmitted  the  same  to  Police  Station  on  the  presentation  of  which 
Muhammad Arshad, ASI (PW-1), chalked out formal FIR. Thereafter 
investigation was entrusted to Aftab Ullah Khan, DSP (PW-4), who on 
19.04.2003 wrote a letter (Exh.PE) to the Controller of Examination, 
University  of  the  Punjab,  for  verification  of  B.A.  Degree  and  vide 
letter  No.685/C,  dated  31.05.2003  (Exh.PT)  it  was  replied  that  the 
same was bogus.  
5. 
 
It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  during  the  course  of 
investigation  the  Investigating  Officer  prepared  cancellation  report, 
however, the same was disagreed by the learned Magistrate Section-
30,  Bhakkar  vide  order  dated  14.07.2008.  The  order  of  learned 
Magistrate  was  assailed  through  filing  Writ  Petition  No.9607/2008; 
wherein  vide  order  dated  09.07.2009  the  same  was  allowed  and  the 
matter  was  remanded back to the learned Magistrate to  pass  a fresh 
order.  During 
the  proceedings  before 
learned  Magistrate  on 
17.03.2010  both  the  parties  were  afforded  hearing,  however,  the 
learned  court  below  while  disagreeing  with  the  cancellation  report 
directed the local police to submit report under Section 173, Cr.P.C, 
which  was  submitted  before  the  court  of  competent  jurisdiction.  The 
learned  trial  court  formally  charge  sheeted  the  accused  vide  order 
dated  31.05.2013  to  which  he  pleaded  not  guilty  and  claimed  trial. 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
4 
 
Prosecution  in  order  to  substantiate  its  case  produced  as  many  as 
eight (8) prosecution witnesses. 
6. 
 
Ghulam Abbas Chheena (PW-8) is the complainant of the 
case. Raja Zahoor Ahmed, Additional Sessions Judge (PW-5) was the 
Returning Officer at the relevant time. Muhammad Arshad, ASI (PW-
1)  had  chalked  out  formal  FIR  while  investigation  in  this  case  was 
conducted  by  Makhdoom  Altaf  Hussain,  Inspector  (PW-2)  and  Aftab 
Ullah  Khan,  DSP  (PW-4).  Rana  Fazal  Ahmed  (PW-6)  was  a  retired 
Assistant  Controller  Examinations,  Punjab  University  while  Zubair 
Ahmed,  Assistant  Controller  Examinations  (PW-7)  had  produced 
record before the learned trial court. 
7. 
 
The appellant was examined under Section 342, Cr.P.C, 
wherein  he  refuted  the  allegations  levelled  against  him  in  the 
prosecution  evidence  and  he  also  tendered  in  evidence  certain 
documents. 
8 
 
Learned 
trial  court  after  evaluating 
the  evidence 
available on record, found version of the prosecution proved beyond 
shadow of reasonable doubt against the appellant, which resulted into 
his conviction in the afore-stated terms. 
9. 
 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  while  advancing  his 
arguments  submitted  that  the  impugned  judgment  has  been  recorded 
by  the  learned  trial  court  in  a  slipshod  manner  without  adverting  to 
real facts of the  case and material brought forth on record.  Learned 
counsel  vehemently  argued  that  the  alleged  photo  copy  of  degree 
appended  with  the  nomination  papers  was  not  scrutinized  by  the 
competent  authority  rather  the  nomination  papers  were  withdrawn 
before its scrutiny. Main crux of arguments of learned counsel for the 
appellant  is  that  the  photocopy  of  degree  allegedly  produced  by  the 
appellant was neither attested by the concerned authority nor verified 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
5 
 
and  even  no  effort  whatsoever  was  made  during  the  course  of 
investigation  to  procure  the  original  degree.  Learned  counsel 
vigorously  argued  that  Rana  Fazal  Ahmed  (PW-6)  was  a  retired 
official  of  Punjab  University  as  such  he  was  not  custodian  of  the 
record at the time of recording his statement before the learned trial 
court,  therefore,  his  statement  does  not  carry  any  legal  sanctity. 
Moreover,  he  admitted  that  report  (Exh.PT)  does  not  contain  the 
official  seal.  Learned  counsel  submitted  that  during  the  course  of 
investigation  vires  of  the  case  were  found  false,  hence  cancellation 
report  was  prepared.  Moreover,  on  the  same  set  of  evidence,  Dr. 
Ayyaz Ahmed Gulzar, co-accused was acquitted of the charge. It was 
finally argued that there is not an iota of evidence to establish that the 
appellant  was  instrumental  in  committing  fraud/forgery;  hence 
keeping in view deficit material available on record, the learned trial 
court  was  not  justified  in  recording  conviction  against  him.  Finally 
learned  counsel  prayed  for  clean  acquittal  of  the  appellant  from  the 
charges. 
10. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General 
assisted  by  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  vehemently  opposed 
the  contentions  raised  by  learned  counsel  for the  appellant.  Learned 
counsel  for  the  complainant  contended  that  the  appellant  by  way  of 
attaching  photocopy  of  a 
fake/fictitious  degree  submitted  his 
nomination  papers  before  the  Returning  Officer.  Next  submitted  that 
during  the  course  of  investigation  the  officials  of  Punjab  University 
verified that in their record degree produced by the appellant did not 
exist  rather  it  was  forged  one.  Learned  counsel  argued  that  there  is 
tangible  evidence  available  on  record  to  connect  the  appellant  with 
the commission of offence.  It was finally argued that  the prosecution 
proved  its  case  through  leading  cogent  and  confidence  inspiring 
evidence;  therefore,  the  learned  trial  court  was  rightly  justified  in 
recording conviction against him under the relevant provisions of law. 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
6 
 
11. 
 
We  have  heard  the  arguments  advanced  by  learned 
counsel for the appellant, learned counsel for the complainant, as well 
as,  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General  and  gone  through  the  record 
available on file with their able assistance. 
12. 
 
According  to  prosecution  accusations  in  the  year  2002 
the appellant in order to contest General Elections as a Candidate for 
PP-49, Bhakkar-III  filed his nomination papers before the Returning 
Officer while attaching copy of a fake/fictitious degree of B.A. issued 
by  the  University  of  the  Punjab.  Said  Returning  Officer  appeared 
during  the  course  of  trial  as  PW-5,  who  during  the  course  of  cross-
examination frankly conceded that no such degree was appended with 
the  nomination  papers.  He  further  admitted  that  the  appellant 
withdrew  the  nomination  papers  prior  to  the  day  of  scrutiny.  
Moreover,  PW-5  admitted  that  neither  the  alleged  fake  degree  was 
signed  by  the  appellant  nor  it  was  annexed  with  the  nomination 
papers  as  Annexure.  Relevant  extract  out  of  his  statement  is 
reproduced as under:- 
“It  is  correct  that  photocopy  of  alleged  fake  degree 
Mark.A  neither  bears  signature of accused  Saeed  Akbar 
Khan  nor  the  same  has  been  marked  as  annexure  with 
the nomination papers.” 
Perusal  of  record  also  reflects  that  the  Returning  Officer  had  not 
passed  any  order  for  initiation  of  proceedings  against  the  appellant 
on account of producing copy of a forged/fictitious document.  
13. 
 
The mainstay of the prosecution version is that during the 
course of investigation, Investigating Officer had transmitted copy of 
the  degree  to  the  University  of  the  Punjab  for  verification  and  the 
same was found bogus. In order to establish this fact the prosecution 
produced  Rana  Fazal  Ahmad,  a  retired  Assistant  Controller  of 
Examination as PW-6. However, admittedly he being a retired official 
was  not  custodian  of  record  at  the  time  of  recording  his  statement 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
7 
 
during the course of trial.  Although said PW had stated that he had 
submitted  his  report  (Exh.PT),  however,  during  the  course  of  cross-
examination, he frankly conceded that Exh.PT did not bear seal of the 
Assistant Controller concerned. Relevant extract out of his statement 
is reproduced as under:- 
“It  is  correct  that  Ex.P.T  does  not  bear  seal  of  the 
Assistant Controller concerned.” 
Without seal the said report is devoid of legal importance.  Fact also 
remains that said PW neither produced original record nor provided 
any attested/certified copy of the said record. 
 
As  far  as  Zubair  Ahmed,  Assistant  Controller  (Certificates)  of 
University of the Punjab, who appeared during the course of trial as 
PW-7  is  concerned,  he  brought  the  result  gazette  pertaining  to  Roll 
No.4567  whereas  roll  number  mentioned  in  Exh.PA  was  48567. 
Hence, his statement is of least importance for the prosecution. 
14. 
 
There  is  no  cavil  to  this  proposition  that  the  original 
degree, photocopy of which was allegedly produced by the appellant 
at  the  time  of  filing  his  nomination  papers  was  neither  brought  on 
record during the course of investigation nor was exhibited during the 
trial.  While  going  through  the  record  we  have  observed  that  said 
document  was  brought  on  record  as  Mark-A  in  the  shape  of  a 
photocopy,  however,  the  same  being  secondary  evidence 
  is 
inadmissible and  that was  not proved  in accordance  with law.  It is 
settled law that a person relying on a document is under obligation to 
prove  the  same,  hence,  the  same  could  not  be  read  in  evidence  to 
record  conviction  against 
the  appellant  keeping 
in  view 
the 
pronouncements  of  the  superior  courts  of  the  country.  The  august 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of  STATE LIFE INSURANCE 
CORPORATION  OF  PAKISTAN  and  another  vs.  JAVAID  IQBAL 
(2011 SCMR 1013), laid down the following principle:- 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
8 
 
“---O.XIII,  Rr.  3  &  4---Document  not  produced  and 
proved  in  evidence  but  only  marked  could  not  be 
considered by courts as a legal evidence of a fact.” 
Similar  view  was  held  in  the  cases  of  Zia  Ul  Hasan  vs.  The  State 
(PLD  1984  SC  192),  Abdul  Qayyum  vs.  Muhammad  Rafique  (2002 
SCJ  300),  Fazal  Muhammad  vs.  Mst.  Chohara  and  others  (1992 
SCMR  2182),  Muhammad  Arshad  Naseem  vs.  the  State  (2004 
PCr.L.J.  371)  and  ASIF  ALI  HASHMI  through  4  Legal  Heirs  vs. 
MUHAMMAD ARIF MIAN and 4 others (PLD 2015 Islamabad 191).  
15. 
 
As  far  as  antecedents  of  the  complainant  PW-8  are 
concerned,  there  is  ample  material  available  on  record  that  he 
belongs to rival party of the appellant. During cross-examination, the 
complainant  admitted  that  his  real  uncle,  namely,  Aman  Ullah 
Cheena contested General Election in 1988 against the appellant and 
lost  the  same.  He  further  admitted  that  his  uncle  Muhammad  Aslam 
contested  General  Election  in  1993  for  provincial  assembly  against 
the appellant and faced the defeat while the complainant himself lost 
General  Election  in  1997  against  the  appellant.  He  further  admitted 
that  he  contested  General  Election  against  Hafeez  Ullah  in  2002 
brother-in-law of the appellant and lost the same. He further admitted 
that  in  all  General  Elections  from  2002  to  2008,  the  objections  with 
regard  to  educational  qualification  of  accused  Saeed  Akbar  Khan 
were  not  sustained  by  any  forum  and  in  all  those  objections, 
educational qualification of accused  Saeed Akbar Khan for General 
Election,  2002  was  made  basis.  It  was  conceded  by  the  complainant 
that he filed CPLAs No.103,104 LR-2003 and CPLA No.95-96 of 2006 
in  the  Apex  Court  regarding  educational    qualification  of  the 
appellant for General Election, 2002 and both the said petitions were 
dismissed.  He  went  on  to  acknowledge that facts  of  present  criminal 
case were also discussed in the orders of the  Apex Court. He further 
conceded that despite the failure  in earlier rounds of aforementioned 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
9 
 
petitions, he filed  Writ Petition No.12230 of 2007 and  Writ Petition  
No.12231  of  2007  in  the  Lahore  High  Court,  Lahore  against  the 
appellant  and  his  brother  Rasheed  Akbar  Khan  regarding  their 
qualification  and  both  were  dismissed  by  the  full  Bench  comprising 
upon three  Hon’ble Judges of Lahore High Court Lahore. He could 
not deny the registration of FIR No.02 dated 06.1.1995 under sections 
468,471,409,420,  and  409  PPC  registered  against  him  at  Police 
Station  City    Bhakkar    with  the  allegation  that  he  used  to  steal 
documents  from  different    government  departments  and  to  prepare 
bogus  documents  on  the  basis  thereof  in  order  to  get  the  benefit 
therefrom. He also did not deny that he had prepared a false RL-II in 
order to get the land transferred in the name of his brothers, namely, 
Rafaqat and Liaqat by converting its area from 1600 Kanals to 4500 
Kanals.  While  replying  to  a  question  in  cross-examination,  he 
admitted that Roll No.48567 and the year 1976 were not mentioned in 
the nomination papers of the appellant, however, it is quite surprising 
for  us  that  how  he  came  to  know  about  this  fact.  This  fact  alone 
creates flaw in the authenticity of the prosecution version. 
16. 
 
Another  important  aspect  of  the  case  is  that  during  the 
course  of  investigation  the  Investigating  Officer  opined  that  there  is 
deficit  material  to  establish  the  contents  of  the  crime  report,  hence, 
cancellation  report  was  prepared.  Moreover,  on  the  same  set  of 
evidence,  co-accused  Dr.  Ayyaz  Ahmed  Gulzar  was  acquitted  of  the 
charge and no appeal against his acquittal was filed. 
17. 
 
While  going  through  the  record  we  have  also  observed 
that  the  appellant  along-with  his    brother  Rasheed  Akbar  Khan  was 
being  prosecuted  by  the  complainant  in  case  FIR  No.190  for  the 
similar  offence  and  with  the  same  allegation.  The  cases,  both,  were 
tried by the same Court and the evidence was also recorded almost on 
the same dates. Except few variations in the statements of PW.1 and 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
10 
 
PW.5, the evidence was not recorded independently in each case  and 
the  learned  trial  Court has brought on record the evidence recorded 
in  other  case  to  the  file  of  this  case,  which  definitely  is  not  the 
requirement of law. There is no hesitation in saying that a stereotyped 
judgment  based  on  stereotyped  evidence  has  been  delivered  by  the 
learned  trial  Court  which  vitiates  the  proceedings  against  the 
appellant.  This  type  of  practice  is  not  only  against  the  very  spirit  of 
law  but  against  the  natural  justice.  So  in  our  humble  view  the 
conviction  and  sentence  passed  by  the  learned  trial  Court  is  not 
proper and the same cannot be sustained.  
18. 
 
So  far    as,  Section  82  of  the  Representation  of  the 
Peoples  Act,  1976  is  concerned,  the  complainant  was  required  to 
prove  the guilt through independent witnesses and  proof may be such 
as  to  inspire  confidence,  consistent,  cogent,  clear  and  convincing. 
There  should  be  no  doubt  that  the  complainant  deposed  because  of 
political  rivalry/animosity  and  the  independent  corroboration  of  the 
witness  is  necessary.  In  this  case,  the  complainant  himself  appeared 
as  PW.8  and  frankly  admitted  that  his  uncles  were  defeated  by  the 
appellant.  The  complainant  was  also  defeated  by  the  appellant.  The 
complainant  admitted  the  registration  of  the  FIR  against  himself  for 
tampering with the public record and he also could not prove that the 
appellant  was  a  valid  nominated  candidate.  The  basic  allegation  of 
forging  a  bogus  degree  has  also  not  been  proved.  In  such 
circumstances, it is observed that the prosecution failed to discharge 
its onus to prove the charge of corrupt practice.  
19. 
 
For  the  reasons  mentioned  above,  we  are  satisfied  that 
the  prosecution  has  failed  in  its  duty  to  prove  guilt  of  the  appellant 
beyond  shadow  of  doubt  while  it  is  cordial  principle  of  law  that 
benefit of every doubt is to be extended in favour of the accused not as 
a  matter  of  grace  rather  as  a  matter  of  right.  Respectful  reliance  in 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.106/2014 
 
 
11 
 
this  context  can  be  placed on  the  ratio  decidendi  of august  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of  Muhammad  Mansha  vs.  The  State 
(2018 SCMR 772); wherein it was held as under: 
 Needless  to  mention  that  while  giving  the  benefit 
“4. 
of  doubt  to  an  accused  it  is  not  necessary  that  there 
should be many circumstances creating doubt. If there is 
a  circumstance  which  creates  reasonable  doubt  in  a 
prudent  mind  about  the  guilty  of  the  accused,  then  the 
accused  would  be  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  such  doubt, 
not as a matter of grace and concession, but as a matter 
of  right.  It  is  based  on  the  maxim,  “it  is  better  that  ten 
guilty  persons  be  acquitted  rather  than  one  innocent 
person be convicted” Reliance in this behalf can be made 
upon the cases of Tariq Pervez v. The State (1995 SCMR 
1345),  Ghulam  Qadir  and  2  others  v.  The  State    (2008 
SCMR  1221),  Muhammad  Akram  v.  The  State  (2009 
SCMR  230)  and  Muhammad  Zaman  v.  The  State  (2014 
SCMR 749)” 
20. 
 
Moreover,  it  is  golden  principle  of  law  that  the  Court 
ought to let off 100 guilty but should not convict one innocent person 
on  the  basis  of  suspicion.  Resultantly  while  setting  aside  the 
conviction and  sentence  recorded by  the learned  trial  court in  terms 
of  judgment  dated  21.01.2014,  Crl.  Appeal  No.106/2014  filed  by  the 
appellant is accepted in toto as a consequence whereof he is ordered 
to  be  acquitted  of  the  charge  in  case  FIR  No.193/2002,  dated 
02.11.2002,  offence  under  Sections  468,  471,  474,  476,  PPC,  read 
with Section 82 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1976, registered 
at  Police  Station  City  Bhakkar.  Sentence  of  the  appellant  stands 
suspended  vide  order  dated  10.02.2014  passed  in  Crl.  Misc. 
No.1/2014. His surety stands discharged from the liability. 
 
(Sardar Ahmed Naeem) 
(Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi) 
Judge 
Judge 
Riaz 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
