PSLA No. 6 of 2016 
 
1 
Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
 LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
PSLA No.6 of 2016 
Khawaja Muhammad Ahmed 
VS. 
Muhammad Ayyub, etc. 
S.No. of order/  
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding. 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties or 
counsel, where necessary. 
 
 
 
 
25.10.2018.  Nemo for the petitioner. 
Mr. Tariq Javed, District Public Prosecutor. 
 
 
The  petitioner  namely  Khawaja  Muhammad  Ahmad  son 
 
 
of  Khawaja  Bashir  Ahmed  being  aggrieved  of  the  order  of  the 
acquittal  passed  by  the  Judicial  Magistrate  Ist  Class  Gujranwala 
dated 28.2.2015 in the case instituted upon the complaint filed by 
the  petitioner  and  has  prayed  for  grant  of  special  leave  to  appeal 
from the order of said acquittal. The application for grant of special 
leave to appeal  was presented on  9th of January, 2016 beyond  the 
period of 60 days as prescribed by Section 417 (3)  of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 along with an application under section 
5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 seeking condonation of delay on the 
following grounds:- 
1.    ………………………………………… 
to 
That  the  impugned  order  was  came 
the 
knowledge of the  petitioner  two days before  filing 
of this petition so in the interest of justice the delay 
in filing the present appeal may be condoned.  
That  the  petitioner  has  a  very  good  prima  facie 
arguable case in her favour. 
That if the delay is not condone the petitioner shall 
suffer irreparable loss and injury. 
2 
3     
4. 
 
At the very outset it has been noticed that the order of the 
 
 
2. 
acquittal was passed by the Court of Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, 
Gujranwala on 28.2.2015 and this petition is hopelessly barred by 
time. 
PSLA No. 6 of 2016 
 
2 
3. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  section  417(2)  of  the  Code  of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 provides  for filing of such applications 
seeking  grant  of  special  leave  to  appeal  whereas  section  417  (3) 
provides for the time before the expiry of which  such application 
for grant of special leave to appeal from  order of acquittal can be 
entertained  by  the  High  Court.  That  said  provisions  of  law  are 
being reproduced as under: 
417. Appeal in case of acquittal. (1)Subject to the provision of sub-
section (4) the Provincial Government may, in any case, direct 
the  Public  Prosecutor  to  present  an  appeal  to  the  High  court 
from an original   or appellate order of acquittal passed by any 
Court other than a   High court. 
 
(2)If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted 
upon complaint and the High court, on an application made to it 
by the complainant in this behalf grants special leave to appeal 
from the order of acquittal the complainant may present such an 
appeal to the High court. 
 
(2-A) A person aggrieved by the order of acquittal passed by any  
court other  than a  High court, may,  within thirty days, file an 
appeal against such order. 
 
(3) No application under sub-section (2) for the grant of special 
leave  to  appeal  from  an  order  of  acquittal  shall  be  entertained 
by the High Court after the expiry of sixty days from the date of 
that order.  
 
 
(4) If, in any case, the application under sub-section (2) for the 
grant  of  special  leave  to  appeal  from  an  order  of  acquittal  is 
refused,  no  appeal  from  that  order  of  acquittal  shall  lie  under 
sub-section (1). 
 
(5) An appeal against an order of conviction or acquittal under 
Sections  354A,  376,376A,  377  or  377B  of  the  Pakistan  Penal 
code,  1860  (Act  XLV  of  1860)  shall  be  decided  within  six 
months.” 
 
 
4.  
It  is  important  to  note  that  according  to  established 
principle of the criminal administration of justice once an acquittal 
is  recorded  in  favour  of accused  facing criminal  charge  he  enjoys  
double presumption  of innocence, therefore, the courts competent 
to interfere in the acquittal order should be slow in converting the 
same  into  conviction,  unless  and  until  the  said  order  is  patently 
illegal,  shocking,  based  on  misreading  and  non-reading  of  the 
record or perverse.  The said principle has been enunciated by the 
August  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  judgment  reported  as 
Muhammad  Inayat  Versus  The  State  (  1998  SCMR  1854). 
Furthermore  the  August  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case 
reported  as  Abdul  Qayyum  Versus  Ghulam  Yasin  (PLD  1963 
PSLA No. 6 of 2016 
 
3 
Supreme Court 151), refused to condone the delay of only fifteen 
days.  
5. 
The  application  under  section  5  of  the  limitation  Act, 
1908 is otherwise not maintainable in cases relating to applications 
made  under  section  417  (2)  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898 
seeking grant of special leave to appeal on the order of acquittal in 
a case instituted upon a complaint. In this regard Section 29 of the 
Limitation Act, 1908 provides as under: 
Section 29. Saving. 
(1) “Nothing in this Act shall affect section 25 of the Contract   
Act,  1872. 
 
(2).  Where  any  special  or  local  law  prescribes  for  any  suit, 
  appeal  or  application  a  period  of  limitation  different  from  the 
period prescribed therefor by the First Schedule,  the  provisions  of  
section  3  shall  apply,  as  if  such  period  were  prescribed  therefor  in 
that  schedule,  and    for  the  purpose  of  determining  any  period  of 
limitation  prescribed  for  any  suit,  appeal  or  application    by  any 
special or local law: 
(a) 
the  provision  contained  in  section  4,  sections  9  to 
18 and section 22 shall apply only in so far as, and to the 
extent  to  which,  they  are  not  expressly  excluded  by    such 
special or local law: and  
(b) 
the remaining provisions of this Act shall not apply. 
(3) 
Act (IV of 1869). 
Nothing in this Act shall apply to suits under the  Divorce 
Sections 26 and 27 and the definition of  “easement” 
(4) 
in 
section 2 shall not apply to cases arising in territories to which the  
Easements Act, 1882, may for the time being extend”.  
 
As  is  very  much  evident  from  the  perusal  of  the  said 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
provision  of law for determining any period of limitation prescribed 
for any suit, appeal or application  shall only apply insofar as, and to 
the extent to which they are not expressly excluded by such special or 
local law. As the instant application for grant of special leave to file 
an  appeal  against  the  order of  acquittal  has  been  filed  under  section 
417 (2) of the  Code of Criminal Procedure and Section 417 (3) of the 
Code of  Criminal  Procedure, 1898 itself provides  the  period   within 
which the same has to be filed. Therefore, Section 5 of the Limitation 
Act, 1908  cannot be made  applicable to such  applications.  Needless 
to  add  that  the  time  period  provided  under  Article  157  of  the 
Limitation Act is also of no import in this matter.  
7. 
In the case of the State versus Zahid Hussain reported as 
(1990  SCMR  164),  it  was  held  by  the  August  Supreme  Court  of 
PSLA No. 6 of 2016 
 
4 
Pakistan that where period of limitation is prescribed by a special law 
or  local  law  and  its  different  from  the  one  in  the  Limitation  Act, 
1908,  then  the  period  as  provided  in  the  special  or  local  law  shall 
prevail  over  the  period    provided  for  by  the  Limitation  Act.  It  has 
been  further  held  in  the  above  mentioned  case  of  The  State  versus. 
Zahid Hussain that in case of conflict of express words the limitation 
Act yields.  
8. 
For  all  the  above  reasons  and  upon  consideration  of  the 
above binding decisions  of  the  August  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  I 
am  of  the  view  that  section  5  of  the  Limitation  Act  1908  is  not 
applicable to the applications filed under Section 417(2) of the Code 
of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898.  This  Court 
is, 
therefore,  not 
empowered to condone any delay in filing the applications for grant 
of  special  leave  to  appeal  from  the  order  of  acquittal  passed  by  the 
learned Judicial Magistrate, Gujranwala.  
9. 
For  the  reasons  stated  above,  the  application  under 
section  5  of  the  Limitation  Act  is  dismissed  and  consequently  the 
petition  for  grant  of  special  leave  to  appeal  No.  6  of  2016  is  also 
dismissed.  
  
(Sadiq Mahmud Khurram) 
JUDGE 
Raheel 
 
 
 
                      
                       APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
                                               
JUDGE 
