Stereo. HCJDA.38. 
 Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
  JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 
 
     Case No. W.P.No.29724/2015. 
City School Private Limited 
 
 
 
     Versus  
     
 
Government of the Punjab etc.  
 
 
                                   
    JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.03.2018 
13.03.2018, 
Dates of hearing  14.03.2016, 15.06.2016, 26.02.2018, 27.02.2018, 
28.02.2018, 05.03.2018, 06.03.2018, 07.03.2018, 
12.03.2018, 
and 
15.03.2018. 
Mrs.  Asma  Jahangir  Advocate,  M/S  Shahid 
Hamid  Advocate,  Miss  Aysha  Hamid 
Advocate,  Khawaja  Haris  Advocate,  Faisal 
Hussain  Naqvi  Advocate,  Khawaja  Ahmad 
Hosain Advocate, Shezad Atta Elahi Advocate, 
Dr.  Khalid  Ranjha  Advocate,  Asad  Ullah 
Saddiqui  Advocate,  Muhammad  Haroon 
Mumtaz  Advocate,  Hassan  Makhdoom, 
Advocate,  Tafazzul  Rizvi  Advocate,  Raza 
Kazim Advocate, Zaki Rehman Advocate, Ch. 
Muhammad  Usman  Advocate,  Shezada 
Mazher  Advocate,  Ali  Raza  Advocate,  Ijaz 
Mehmood  Ch.  Advocate,  Mian  Muhammad 
Kashif  Advocate,  Ch.  Hassan  Murtaza  Mann 
Advocate,  Azam  Nazeer  Tarar  Advocate, 
Hassan Nawaz Makhdoom Advocate, Hasnain 
Ali  Ramzan  Advocate,  Fawad  Malik  Awan 
Advocate,  Syed  Anwar  ul  Haq  Gillani 
Advocate,  Miss  Asma  Inam  Advocate,  Asim 
Hafeez  Advocate,  Rana  Nadeem  Sabir 
Advocate,  Syed  Ahmad  Hassan  Shah 
Advocate,  Barrister  Muhammad  Umar  Riaz 
Advocate,  Mashhood  Hussain  Advocate, 
Moazzam  Salim  Advocate,  M.  Anwar  Ch. 
Advocate and Hashim Raza Shamsi Advocate.  
Petitioner 
Schools by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
Petitioner 
students/parents 
by: 
Respondent 
Government  by: 
 
2 
 
M/S  A.  K.  Dogar  Advocate,  Syed  Shahab 
Qutab  Advocate,  Waqas  Meer  Advocate, 
Muhammad 
Javed  Arshad  Advocate,  
Muhammad Azhar Siddique Advocate, Liaqat 
Ali  Butt  Advocate,  Muhammad  Zaheer  Butt 
Advocate, Fayyaz Ahmad Mehr Advocate and 
Zubair Ahmad Chaudhry Advocate  
 
Mr.  Muhammad  Shan  Gull,  Additional 
Advocate General assisted by Mr. Obaid Ullah 
Advocate  and  Rai  Ashfaq  Ahmad  Kharal, 
Assistant Advocate General. 
 
Abid  Aziz  Sheikh,  J.-    This  judgment  will  decide    instant 
writ  petition  as  well  as  writ  petitions  detail  of  which  is  given  in 
appendix-A  and  appendix-B.  In  all  these  writ  petitions,  there  is 
communality of issue relating to school fee being charged by unaided 
private  educational  institutions  in  Province  of  Punjab.    The  issue 
involved is right of private educational institutions to increase school 
fee  from  time  to  time  and  nature  of  control  which  government  can 
exercise in regulating such fee structure.  In some of the writ petitions, 
(petitions  in  appendix  A),  petitioners  are  private  schools  and  have 
challenged  the  vires  of  certain  sub-clauses  of  section  7-A  of  the 
Punjab  Private  Educational  Institutions  (Promotion  and  Regulation) 
Ordinance,  1984  (Ordinance  1984)  inserted  on  19.09.2015  through 
section  4  of  Punjab  Private  Educational  Institutions  (Promotion  and 
Regulation)  Amendment  Ordinance,  2015  (Ordinance  of  2015). 
Subsequently on 04.03.2016, the Ordinance 2015 was converted into 
Act  through  the  Punjab  Private  Educational  Institutions  (Promotion 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
3 
and Regulations) (Amendment) Act, 2016 (Act of 2016). Section 7-A 
of  the  Ordinance  1984  was  further  amended  through  Punjab  Private 
Educational  Institutions  (Promotion  and  Regulations)  (Amendment) 
Act,  2017  (Act  of  2017).  Accordingly  these  petitions  were  amended 
from time to time, also to challenge the amendments made in section 
7-A of the Ordinance 1984 through Act of 2016 and Act of 2017. 
2. 
Brief  facts  are  that  in  Province  of  Punjab,  Private 
educational  institutions  are  regulated  through  Ordinance  1984  and 
Punjab  Private  Educational  Institutions  (Promotion  and  Regulation) 
Rules, 1984 (Rules of 1984).  The said Ordinance 1984 was amended 
and  section  7-A  was  inserted.  Under  section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance 
1984,  certain  restrictions  are 
imposed  on  private  educational 
institutions including capping of increase in fee for any academic year 
for  not  more  than  5%  (under  Ordinance  2015  and  Act  of  2016)  and 
finally 8% (under Act of 2017), charged in preceding academic year.  
Some  of  the  private  schools  being  aggrieved  of  section  7-A  of  the 
Ordinance  1984  have  filed  these  constitutional  petitions,  whereas 
some  of  the  students  through  their  parents  also  filed  petitions  for 
directing the private schools to charge the fee in terms of section 7-A 
of  the  Ordinance  1984  (detail  of  petitions  by  students/parents  are 
appendix B).  
3. 
Ms.  Asma  Jahangir,  Advocate  for  private  schools  argued 
that section 7-A of the Ordinance 1984 is violative of Article 18 of the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
4 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (Constitution). 
Submits  that  the  petitioners  have  right  to  carry  out  their  business  of 
private  schools  and  the  State  at  best  in  order  to  promote  free 
competition  could  regulate  business  through  licence  in  a  reasonable 
manner. She submits that section 7-A of the Ordinance 1984 has gone 
beyond the licensing system and is actually controlling the business of 
the petitioner in arbitrary manner. Submits that under article 18 of the 
Constitution,  only  reasonable  restrictions  can  be  imposed  but 
impugned  legislation  is  not  only  unreasonable  but  also  amounts  to 
deprive  the  petitioners  of  their  business.    She  placed  reliance  on 
Arshad  Mahmood  v.  Government  of  Punjab  (PLD  2005  SC  193), 
Pakcom  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2011  SC  44),  Khawaja 
Imran  Ahmed  vs.  Noor  Ahmed  (1992  SCMR  1152),  Messrs  Murree 
Brewerey  Company  Limited  D.G  (Excise  and  Taxation)  (1991  MLD 
267),  Landirenozo  vs.  Federation  of  Pakistan  (2013  PTD  658),  Al 
Raham  Travels  and  Tours  v.  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs  (2011 
SCMR  1621),  Elahi  Cotton  Mills  vs.  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD 
1997  SC  582),  Administrator,  Market  Committee  vs  Muhammad 
Sharif  etc  (1994  SCMR  1048),  Northern  Bottling  vs.  Federation  of 
Pakistan (2015 PTD 231), K.B. Threads vs. Zila Nazim Lahore (PLD 
2004 Lah. 376), Shahabuddin vs. Pakistan etc (PLD 1957 Kar. 854). 
Further  submitted 
that 
through 
impugned  amendment,  private 
business of the petitioner schools have virtually been nationalized, as 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
5 
now  the  regulator  will  make  policy  and  business  decisions  regarding 
educational  institutions  of  the  petitioners.    She  submitted  that 
impugned legislation has also been given retrospective effect which is 
not permissible under law.  Learned counsel submitted that provision 
of  section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance  particularly  its  subsection  1,  5,  6,  7 
and  8  being  ultra  vires  of  the  constitution  and  violation  of 
fundamental 
rights  of  petitioners  are 
liable 
to  be  declared 
unconstitutional.  Learned  counsel  further  argued  that  under  Article 
25-A  of  the  Constitution,  it  is  the  duty  of  State  to  provide  free  and 
compulsory  education  to  all  children  of  age  5  to  16  and  unaided 
private  educational  institutions  are  not  obliged  to  provide  free 
education.  Submits  that  imparting  quality  education  is  like  trade  and 
business  which  is  not  only  protected  under  article  18  of  the 
Constitution  but  private  institutions  also  have  right  to  give  excellent 
education to children between age of 5 to 16 year against reasonable 
fee.  Reliance is placed on Petition regarding miserable conditions of 
schools  (2014  SCMR  396),  Human  Rights  Case  No.19360-P/2012 
(2013 SCMR 54), Fiaquat Hussain vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
2012  SC  224),  Syed  Nazeer  Agha  vs.  Government  of  Balochistan 
(PLD 2014 Bal. 86).  She further submitted that private schools have 
raised  fee  in  proportionate  to  inflation  and  increase  of  salaries  and 
there is no exploitation or forming of cartel.  Submitted that parents of 
students  have  no  locus  standi  against  increase  of  fee  because 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
6 
providing  quality  education  against  reasonable  fee  does  not  violates 
fundamental rights, if there is no profiteering or exploitation on part of 
the petitioners. Submitted that in any other case, the respondents have 
remedy  before  Competition  Commission  of  Pakistan  or  Consumer 
Courts.  She  further submitted that parents have also right to seek free 
education for their children from Government schools if so desired. 
4. 
Mrs.  Asma  Jahangir  Advocate  unfortunately  passed  away 
during course of these proceedings. Her above arguments are adopted 
by  her  co-counsel  Mr.  Shezad  Atta  Elahi  Advocate  who  in  addition 
submitted that under Article 18 of the Constitution, the condition can 
be  imposed  only  in  the  interest  of  free  competition  or  through 
licensing  system  and  finally  it  must  be  reasonable.  He  submits  that 
through  impugned  legislation,  the  discretion  of  the  regulatory 
authority  has  been  fettered  to  allow  increase  in  fee  more  than  8%, 
even  if  educational  institution  duly  justify  such  increase.  He, 
therefore,  concluded  that  impugned  legislation  is  not  sustainable  and 
further it is also violative of Article 3 of the Constitution, as it exploits 
the educational institutions. 
5. 
Mr.  Shahid  Hamid  Advocate  for  private  schools  argued 
that  the  impugned  provisions  of  section  7-A  of  Ordinance  1984,  are 
prima  facie  violative  of  fundamental  rights  guaranteed  to  the 
petitioners  under  Article  23  and  24  of  the  Constitution  as  the 
petitioners are being compulsorily restrained/deprived of their right to 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
7 
income/property through charging fees for services provided by them, 
without  any  compensation  on  account  of  such  compulsory 
restraint/deprivation.  Submitted  that  the  parents  who  place  their 
children in schools operated by petitioners, do so knowing fully well 
two things: first, the level of fees at the time of entry and second, that 
these fees will, on average increase by 12 to 14% each year based on 
the historical pattern of the previous years. Further submitted that they 
willingly  entered  into  this  contractual  relationship  and  respondents 
cannot  lawfully  interfere  in  this  contractual  relationship. Argued  that 
under  section  7A(1)  of  the  Ordinance,  all  private  schools  charging 
fees of less than Rs.4,000/- per month per student have been exempted 
from the maximum cap on fees. Submits that these schools are almost 
96-98%  of  all  private  schools.  Argued  that  the  petitioners  do  not 
grudge the exemption given to these schools but it bears mention that 
the  parents  of  students  studying  in  such  schools  are  self-evidently 
much  less  well-off  than  parents  of  students  studying  in  petitioners‟ 
schools. Submits that in other words the well-to-do parents are sought 
to  be  protected  as  against  those  much  less  well-off  parents.  Argued 
that  this  is  not  only  discriminatory  in  violation  of  Article  25  of  the 
Constitution,  as  there  is  no  perceivable  logic  to  the  cut-off  of 
Rs.4,000/-  but  it  also  reflects  social  priorities.  Argued  that  why 
protection  for  the  well-to-do  and  not  for  the  less  well-off  when  the 
Secretary Schools (respondent), in written statement describe them, as 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
8 
„teaching shops‟. Added that petitioners had already collected fees for 
the  months  of  August  and  September  2015,  before  the  respondents 
notified/enacted  Ordinance  of  2015,  which  prescribed  that  for 
academic  year  2015-16,  the  petitioners  could  not  charge  any  fee 
higher  than  the  fees  charged  for  that  class  during  the  academic  year 
2014-15.  Argued  that  neither  the  Ordinance  2015  nor  the  Act  2016 
had  any  provision  giving  them  retrospective  effect.  Argued  that 
consequently  the  petitioners  are  entitled  to  retain  the  fees  already 
realized  by  them  prior  to  the  notification/enactment  of  the  aforesaid 
Ordinance  of  2015  and  Act  of  2016.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Zila 
Council  Jhang  vs.  Daewoo  Corporation  (2001  SCMR  1012)  and 
Chief  Land  Commissioner  vs.  Ghulam  Hyder  Shah  (1988  SCMR 
715).  
6. 
Mr.  Faisal  Hussain  Naqvi,  Advocate  for  the  petitioner 
schools  argued  that  impugned  provisions  of  section  7-A  of  the 
Ordinance  are  unreasonable,  unconstitutional  and  against 
the 
fundamental rights of the petitioner. He stressed four grounds to assail 
the  impugned  provision.  Firstly  that  the  provision  is  violative  of 
Article  18  of  the  Constitution,  secondly  the  provision  amounts  to 
legislative  judgment  and  also  violative  of  separation  of  power  and 
right  of  fair  trial  under  Article  10-A  of  the  Constitution,  thirdly  the 
provision is violative of Article 25 of the Constitution, not because it 
is discriminatory but because the legislature has failed to discriminate 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
9 
the petitioner and fourthly, that it is violative of Articles 23 and 24 of 
the  Constitution,  which  is  not  only  confined  to  right  of  property  but 
where  by  imposing  conditions,  the  value  and  utility  of  property  is 
reduced,  it  also  amounts  to  violation  of  right  of  property.  Regarding 
first  ground,  he  submits  that  the  word  “lawful  trade”  used  in  Article 
18 has been discussed in various judgments of Indian Supreme Court, 
in State of Bombay vs. RMD Chamarbaugwala (AIR 1957 SC 699), it 
was  held  that  gambling  is  not  a  lawful  trade.  Similarly  in  Khoday 
Distilleries Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka  (1995) 1  SC 574,  it  was held 
that the right to practice a profession or trade does not mean a practice 
of  profession  or  carrying  out  trade  which  is  inherently  vicious, 
pernicious and is condemned by all civil societies, however, in Action 
Committee,  Un-Aided  Private  Schools  vs.  Director  of  Education, 
Delhi  and  others  (2009)  10  SCC  1),  it  was  held  that  education  is  a 
lawful trade. He submits that once it is established that education is a 
lawful trade, the next question is whether any capping can be done on 
the fee structure as was done in the impugned provision. He referred 
the various judgments of Indian Supreme Court including  Monini Jai 
vs.  State  of  Karnataka  (1992)  3  SCC  666,  Unni  Krishnan,  J.P.  vs. 
State  of  A.P.  (1993)  1  SCC  645,  TMA  Pai  Foundation  vs.  State  of 
Karnataka (2002) 8 SCC 481, Islamic Academy of Education vs. State 
of Karnataka (2003) 6 SCC 697, Modern School vs. Union of Indian 
(AIR  2004  SC  2236)  and  P.A.  Inamdar  vs.  State  of  Maharashtra 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
10 
(2005) 6 SCC 537, to argue that the question whether school fee can 
be regulated by Government institutions was subject matter of various 
petitions before Supreme Court in India and after chequered history of 
judgments,  the  final  consensus  reached  in  P.A.  Inamdar  vs.  State  of 
Maharashtra supra that there can be no profiteering and capitation of 
fee  but  reasonable  fee  can  be  charged  and  there  will  be  minimal 
regulatory  control  and  autonomy  be  given  to  unaided  schools.  He 
submits that applying the same principle, the capping of  fee amounts 
to violative of fundamental rights of the petitioner under Article 18 of 
the Constitution.  On the issue of legislative judgment, he referred the 
reply  filed  by  the  respondents  where  it  was  stated  that  impugned 
legislation  was  passed  because  petitioners  were  engaged 
in 
profiteering and capitation. He submits that the profiteering as defined 
in various dictionaries is a crime and without giving any opportunity 
to  the  petitioners  to  explain  their  position,  the  legislature  could  not 
issue the impugned provision, which amounts to legislative judgment 
against  the  petitioners.  He  submits  that  even  the  opportunity  of  ex-
post-facto  hearing  is  not  brought  in  the  impugned  provision.  He 
placed  reliance  on  judgments  Dr. Mubshar Hassan vs. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD  2010  SC  265,  370),  Naseer  Ahmed  Khan  vs. 
Government of Punjab (PLD 1980 Lahore 684, 694), Government of 
Punjab vs. Naseer Ahmed Khan (2001 CLC 1422, 1426), Government 
of  Punjab  vs.  Naseer  Ahmed  Khan  (2010  SCMR  431),  National 
11 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
Industrial  Co-operative  Credit  Corporation  vs.  Province  of  Punjab 
(PLD  1992  Lah.  462,  491-92)  and  Province  of  Punjab  vs.  National 
Industrial  Co-operation  Credit  Corporation  (2000  SCMR  567,  598) 
to  argue  that  judicial  functions  are  to  be  performed  by  judiciary  and 
not  by  the  legislation  and  therefore,  the  impugned  provision  being 
legislative  judgment  is  not  sustainable  under  law.  Finally  be 
concluded that impugned legislation is discriminatory and also violate 
right of property. 
7. 
Khawaja  Ahmad  Hosain,  Advocate  for  private  schools 
argued that impugned provisions are ultra vires of the Constitution as 
Government  has  no  jurisdiction  to  interfere  in  the  business  of  the 
petitioner  in  a  free  market.  Submits  that  Government  can  only 
interfere if schools have created monopoly or there are allegations of 
collusion  or  cartel.  Submits  that  in  absence  of  any  such  allegation, 
provisions are not sustainable being violative of Article 18 and 25 of 
the  Constitution.  He  adds  that  impugned  provision  of  section  7-A  of 
the  Ordinance  1984  is  only  regarding  increase  of  fee  of  existing 
schools but there is no restriction of fixation of fee by a new school, 
therefore, this provision being irrational is not sustainable. 
8. 
 Khawaja  Haris  Advocate  for  private  schools  argued  that 
education  is  an  occupation,  therefore,  no  doubt  it  is  subject  to 
qualification  under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution.  He  however 
submits that such qualification or restrictions can only be reasonable. 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
12 
Submits  that  restriction  of  capping  the  increase  in  fee  through 
impugned  legislation  is  un-reasonable  restriction,  therefore,  violative 
of  Article  18  of  the  Constitution.  He  submits  that  in  imposing 
restriction on increase of fee, the balance must be drawn between right 
of  the  educational  institution  on  increase  of  fee  and  right  of  the 
students  and  their  parents  against  exploitation  or  profiteering  of  fee.  
He placed reliance on judgment passed by the Islamabad High Court 
in Educational Services (Pvt.) Limited and 4 others vs. Federation of 
Pakistan and another (PLD 2016 Islamabad 141). 
9. 
Dr. Khalid Ranjha Advocate argued that impugned section 
7-A  of  Ordinance  of  1984  was  inserted  through  Ordinance  of  2015 
which  is  not  a  valid  legislation  and  amendment  could  only  be  made 
through Act of the Parliament. 
10. 
Mr.  Asad  Ullah  Saddiqui,  Advocate  for  the  petitioner 
schools  argued  that  impugned  legislation  amounts  to  exercise  the 
delegation of power by authority without giving procedure, yard stick 
and  parameters  for  such  delegated  power.    Submits  that  such  un-
explained  and  un-structural  powers  are  not  sustainable.    Reliance  is 
placed  on  Khawaja  Muhammad  Safdar,  M.P.A,  Lahore  vs.  Province 
of  West  Pakistan  etc.    (PLD  1964  (W.P.)  Lahore  718).    He  further 
submits  that  main  purpose  of  impugned  legislation  is  to  put  the 
petitioners  out  of  business,  hence  violation  of  article  18  of  the 
Constitution.    Adds  that  impugned  legislation  has  not  only  denied 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
13 
livelihood  of  the  petitioner  but  also  its  employees  because  their 
salaries  and  other  benefits  cannot  be  increased  due  to  unreasonable 
restrictions, therefore, impugned legislation is violation of article 9 of 
the Constitution. He submits that legislation is discriminatory because 
in  none  of  the  other  private  professions  including  hospitals,  private 
tuition centers etc., such restriction has not been imposed.  He submits 
that under Article 4 of the Constitution, every citizen has the right to 
be  dealt  in  accordance  with  law  whereas  impugned  legislation  is 
clearly  discriminatory  which  is  against  the  fundamental  rights  of  the 
petitioners. 
11. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Haroon  Mumtaz,  Advocate  for  schools 
argued  that  no  doubt  the  provincial  legislation  can  regulate  the  fee 
structure,  however,  it  cannot  impose  maximum  limit  on  the  increase 
of  fee  as  said  power  falls  within  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  the 
Parliament  under  Article  253(1-A)  of  the  Constitution.  He  submits 
that increase of fee falls within the definition of property which is not 
confined to immovable property but also the right to enjoy the benefit 
of  said  property.  In  this  regard  he  also  referred  to  the  definition  of 
property  in  Article  260  of  the  Constitution  and  also  “property” 
definition  in  Black‟s  Law  Dictionary.  Argued  that  impugned  section 
7-A  infringes  right  of  property  of  petitioners.  He  placed  reliance  on 
Messrs  X.E.N.  Shahpur  Division 
(LJC)  Quarry  Sub-Division 
Sargodha  vs.  The  Collector  Sales  Tax  (Appeals)  Collectorate  of 
14 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
Customs Federal  Excise and Sales Tax Faisalabad and others  (2016 
SCMR 1030), Malik Gul Hassan and Co. vs. Federation of Pakistan 
through  the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Health,  Islamabad  and  9  others 
(1995 CLC 1662), Federation of Pakistan and others vs. Shaukat Ali 
Mian  and  others  (PLD  1999  SC  1026)  and  Tilla  Muhammad  and 
another  vs.  Government  of  North-West  Frontier  Province  through 
Secretary, Law Department and another (1986 CLD 1429).  
12. 
Mr.  Hassan  Makhdoom,  Advocate  for  private  schools 
argued  that  the  impugned  levy  is  discriminatory  and  violative  of 
Article  25  of  the  Constitution  because  schools  who  are  charging  fee 
less  than  Rs.4,000/-  have  been  totally  excluded  from  the  purview  of 
the  impugned  legislation.  He  adds  that  impugned  legislation  is 
violative  of  Article  18  of  the  Constitution  and  placed  reliance  on 
Arshad  Mehmood  and  others  v.  Government  of  Punjab  through 
Secretary Transport Civil Secretariat, Lahore and others  (PLD 2005 
SC 193).  
13. 
Mr. Tafazzul Rizvi Advocate argued that impugned section 
7-A of the Ordinance of 1984 amounts to unreasonable restriction on 
fundamental  rights  of  the  private  schools,  therefore,  not  sustainable 
under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution.  Mr.  Zubair  Ahmad  Chaudhry, 
Advocate adopted the aforesaid arguments of the petitioner schools. 
14. 
Mr.  A.  K.  Dogar,  Advocate  (in  C.M.  No.10/2015  in  W.P. 
No.29724/2015)  argued  that  under  Article  25-A  of  the  Constitution, 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
15 
all  children  in  age  of  5-15  years  have  fundamental  right  to  get  free 
education. Submits that this fundamental right is not only enforceable 
against  Government  Institutions  but  also  against  Private  Parties  and 
Institutions.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Human  Rights  Commission  of 
Pakistan  and  2  others  vs.  Government  of  Pakistan  and  others  (PLD 
2009  SC  507).  He  further  submits  that  education  in  Islam  is  a 
religious duty, therefore enforceable against all Muslims including the 
private  schools. Reliance is  placed on  Fiaqat Hussain and others vs. 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Planning and Development 
Division, Islamabad and others (PLD 2012 SC 224). He next argued 
that  afore-noted  judgments  of  august  Supreme  Court  are  binding  on 
all  Courts  and  institutions  and  must  be  complied  with  in  letter  and 
spirit.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Al-Jehad  Trust  through  Raees  ul 
Mujahidin  Habib  Al-Wahabul  Khairi,  Advocate  Supreme  Court  and 
another  vs.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (PLD  1997  SC  84). 
Based  on  above  submission,  he  concluded  that  all  constitutional 
petitions  are  liable  to  be  dismissed  and  no  fee  whatsoever  can  be 
charged by any Private or Government Institution. 
15. 
Syed  Shahab  Qutab,  Advocate  appearing  on  behalf  of 
respondent  parents 
(in  W.P.  No.830822/2015),  defended 
the 
impugned  legislation.  He  submits  that  running  of  educational 
institution  being  a  “trade”  can  be  regulated  by  the  State  through  a 
licensing  system  under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution.  He  referred  to 
16 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
the  definition  of  “trade”  explained  in  K.G.  Old,  Principal,  Christian 
Technical Training Centre Gujranwala vs. Presiding Officer, Punjab 
Labour Court, Northern Zone and 6 others (PLD 1976 Lahore 1097) 
and  also  referred  to  various  clauses  of  Ordinance  1984,  where 
conditions  for  registration  have  been  prescribed.  He  argued  that  the 
requirement of registration of school under the Ordinance amounts to 
issuance  of  licence,  therefore,  the  State  could  regulate  the  private 
institutions as well as their registration. He submits that the impugned 
legislation is not a legislative judgment as it does not interfere in the 
quasi-judicial  power  of  the  executive  who  will  determine  whether 
increase in fee is justified or not. He further argued that the impugned 
legislation  is  neither  discriminatory  nor  it  amounts  to  deprive  the 
petitioner  from  their  right  of  property.  Submits  that  Article  25-A  of 
the  Constitution  regarding  State  obligation  does  not  entitle  the 
petitioner‟s  to  charge  the  excess  fee  for  failure  on  part  of  State  to 
perform  its  obligations.  He  argued  that  impugned  legislation  is 
permissible  under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution.  He  elaborates  that 
under  first  part  of  Article  18,  qualification  can  be  prescribed  for 
occupation  and  profession  whereas  under  second  part  of  Article  18, 
regulation  can  be  framed  under  licensing  system.  He  submits  that 
running  of  education  institution  being  an  occupation,  conditions  for 
registration  under  the  Ordinance  1984  and  Rules  of  1984  are 
qualifications  as  held  by  august  Supreme  Court  in  Arshad Mahmood 
17 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
case supra. He submits that the running of education institution being 
also  a  trade  and  business  and  requirements  u/s  3,  7,  8  and  9  of  the 
Ordinance  for  the  registration  of  schools  and  their  monitoring 
amounts  to  licensing  system,  therefore,  regulations  in  form  of 
impugned legislation is also permissible under second part of Article 
18 of the Constitution. In this regard reliance is placed on Messrs D.S. 
Textile  Mills  Limited  vs.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (PLD 
2016  Lahore  355),  Messrs  East  West  Steam  Shipping  Company  vs. 
Pakistan etc. (PLD 1958 SC 41) and Judgment passed by Sindh High 
Court  in  case  titled  ―Beacons  House  School  System  vs.  Province  of 
Sindh‖,  C.P.  D.  No.5812/2015.  He  finally  concluded  that  these 
conditions/restrictions being reasonable are valid and legal. 
16. 
Mr.  Waqas  Meer,  Advocate  while  appearing  on  behalf  of 
respondents/parents argued that fundamental right under Article 18 of 
the  Constitution  is  not  an  absolute  right  but  subject  to  qualifications 
and  regulations  being  relating  to  economics  of  the  State.  He  submits 
that  heavy  burden  lies  on  part  of  the  petitioner  to  establish  that 
regulations  under  Article  18  destroy  their  other  fundamental  rights 
including  right  of  property.  He  submits  that  there  are  many  laws 
which  provide  controlling  of  prices  including  prices  of  commodities 
but  same  were  never  declared  unconstitutional  merely  because  it 
regulates  the  right  of  occupation  or  trade.  He  submits  that  law  can 
only be struck down if it is unconstitutional and not merely because it 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
18 
regulates  profession  and  trade  which  amount  to  imposing  certain 
restrictions  on  the  business.  He  placed  reliance  on  Pakcom  Limited 
and others vs. Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD 2011 SC 44) 
and  All  Pakistan  Newspapers  Society  and  others  vs.  Federation  of 
Pakistan and others  (PLD 2012 SC 1). 
17. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Javed  Arshad,  Advocate  also  appearing 
for parents (in W.P. No.29724/2015) argued that the regulation can be 
prescribed  to  control  working  of  private  schools  including  their  fee 
structure.  He  placed  reliance  on  International  College  of  Commerce 
vs.  University  of  Punjab  (PLD  2004  Lahore  335)  and  Rahim  Yar 
Khan College of Education through Principal and another vs. Islamia 
University  of  Bahawalpur  through  Vice-Chancellor  and  3  others 
(1996 SCMR 341).  
18. 
Mr.  Azhar  Siddique  Advocate  on  behalf  of  respondent 
parents  argued  that  maximum  fee  was  lawfully  capped  to  restrain 
private  schools  from  profiteering  and  exploiting  the  parents.  He 
further  argued  that  in  order  to  declare  the  impugned  provision 
confiscatory, the petitioners are bound to show that they have actually 
suffered loss due to capping of fee. 
19. 
Mr.  Shan  Gull,  Additional  Advocate  General  while 
appearing on behalf of respondent Provincial Government argued that 
in  September  2015,  lot  of  hue  and  cry  was  made  by  the  parents 
through demonstrations and media publications against the exorbitant 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
19 
increases  of  fee  by  private  schools.  Submits  that  number  of 
complaints were also filed by these parents and matter was also taken 
up by this Court in W.P. No.14965/2014. Submits that in consequence 
of  these  agitations  and  complaints  by  parents,  the  issue  regarding 
increase of fee by private educational institutions was taken up by the 
provincial  legislation  and  Ordinance  of  2015  was  passed,  where 
beside regulating the fee increase, the maximum limit of 5% was also 
added  through  section  7-A  in  the  Ordinance  of  1984,  which  was 
ultimately  converted  into  Act  of  2016.  Submits  that  subsequently 
section 7-A of Ordinance 1984, was further amended through Act of 
2017  where  private  schools  were  allowed  to  increase  fee  up  to  5%, 
however  maximum  limit  was  prescribed  at  8%.  Submits  that  in 
addition, the private schools were also bifurcated in two categories i.e. 
schools charging fee less than Rs.4000/- and the other charging more 
than Rs.4,000/- and section 7-A was only made applicable to schools 
charging  fee  more  than  Rs.4,000/-  per  month.  Submits  that  this 
exercise  was  done  after  reviewing  the  increase  of  fee  by  private 
schools from year 2008-2015 and comparing it with the inflation rate 
during  this  period  which  proved  that  most  of  the  schools  were 
involved  in  profiteering.  The  learned  counsel  argued  that  right  of 
profession, occupation and trade under Article 18 of the Constitution 
is  neither  an  absolute  right  nor  same  is  fundamental  right,  therefore, 
the  State  could  impose  total  prohibition  on  this  right  in  view  of  law 
20 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
laid  down  by  august  Supreme  Court  in  Government  of  Pakistan  vs. 
Zameer Ahmad Khan (PLD 1975 SC 667). Submits that in the light of 
law  settled  by  august  Supreme  Court  in  Zameer  Ahmad  Khan  case 
supra,  the  provincial  legislation  was  within  its  right  to  declare  that 
increase of fee for more than 8% in a particular year is forbidden by 
law. Submits that Article 18 of the Constitution, only protects lawful 
trade  and  occupation  and  once  the  charging  of  fee  more  than  8%  is 
declared unlawful, there is no protection to said increase under Article 
18 of the Constitution. He submits that  Arshad Mahmood case supra 
where it is held that there can be no absolute prohibition or ban in any 
field is distinguishable.  
20. 
Learned Additional Advocate General refer to provision of 
sections, 3, 5, 7-A, 8, 9 and 11 of the Ordinance 1984 and rules 11 and 
12  of  the  Rules  of  1984  to  submit  that  the  registration  requirements 
are not only qualifications under Article 18 of the Constitution but the 
schools  are  also  governed  under  the  licensing  system  through  the 
above  provisions,  therefore,  the  qualifications  and  conditions  can  be 
prescribed under Article 18 for fixation of fee by the un-aided private 
educational  institutions.  He  further  argued  that  the  impugned 
legislation  provided  a  two  tear  system  of  price  fixation  which  is 
permissible under the law as already held by the Sindh High Court in 
case  titled  ―Beacons  House  School  System  vs.  Province  of  Sindh‖ 
C.P.  D.  No.5812/2015  supra.  He  next  argued  that  the  Ordinance  of 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
21 
2015 was promulgated in September 2015 and had expressly given it 
retrospective effect regarding the fee deposited in August 2015 which 
is permissible under the law. He submits that normally the legislative 
provisions are to be applied prospectively, however, there is no bar on 
the  legislation  to  pass  law  with  retrospective  effect  expressly.  He 
placed reliance on Messrs Haider Automobile Ltd. vs. Pakistan (PLD 
1969  SC  623)  and  Molasses  Trading  &  Export  (Pvt.)  Limited  vs. 
Federation of Pakistan and others (1993 SCMR 1905).   
21. 
He  next  argued  that  there  is  no  discrimination  between 
petitioner  schools  and  the  schools  which  are  charging  fee  less  than 
Rs.4,000/- as well as Aitchison College Lahore. He submits that these 
schools  are  not  equal  to  petitioner  schools,  therefore,  there  is  no 
question  of  discrimination.  Adds  that  legislation  in  its  wisdom  can 
make reasonable classification. Learned Additional Advocate General 
submits that on number of occasions, the maximum limit imposed by 
the  legislation  has  been  upheld  by  this  Court.  He  in  this  regard  has 
placed reliance on Messrs Shaheen Cotton Mills, Lahore and another 
vs. Federation of  Pakistan, Ministry of Commerce through Secretary 
and  another  (PLD  2011  Lahore  120).  Learned  counsel  further 
submits that right through capping of fee can be restricted where it has 
adverse impact on the welfare of public at large. He next argued that 
price fixation is a legislative function and can be imposed to save the 
public  interest.  He  argued  that  the  impugned  legislation  does  not 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
22 
affect  the  right  of  property  of  the  petitioner  and  in  any  case,  the 
petitioners have to prove that the impugned legislation is confiscatory 
or  expropriatory.  He  next  argued  that  the  impugned  levy  is  neither 
legislative judgment nor on this ground, impugned levy can be struck 
down. He finally argued that detailed mechanism is available with the 
department  to  fix  fee  beyond  5%,  therefore,  impugned  levy  is 
reasonable and justified.   
22. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused 
the record within their able assistance.  
23. 
In  present  time  while  parents  increasingly  sending  their 
children  to  private  schools  for  better  education  but  they  are  also 
simultaneously affected by the increasing cost of living and education 
fee  every  year.  Private  schools  charge  fees  based  on  demand  and 
increasing  it  regularly  for  multiple  reasons.  This  has  created  a 
situation  whereby  parents  want  their  children  to  be  educated  in  a 
private school, but cannot afford it, hence have sought the help of the 
government  to  control  the  price  of  the  services  offered  by  private 
schools.  It 
is 
in 
this  context, 
that  Government  has  started 
promulgating and implementing laws to fix the maximum tuition fees 
that  can  be  charged  by  private  schools.  Impugned  law  can  be 
understood  as  a  reaction  from  the  provincial  legislation  to  public 
demand, complaints from parents and the media publicity about some 
private schools charging exorbitant fees. 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
23 
24. 
The  right  to  education  is  concomitant  to  the  fundamental 
rights enshrined under Part II, Chapter 1 of the Constitution. The right 
to  education  flows  directly  from  right  to  life.  The  right  to  life  and 
dignity  of  an  individual  under  Articles  9  and  14  of  the  Constitution 
cannot be assured unless it is accompanied by the right to education. 
The  right  to  education  is  also  guaranteed  under  Article  37(b)  and 
38(d) which though principle of policy and not justiciable but cannot 
be 
isolated 
from 
fundamental 
rights  guaranteed  under 
the 
Constitution.  After  18th  Amendment  in  the  Constitution,  the  right  of 
education  has  been  made  an  independent  fundamental  right  under 
Article  25-A  of  the  Constitution.  Without  right  of  education  under 
Articles 9, 14, 25-A, 37(b) and 38(d) of the Constitution, in reality the 
fundamental  rights  under  the  Constitution  shall  remain  beyond  reach 
of  large  majority  which  will  be  illiterate.  Thus  every  citizen  has  a 
right  to  education  and  State  is  under  an  obligation  to  establish 
educational  institutions  to  enable  the  citizens  to  enjoy  the  said  right. 
The  State  may  discharge  its  obligation  through  State  owned  or  State 
recognized  private  educational  institutions.  However,  when  the  State 
grants  recognition  to  the  private  institution,  it  creates  an  agency 
through 
these 
institutions 
to  fulfill 
its  obligations  under 
the 
Constitution.  Therefore,  it  is  the  State  responsibility  to  see  that  any 
private  educational  institutions  which  have  been  set  up  with 
Government permission are not involved in profiteering, capitation or 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
24 
exploiting  the  parents.  The  State  has  also  a  responsibility  to  ensure 
that these educational institutions must function to the best advantage 
of all the citizens and not confine to only richer section of the society 
by  increasing  fees  exorbitantly.  This  State  responsibility  can  be 
fulfilled by providing registration requirements or through regulations 
under law.  
25. 
Apparently  with  this  back  ground,  the  Ordinance  of  1984 
and  Rules  of  1984  were  promulgated  to  register  and  regulate  private 
educational institutions. The Ordinance of 1984 was amended through 
Ordinance  2015  whereby  the  impugned  section  7-A  was  inserted  in 
Ordinance of 1984 and inter alia maximum limit of 5% for increase in 
fee  was  prescribed.  The  said  Ordinance  of  2015  was  converted  into 
Act  of  2016.  The  provision  of  section  7-A  of  Ordinance  1984  was 
further  amended  through  Act  of  2017  and  maximum  limit  was 
increased  to  8%.  The  current  provision  of  section  7-A  of  the 
Ordinance  1984  as  amended  through  Act  of  2017  is  reproduced 
hereunder:- 
“7-A.  Fees,  etc.–  (1)  Subject  to  this  section,  a  school 
charging  fee  at  the  rate  of  four  thousand  rupees  per 
month or above shall not charge the fee at a rate higher 
than five percent of the fee  charged for the class during 
the  previous  academic  year  but  this  limitation  shall  not 
apply  to  a  school  charging  monthly  fee  from  a  class  of 
students  at  the  rate  which  is  less  than  four  thousand 
rupees per month inclusive of the increase in the fee.  
(2) If there is reasonable justification for increase in the 
existing  fee  at  a  rate  higher  than  five  percent  under 
subsection  (1),  the  Incharge  may,  at  least  three  months 
before  the  commencement  of  the  next  academic  year, 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
25 
to 
incorporating 
shall  contain 
the  Registering  Authority 
apply 
justification. 
(3)  The  application 
reasons  and 
justification  for  the  proposed  increase  and  all  the 
requisite  documents  or  evidence  in  support  of  the 
application shall be annexed with the application.  
(4) The Incharge shall provide such other information or 
documents  to  the  Registering  Authority  as  may  be 
necessary for the disposal of the application. 
(5)  The  Registering  Authority  may,  after  affording  an 
opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  Incharge  and  after 
recording reasons, reject the  application for  increase  in 
the fee of the school or allow reasonable increase in the 
fee not exceeding eight per cent of the fee charged for the 
class during the previous academic year.  
(6) 13[* * * ** * * * * * * *]  
(7)  The  Registering  Authority  shall,  within  thirty  days 
from the receipt of the application for increase in the fee, 
take appropriate decision and inform the applicant of the 
decision taken.  
(8) The admission fee or the security shall not exceed the 
amount equal to the tuition fee payable by the student for 
a month.  
(9)  The  word  ‗fee‘  in  this  section  means  admission  fee, 
tuition  fee,  security,  laboratory  fee,  library  fee  or  any 
other  fee  or  amount  charged  by  an  institution  from  a 
student.  
(10)  An  institution  shall  not  require  the  parents  to 
purchase  textbooks,  uniform  or  other  material  from  a 
particular shop or provider. 
  
26. 
The question require determination is that whether the above 
enactment  in  issue  regarding  fixation  or  determination  of  fees  of 
private educational institutions which as claimed by Government is to 
ensure  not  to  allow  commercialization,  profiteering  and  exploitation, 
does run foul of any provision of the Constitution. In this regard with 
undisputed  right  of  State  to  regulate  lawful  trade  and  lawful 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
26 
professions  or  occupations,  the  moot  issue  is  whether  impugned 
enactment is permissible under Article 18 of the Constitution.  
 
Scope of Article 18 of the Constitution. 
27. 
For  convenience,  Article  18  of 
the  Constitution 
is 
reproduced hereunder:- 
―18.  Subject to such qualifications, if any, as may be 
prescribed by law, every citizen shall have the right to 
enter upon any lawful profession or occupation, and to 
conduct any lawful trade or business:- 
 
Provided that nothing in this Article shall prevent— 
 
the  regulation  of  any  trade  or  profession 
(a) 
by a licensing system; or  
(b) 
the  regulation  of  trade,  commerce  or 
industry  in  the  interest  of  free  competition 
therein; or  
the  Federal 
(c) 
Government or a Provincial Government, or by 
a 
such 
Government, of any trade, business, industry or 
service, to the exclusion, complete or partial, of 
other persons.‖ 
controlled  by  any 
carrying  on,  by 
corporation 
the 
 
 
Plain reading of Article 18 of the Constitution shows that citizen has 
right  to  enter  upon  lawful  occupation  or  profession  or  conduct  a 
lawful trade or business subject to qualifications or conditions through 
regulations.  These  restrictions  under  Article  18  are  of  four  kinds. 
Firstly the State can through law prescribe qualifications; secondly the 
trade  or  profession  may  be  regulated  by  a  licensing  system;  thirdly 
trade,  commerce  or  industry  may  be  regulated  in  the  interest  of  free 
competition  therein  and  fourthly,  a  citizen  may  be  excluded 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
27 
completely or partially from carrying out a trade, business, industry or 
services,  where  State  wants  to  carry  it  out  itself.    The  question 
whether running of educational institution is a profession, occupation 
or  trade,  came  up  for  discussion  in  number  of  cases.  The  Indian 
Supreme  Court  in  cases  reported  as  P.A.  Inamdar  vs.  State  of 
Mahrashtra (2005 (5) SCC 537) and Model Dental College vs. State 
of  Madhya  Pradesh  (AIR  2009  SC  2432)  held  that  running  of  an 
educational  institution  for  charity  or  for  profit  fall  within  the 
definition  of  “occupation”.  This  position  is  also  not  disputed  by 
learned counsel for the petitioner schools.  
28. 
The  honourable  Supreme  Court  in  Arshad Mahmood  case  
supra (PLD  2005  SC  193),  while  interpreting  first part  of  Article  18 
of  the  Constitution  held  that  word  “qualification”  used  in  Article  18 
relates  to  lawful  profession  or  “occupation”  and  not  to  conduct  any 
lawful  trade  or  business.  The  relevant  extract  from  the  Judgment  is 
reproduced here under:- 
―But  in  our  opinion,  in  Article  18  of  the  Constitution, 
word  ―qualification‖  has  been  used  to  confer  a  right 
upon  a  citizen  to  enter  upon  any  lawful  profession  or 
occupation  and  not  to  conduct  any  lawful  trade  or 
business.‖ 
 
The  educational  institutions  being  admittedly  an  “occupation”,  the 
“qualifications”  under  Article  18  can  indeed  be  prescribed  for  these 
institutions by the State. In Arshad Mahmood case supra, honourable 
Supreme  Court  while  defining  “qualification”  held  that  ―as  per 
28 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
ordinary  meaning  of  ―qualification‖,  a  quality,  which  is  legally 
necessary  to  render  a  person  eligible  to  fill  an  office  or  to  perform 
any  public  duty  or  function  like  a  qualified  voter,  who  meets  the 
residence,  age  and  registration  requirements  etc.‖    Plain  reading  of 
impugned  section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance  1984  ibid  shows  that  a 
mechanism  has  been  provided  for  fixation  of  the  fee  by  educational 
institution  including  maximum  limit  to  which  fee  can  be  increased. 
Charging  of  reasonable  fee  being  already  a  condition  for  registration 
u/s  7  of  the  Ordinance  1984  read  with  Rule  12(ii)  of  the  Rules  of 
1984, the mechanism of fixation of reasonable fee through impugned 
section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance  1984  is  also  a  part  of  registration 
requirements prescribed u/s 7 of the Ordinance of 1984 and Rule 12 of 
the  Rules  of  1984.  Indeed  certain  registration  requirements  may  also 
amount  to  “qualifications”, however, we  need  not  to  dilate  upon  this 
question any further because it is respondent Government‟s own case 
that  impugned  section  7-A  of  Ordinance  1984,  is  to  regulate  trade 
under the licensing system. 
29. 
We  have  considered 
this  stance  of 
the 
respondent 
Government  and  have  noted  that  under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution, 
the  State  can  regulate  trade  or  profession  by  a  licensing  system.  The 
ordinary  meaning  of  word  “licence”  as  contained  in  Black‟s  Law 
Dictionary is “permit from Government to carry on some trade etc.” The 
definition  and  general  nature  of  licence  as  stated  in  33rd  Volume  of 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
29 
American  Jurisprudence  is  “to  confer  on  a  person  the  right  to  do 
something  which  otherwise  he  would  not  have  the  right  to  do”.  In 
Ghulam Zameer vs. Khondar (PLD 1965 Dacca 156) the Court held that 
uniformity  of  rules and norms  of  conditions  applicable to  every  case  is 
the  gist  of  the  implication  of  expression  “licence”.  Further  held  that 
those who answer the conditions so laid down are entitled to obtain the 
said licence.  
30. 
Justice Cornelius in East and West Steam Shipping Company 
case (PLD 1958 SC 41) held that licence in the relevant aspect mean an 
arrangement by way of regulation, applicable to a complex whole. It was 
held  that  it  would  provide  for  rules  applicable  uniformly.  The  relevant 
observation by honourable Supreme  Court in M/s East and West Steam 
Shipping Company case supra is reproduced hereunder:- 
    
―A  system,  in  my  opinion,  would  in  the  relevant 
respect  mean  an  arrangement  by  way  of  regulation, 
applicable  to  a  complex  whole  namely  the  trade  of 
shipping  in  general.  It  would  provide  for  rules 
applicable uniformly, subject to suitable classification, 
in relation to the entire trade of shipping. Again, it is 
inherent in the use of the expression "licensing system" 
that  the  actions  of  the  State  in  respect  of  the  trade 
should  be  in  the  nature  of  permissions  granted  to  do 
certain  acts  provided  certain  conditions  are  satisfied; 
it  goes  entirely  beyond  the  meaning  of  the  expression 
"licensing"  to  interpret  it  as  a  check  upon  even  the 
primary processes involved in the trade which is being 
licenced. A simple meaning of the expression "licence" 
in  the  sense  relevant  to  this  discussion  is  that 
contained in the Concise Oxford Dictionary reading as 
under :- 
  
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
30 
  
''  permit  from  Government  etc.,  to  marry,  print 
something, preach, carry on some trade (especially 
that in alcoholic liquor), etc." 
While it is true that upon this interpretation, no person 
can  enter a trade, which is subject to licensing, unless 
he possesses a licence, yet it seems to me, speaking with 
respect,  that  there  is  a  danger  of  fallacy  involved  in 
treating  a  licence  as  if  it  were  a  reversed  prohibition. 
For  the  grant  of  the  Fundamental  Right  of  freedom  to 
conduct  lawful  trades  in  itself  connotes  that  there  is 
advantage  to  be  gained  by  granting  such  a  liberty  to 
individual citizens, not only because it tends to produce 
profit  and  a  livelihood  for  such  citizens,  but  also 
because  it  is  to  the  advantage  of  the  community  in 
general. Therefore, I feel no hesitation in expressing the 
opinion that the power given to the State to regulate a 
trade  by  a  licensing  system  is  one  which  is  to  be 
exercised,  not  for  the  curtailment  of  trade  or  for 
restricting  the  initiative  and  liberty  of  action  which 
persons engaged in trade must necessarily be allowed, 
if they are too make their livelihood under conditions of 
free  enterprise,  but  for  the  advancement  of  the  trade 
and  its  better  organization,  for  the  mutual  benefit  of 
those engaged in it as well as the community at large, I 
decline  to  allow  that  the  systematic  domination  by  the 
State of every action which a ship owner might wish to 
take  in  relation  to  his  ship  for  the  purpose  of  its 
profitable  employment,  can  possibly  fall  within  the 
meaning  of  the  expression  "regulation  by  a  licensing 
system" occurring in the first proviso to Article 12.‖ 
 
31. 
The perusal of sections 3, 4, 6, 7 and 9 of Ordinance 1984 
shows  that  no  educational  institution  shall  run  unless  it  is  registered 
under  Ordinance  1984.  Under  section  6  of  the  Ordinance  1984, 
application  for  registration  is  to  be  filed  by  the  institution  whereas 
section 7 of the Ordinance requires that conditions of registration are 
to  be  complied  with,  as  prescribed  under  the  Rules  of  1984.  Under 
section  9  of  the  Ordinance  1984,  registration  can  be  cancelled  for 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
31 
failure to comply with the provision of Ordinance 1984 or Rules 1984. 
The above provision of Ordinance 1984 and Rules 1984 show that an 
arrangement has been made for running of private schools by way of 
an  Ordinance  and  Rules  applicable  uniformly.  Therefore,  in  view  of 
definition  of  license  discussed  above,  law  settled  in  Ghulam  Zameer 
and  East  and  West  Steam  Shipping  Company  case  ibid,  it  can  safely 
be concluded that private schools are being regulated under licensing 
system.  
32. 
The  Division  Bench  of  Sindh  High  Court  in  case  titled 
―Beacons  House  School  System  vs.  Province  of  Sindh‖,  (C.P.  D. 
No.5812/2015) also in similar circumstances held that private schools 
are  regulated  under  a  licensing  system.  The  relevant  observation  is 
reproduced hereunder:- 
―In our view, when the 2001 Ordinance and the 2005 Rules are 
considered, they set up a regulatory regime for schools (and of 
course  other  educational  institutions  as  well)  that  is  in  the 
nature  of  a  licensing  system  within  the  meaning  of  the  second 
condition imposable under Article 18. The schools are required 
to be registered under the 2001 Ordinance, which is subject to 
periodic  renewal.  No  school  can  function  as  such  unless 
registered.  The  statute  imposes  a  monitoring  and  inspection 
regime.  The  registration  can  be  cancelled  (or  not  renewed)  if 
the  school  contravenes  any  of  the  provisions  of  the  statute  or 
rules  made  thereunder,  or  any  term  or  condition  of  the 
registration  is  violated,  or  any  order  passed  or  instruction 
given by the registering authority is not complied with. Reports 
have  to  be  submitted  annually.  These  and  a  host  of  other 
provisions easily establish that the schools are being regulated 
under a licensing system.‖ 
 
 
33. 
The  Sindh  High  Court  in  Judgment  referred  above  also 
held that  running of educational institution  falls  within the definition 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
32 
of “trade” which includes business. The relevant observations are re-
produced hereunder:- 
―Before  proceeding  further,  we  pause  to  make  a 
 
general point. Schools obviously impart education and a 
teacher at  a  school is  clearly undertaking  a  vocation  or 
profession. The institutionalized provision of schooling is 
an important and indeed a noble endeavor. Teachers are 
highly  revered  in  most  cultures,  and  rightly  so.  But  the 
school itself, at least to the extent here relevant, can also 
be  a  business.  We  must  emphasize  that  there  is  no 
opprobrium  to  a  school  being  run  as  a  business.  There 
should  be  no  stigma  if  an  educational  institution  is  so 
organized  or  operated.  It  is  perfectly  lawful  to  do  so. 
Furthermore,  the  running  of  a  school  as  a  business 
should not be confused with the making of profits. Many 
schools  that  are  run  on  a  non-profit  basis  do  make  a 
profit, i.e., their receipts exceed the expenses. It is simply 
that such profits are not distributed but are (usually as a 
mandatory  condition  of 
the  school‘s  constitutive 
documents) ploughed back into the institution. However, 
there  is  nothing  wrong  with  running  a  school  with  the 
intent  of  making  (i.e.,  distributing)  a  profit.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  we  are  here  concerned  with  the 
Constitution and the law. While the State, in setting up a 
regulatory  regime  under  a  licensing  system  in  terms  of 
the  second  condition  is  entitled  to  take  into  account  a 
host  of factors and tailor its system accordingly, it  must 
be recognized that we are concerned with a fundamental 
right that is being subjected to a restriction. We proceed 
accordingly.‖ 
 
34. 
The  running  of  educational  institution  being  a  business 
which is covered under definition  of  “trade” can  indeed be  regulated 
by  a  licensing  system.  The  host  of  provisions  of  the  Ordinance  of 
1984  and  Rules  of  1984,  discussed  above  leave  no  manner  of  doubt 
that schools are being regulated under licensing system.  
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
Regulations to be Reasonable. 
35. 
No  doubt the  State can  regulate the trade or profession by  a 
licensing  system,  however,  honourable  Supreme  Court  repeatedly  held 
that  these  regulations  must  be  reasonable.  There  is  distinction  between 
Article  18  of  Pakistani  Constitution  and  Article  19(6)  of  the  Indian 
Constitution.  In  Article  18,  the  word  “reasonable  restriction”  is  not 
specifically  mentioned  as  in  Article  19(6)  of  the  Indian  Constitution. 
However,  word  “regulation”  in  Article  18  has  been  construed  that 
regulation shall be reasonable.  In this regard the august Supreme Court 
in Arshad Mahmood case (PLD 2005 SC 193), held as under:- 
―It is well settled that the right of trade/business or 
profession under Article 18  of the Constitution is not an 
absolute right but so long a trade or business is lawful a 
citizen  who  is  eligible  to  conduct  the  same  cannot  be 
deprived  from  undertaking  the  same,  subject  to  law 
which  regulates  it  accordingly.  The  word  ―regulation‖, 
as used in Article 18 of Constitution has been interpreted 
by  the  Courts  of  our  country  keeping  in  view  the 
provisions  of  Article  19(1)(g)(6)  of 
Indian 
Constitution. 
the 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  our  Constitution  stands  in 
sharp contrast to the corresponding provisions of Indian 
Constitution.  A  comparison  of  Article  18  of 
the 
Constitution  and  Article  19(1)(g)(6)  of  the  Indian 
Constitution  manifestly  makes  it  clear  that  in  later 
Constitution,  words  ―lawful‖  and  ―regulation‖  are 
conspicuously  omitted  but  while  defining  the  word 
―regulation‖, 
the 
interpretation  of  Indian  Supreme  Court  of  expression 
―reasonable restriction‖, while dealing with the concept 
of  ―free  trade/business  etc.‖  under  Article  18  of  the 
Constitution,  despite  the  distinction  noted  herein  above. 
In  this  behalf,  reference  may  be  made  to  Administrator 
Market  Committee,  Kasur,  etc.  vs.  Muhammad  Sharif 
(1994 SCMR 1048). 
our  Courts 
followed 
have 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
34 
Whereas  in  Black‘s  Law  Dictionary,  the  word 
‗regulation‘ has been defined as follows:- 
―Regulation.---The  act  of  regulating;  a  rule  of 
order  prescribed  for  management  or  government;  a 
regulating principle; a precept. Rule of order prescribed 
by  superior  or  competent  authority  relating  to  action  of 
those  under  its  control.  Regulation  is  rule  or  order 
having  force  of  law  issued  by  executive  authority  of 
government. 
Perusal  of  above  definition  persuades  us  to  hold 
that there cannot be denial of the Government‘s authority 
to regulate a lawful business or trade, but question would 
arise  whether  under  the  garb  of  such  authority,  the 
Government  can  prohibit  or  prevent  running  of  such  a 
business or trade. To find out the answer to this question, 
reference  may  be  made  to  the  case  of  Municipal 
Corporation  of  the  City  of  Toranto  vs.  Virgo  (1896  AC 
88,  93),  where  Lord  Davey  while  discussing  a  statutory 
power  conferred  on  a  Municipal  Council  to  make  bye-
laws  for  regulating  and  governing  a  trade  made  the 
following observation;-- 
―No  doubt  the  regulation  and  governance  of  a 
trade  may  involve  the  imposition  of  restrictions  on  this 
exercise……….Where such restrictions are in the opinion 
of the public authority necessary to prevent a nuisance or 
for  the  maintenance  of  order.  But  their  lordships  think 
that there is marked distinction to be drawn between the 
prohibition or prevention of a trade and the regulation or 
government  of  it,  and  indeed  a  power  to  regulate  and 
govern  seems  to  imply  the  continued  existence  of  that 
which is to be regulated or governed.‖ 
In  Article  18  of 
the  Constitution,  word 
―qualification‖  has  been  used  to  confer  a  right  upon  a 
citizen to enter upon any lawful profession or occupation 
and not to conduct any lawful trade or business. 
Argument  of  learned  counsel  for  respondents  is 
that  competent  authority  can  regulate  any  trade  or 
profession by a licensing system. There may be no cavil 
but this clause has to be read conjunctively with proviso 
(b) of Article 18 of the Constitution, according to which 
an  element  of  free  competition  to  regulate  a  trade, 
commerce  or  industry  has  been  introduced  because  if 
competition  in the trade is discouraged,  it  would negate 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
35 
the  provisions  of  Article  3  of  the  Constitution,  which 
deals with the elimination of all forms of exploitation and 
if  due  to  non-competition,  franchise  is  granted  on 
specified  routes,  it  would  tantamount  to  monopolize  the 
trade/business  of  transport,  as  held  in  the  case  of 
Harman Singh v. R.T.A. Calcutta Region. (AIR 1954 SC 
190). 
   
As  observed  herein  above,  Constitution  is  a  living  document 
which  portrays  the  aspirations  and  genius  of  the  people  and 
aims  at  creating  progress,  peace,  welfare,  amity  among  the 
citizens,  therefore,  while  interpreting  its  different  Articles 
particularly  relating  to  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  citizens, 
approach  of  the  Courts  should  be  dynamic  rather  than  static, 
pragmatic  and  not  pedantic  and  elastic  rather  than  rigid.  As 
such,  following  this  principle  and  also  keeping  in  view  other 
provisions  of  the  Constitution,  which  deals  with  the  principles 
of  State  policy, we are inclined to hold that if the definition of 
word  ―regulation‖ as  laid down  in  the judgments  cited herein 
above, is applied to hold that under licensing system, unless the 
business  is  unlawful  or  indecency  is  involved  therein,  the 
legislature  can  enact  laws,  which  will  promote  a  free 
competition  in  the  fields  of  trade,  commerce  and  industry.  At 
any  those  should  not  be  arbitrary  or  excessive  in  nature, 
barring a majority of persons to enjoy such trade.‖ 
 
36. 
Same view was expressed by the august Supreme Court in 
Pakcom  Limited  and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others 
(PLD 2011 SC 44) where while examining the scope of Article 18 of 
the Constitution, it was held as under:- 
―The interpretation of Article 18 has been made variously 
 
and  the  judicial  consensus  seems  to  be  that  the  “right  of 
freedom  of  trade,  business  or  professions  guaranteed  by  Art. 
18 of the Constitution is not absolute, as it can be subjected to 
reasonable  restrictions  and  regulations  as  may  be  prescribed 
by law. Such right is therefore, not unfettered. The regulation of 
any trade or profession by a system of licensing empowers the 
Legislature  as  well  as  the  authorities  concerned  to  impose 
restrictions on the exercise of the right. They must, however, be 
reasonable and bear true relation to ‗trade‘ or profession and 
for  purposes  of  promoting  general  welfare.  Even  in  those 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
36 
countries where the right to enter upon a trade or profession is 
not  expressly  subjected  to  conditions  similar  to  this  Article,  it 
was  eventually  found  that  the  State  has,  in  the  exercise  of  its 
police  power,  the  authority  to  subject  the  right  to  a  system  of 
licensing,  i.e.  to  permit  a  citizen  to  carry  on  the  trade  or 
profession only if he satisfies the terms and conditions imposed 
by  the  prescribed  authority  for  the  purposes  of  promoting 
general welfare.‖ 
  
 
  (emphasis supplied). 
37. 
In  Al-Reham  Travels  and  Tours  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  v.  Ministry  of 
Religious, Hajj, Zakat and Ushr through Secretary and others  (2011 
SCMR  1621),  honourable  Supreme  Court  held  that  Constitution 
protects  the  fundamental  rights  of  every  citizen  to  join  any  lawful 
profession or occupation and to conduct any lawful business. Further 
held that in  the proviso of said  Article, the  Federal  Government or a 
Provincial  Government,  or  by  a  corporation  controlled  by  any 
Government, can carry out any trade, business, industry or service, to 
the  exclusion  complete  or  partial  of  other  persons.  In  the  case  of 
Farooq  Ahmad  Khan  Leghari  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  1999 
SC  57),  it  was  held  that  “the  general  words  cannot  be  construed  in 
isolation, but the same are to be construed in the context in which they 
are employed. Therefore, held that exclusion provided in clause (c) of 
Article 18 of the Constitution is only to the extent of trade, business, 
industry  or  service  controlled  by  the  Federal  Government  or 
Provincial  Government  or  by  a  corporation,  controlled  by  any  such 
Government.  
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
37 
38. 
In  Messrs  Elahi  Cotton  Mills  Ltd.  and  others  vs. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary  M/o  Finance,  Islamabad 
and others (PLD 1997 SC 582), it is held that any legislation whereby 
either the prices of marketable commodities are fixed in such a way as 
to  bring  them  below  the  cost  of  production  and  thereby  make  it 
impossible  for a  citizen to  carry  on  his business  or tax is  imposed  in 
such a way so as to result in acquiring property of those on whom the 
incidence of taxation fell, then such legislation would be violative of 
the  fundamental  rights  to  carry  on  business  and  to  hold  property  as 
guaranteed  in  the  Constitution.  In  Administrator,  Market  Committee 
Kasur  and  3  others  vs.  Muhammad  Sharif  and  others  (1994  SCMR 
1048), it is held that Licensing System is itself a restrain on the trade, 
but the Constitution empowers the Government to impose reasonable 
restrictions.  
39. 
In  Watan  Party  and  another  vs.  Federation  of  Pakistan 
(PLD 2011 SC 997), honourable Supreme Court held as under:- 
  ―This  clearly  envisages  that  the  State  can  by  law  ban  a 
profession, occupation, trade or business by declaring it to 
be  unlawful  which  in  common  parlance  means  anything 
forbidden  by  law,  prostitution,  trafficking  in  women, 
gambling,  trade  in  narcotics  or  dangerous  drugs  are 
common  place  instances  of  unlawful  profession  or  trade. 
These  are  inherently  dangerous  to  public  health  or 
welfare.  Therefore,  on  the  wording  of  Article  18  of  the 
Constitution,  the  right  to  enter  upon  a  profession  or 
occupation or to conduct trade or business can hardly be 
described  to  be  a  Constitutional  or  Fundamental  Right 
when such right may be denied by law. In this respect our 
Constitution 
the 
contrast  with 
stands 
sharp 
in 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
38 
corresponding provisions of the Indian Constitution which 
omits the use of word ―lawful‖ in the relevant provision. 
The  same  principle  was  enunciated  by  this  Court 
   
in  the  case  of  Arshad  Mehmood  (Supra).  This  Court 
observed that the Government has the authority to regulate 
a 
trade.  Reasonable  restriction, 
however,  does  not  mean  prohibition  or  prevention 
completely. Article 24(1) of the Constitution envisages that 
no  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  property  save  in 
accordance with law.‖  
 
lawful  business  or 
In  Shahabuddin  and  another  vs.  Pakistan  (PLD  1957  (W.P.)  Kar. 
854), Sindh High Court held that:- 
The 
first  part  of 
the  Article  relations 
   
to 
prescription of qualifications to enter upon a profession or 
occupation and has no application to this case because no 
qualifications  have  been  prescribed  for  entering  upon  the 
occupation  of  the  petitioners.  The  petitioners  therefore, 
have a right under the Constitution to conduct their trade 
freely, subject to the regulation of their trade, if any by a 
licensing  system.  There  must  be  a  licensing  system  for 
regulating their trade. 
   
Regulation  is  different  from  control.  The  word 
‗control‘  only  means  dominance  of  a  superior  authority. 
The  meaning  of  the  word  does  not  necessarily  imply  a 
purpose other than the subjection of the subordinate. It is 
not so with the expression ‗regulation‘ because regulation 
is not a antithesis orderliness with an objection in view.‖      
 
40. 
The crux of the above judgments is that right of profession 
and trade under Article 18 of the Constitution is not an absolute right 
and is always subject to reasonable restrictions prescribed by law in a 
system  of  licensing. The  competent  authority  is  at  liberty  to  regulate 
profession  and  trade  and  said  form  of  regulation  shall  only  be 
unconstitutional  if  it  is  arbitrary,  discriminatory,  or  demonstrably 
irrelevant  to  the  policy,  hence  an  unnecessary  and  unwarranted 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
39 
interference with individual liberty and right of property. Reasonable 
restrictions  authorized  by  the  Constitution  do  not  negate  the 
Constitutional  rights  of  a  citizen  to  do  business  unhindered  without 
any  condition.  A  reasonable  restriction  is  always  considered  to  be 
within the frame work of the fundamental right. Law may regulate the 
mode  of  carrying  on  business,  there  is  no  bar  to  exercise  the  lawful 
trade  but  the  interest  of  community  should  be  guarded  as  a  public 
policy.  A  right  to  do  business  does  not  guarantee  a  trader  an 
uncontrolled privilege. There should be no doubt that requirement of 
registration/licence  from  person  desiring  to  carry  on  any  occupation, 
trade  or  business  is  a  restriction  on  the  right  to  carry  on  the 
occupation, trade or business and its validity is liable to be questioned 
and  tested.  Therefore  the  requiring  of  registration/licence  would  be 
valid only if it reasonable in the interest of the general public. 
 
Test of Reasonableness. 
41. 
Now  the  next  question  is  that  what  is  the  test  of 
reasonableness  to  determine  if  any  particular  restriction  such  as 
impugned section 7-A of the Ordinance 1984 is reasonable or not. The 
august  Supreme  Court  in  Pakistan  Broadcasters  Association  vs. 
Pakistan Media Regulatory Authority (PLD 2016 SC 692) defined the 
expression “reasonable restriction” as under:- 
―It  is  certainly  not  easy  to  define  ―reasonableness‖  with 
precision. It is neither possible nor advisable to prescribe 
any  abstract  standard  of  universal  application  of 
reasonableness. However, factors such as the nature of the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
40 
right  infringed,  duration  and  extent  of  the  restriction,  the 
causes  and  circumstances  promoting  the  restriction,  and 
the  manner  as  well  as  the  purpose  for  which  the 
restrictions  are  imposed  are  to  be  considered.  The  extent 
of the malice sought to be prevented and/or remedied, and 
the  disproportion of the  restriction  may also be examined 
in  the  context  of  reasonableness  or  otherwise  of  the 
imposition.  It  needs  to be  kept  in  mind that ―reasonable‖ 
implies intelligent care and deliberation, that is, the choice 
of  course  that  reason  dictates.  For  an  action  to  be 
qualified as reasonable, it must also be just right and fair, 
and  should  neither  be  arbitrary  nor 
fanciful  or 
oppressive.‖  
 
42. 
The  august  Supreme  Court  in  Arshad Mahmood case  supra 
observed  that  our  Courts  followed  the  interpretation  of  expression 
“reasonable  restriction”  form  Indian  case  law,  therefore,  it  will  be 
useful  to  also  examine  the  test  of  reasonableness  discussed  in 
following Indian judgments:- 
 
(i).  
In Papnasam Labour Union vs. Madura Coats Ltd. 
(AIR 1952 SC 196), the Court held as under:- 
of 
the 
view 
from 
point 
the  restrictions,  but  also 
―That  both  the  substantive  and  the  procedural 
aspects  of  the  impugned  restrictive  law  should  be 
examined 
of 
reasonableness;  that  is  to  say,  the  Court  should 
consider not only factors such as the duration and 
the  extent  of 
the 
circumstances  under  which  and  the  manner  in 
which their imposition has to bear in mind that the 
test 
statute 
impugned,  and  no  abstract  standard,  or  general 
pattern  of  reasonableness  can  be  laid  down  as 
applicable  to  all  cases.  The  nature  of  the  right 
alleged  to  have  been  infringed,  the  underlying 
purpose of the restrictions imposed, the extent and 
urgency of the evil sought to be remedied thereby, 
the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing 
conditions  at  the  time,  should  all  enter  into  the 
reasonableness, 
individual 
of 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
41 
judicial verdict. In evaluating such elusive factors 
and  forming  their  own  conception  of  what  is 
reasonable,  in  all  the  circumstances  of  a  given 
case, it is inevitable that the social philosophy and 
the  scale  of  values  of  the  Judges  participating  in 
the decision should play an important part, and the 
limit to their interference with legislative judgment 
in such cases can only be dictated by their sense of 
responsibility  and  self-restraint  and  the  sobering 
reflection  that  the  Constitution  is  meant  not  only 
for people of their way of thinking but for all, and 
that  the  majority  of  the  elected  representatives  of 
the  people  have  in  authorizing  the  imposition  of 
the 
be 
reasonable.‖  
restrictions, 
considered 
them 
to 
 
 
(ii). 
In  Mohammad  Faruk  v.  State of  Madhya Pradesh 
(1970 AIR SC 93), the Court held that:- 
―The  impugned  notification-,  though  technically 
within  the  competence  of  the  State  Government, 
directly  infringes  the  fundamental  right  of  the 
petitioner guaranteed by Art. 19(1)(g), and may be 
upheld  only  if  it  be  established  that  it  seeks  to 
impose  reasonable  restrictions  in  the  interests  of 
the  general  public  and  a  less  drastic  restriction 
will  not  be  ensure  the  interest  of  the  general 
public. The Court must in considering the validity 
of the impugned law imposing a prohibition on the 
carrying on of a business or profession, attempt an 
evaluation of its direct and immediate impact upon 
the  fundamental  rights  of  the  citizens  affected 
thereby and the larger public interest  sought to be 
ensured  in  the  light  of  the  object  sought  to  be 
achieved,  the  necessity  to  restrict  in  the  citizen‘s 
freedom,  the  inherent pernicious  nature  of the  act 
prohibited  or  its  capacity  or  tendency  to  be 
harmful  to  the  general  public,  the  possibility  of 
achieving  the  object  by  imposing  a  less  drastic 
restraint,  and  in  the  absence  of  exceptional 
situations  such  as  the  prevalence  of  a  state  of 
emergency-national  or  local-  or  the  necessity  to 
maintain essential supplies, or the necessity to stop 
activities inherently  dangerous, the existence of a 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
42 
machinery  to  satisfy  the  administrative  authority 
that  no  case  for  imposing  the  restriction  is  made 
out or that a less drastic restriction may ensure the 
object intended to be achieved. The sentiments of a 
section  of  the  people  may  be  hurt  by  permitting 
slaughter  of  bulls  and  bullocks  in  premises 
maintained by a local authority. But a prohibition 
imposed on the exercise of a fundamental right to 
carry on an occupation, trade or business will not 
be  regarded  as  reasonable,  if  is  imposed  not  in 
(1)[160]2  S.C.R.  375,  the  interest  of  the  general 
public,  but  merely  to  respect  the  susceptibilities 
and  sentiments  of  a  section  of  the  people  whose 
way of life, belief or thought is not the same as that 
of the claimant.‖ 
 
 
(iii). 
In  Narendra  Kumar  v.  Union of  India  (AIR  1960 
SC 430),  the Court held that:- 
by 
provided 
the  Article, 
―It  is  reasonable  to  think  that  the  makers  of  the 
Constitution  considered  the  word  "restriction"  to 
be  sufficiently  wide  to  save  laws  "inconsistent" 
with  Article  19(1),  or  "taking  away  the  rights" 
conferred 
this 
inconsistency  or  taking  away  was  reasonable  in 
the  interests  of  the  different  matters  mentioned  in 
the  clause.  There  can  be  no  doubt  therefore  that 
they  intended  the  word  "restriction"  to  include 
cases  of  "prohibition"  also.  The  contention  that  a 
law prohibiting the exercise of a fundamental right 
is in no case saved, cannot therefore be accepted. 
It  is  undoubtedly  correct,  however,  that  when,  as 
in  the  present  case,  the  restriction  reaches  the 
stage of prohibition special care has to be taken by 
the  Court  to  see  that  the  test  of  reasonableness  is 
satisfied. The greater the restriction, the more the 
need for strict scrutiny by the Court.  
In  applying  the  test  of  reasonableness,  the 
 
Court  has 
the 
background  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  under 
which the order was made, taking into account the 
nature  of  the  evil  that  was  sought  to  be  remedied 
by  such  law,  the  ratio  of  the  harm  caused  to 
individual  citizens  by  the proposed remedy,  to the 
the  question 
to  consider 
in 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
43 
beneficial  effect  reasonably  expected  to  result  to 
the  general  public.  It  will  also  be  necessary  to 
consider  in  that  connection  whether  the  restraint 
caused  by  the  law  is  more  than  was  necessary  in 
the interests of the general public.‖ 
 
 
(iv). 
In  Bannari  Amman  Sugars  Ltd.  Commercial  Tax 
Officer (2005 1 SC 625), the Court held that:- 
to  have 
―Reasonableness of restriction is to be determined 
in an objective manner and from the standpoint of 
interest  of  the  general  public  and  not  from  the 
stand point of the interests of persons upon whom 
the  restrictions  have  been  imposed  or  upon 
abstract  consideration.  A  restriction  cannot  be 
said to be unreasonable merely because in a given 
case,  it  operates  harshly.  In  determining  whether 
there  is  any  unfairness  involved  the  nature  of  the 
right  alleged 
the 
underlying purpose of the restriction imposed, the 
extent  and  urgency  of  the  evil  sought  to  be 
remedied 
the 
imposition, the prevailing condition at the relevant 
time enter into judicial verdict, the reasonableness 
of the legitimate expectation has to be determined 
with  the  respect  to  the  circumstances  relating  to 
the trade or business in question. Canalisation of a 
particular  business  in  favour  of  even  a  specified 
individual is reasonable where the interests of the 
country  are  concerned  or  where  the  business 
affects the economy of the country.‖ 
the  disproportion  of 
infringed, 
thereby, 
taken 
 
 
  (v). 
In  Bishambhar  Dayal  Chandra  Mohan  v.  State  of 
Uttar Pradesh (1982 AIR (SC) 33), the Court held that:- 
―The  real,  question  at  issue  is  whether  or  not  the 
seizure of wheat was with the authority of law. The 
fundamental  right  to  carry  on  trade  or  business 
guaranteed  under  Article  19(1)(g)  or  the  freedom 
of  inter-State  trade,  commerce  and  intercourse 
under  Article 301  of the  Constitution, has  its  own 
limitations. The liberty of an individual to do as he 
pleases  is  not  absolute.  It  must  yield  to  the 
common good. Absolute or unrestricted individual 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
44 
rights do not and cannot exist in any modern State. 
There  is  no  protection  of  the  rights  themselves 
unless there is a measure of control and regulation 
of  the  rights  of  each  individual  in  the  interests  of 
all.  Whenever  such  a  conflict  comes  before  the 
Court, it is its duty to harmonise the exercise of the 
competing  rights.  The  Court  must  balance  the 
individual's  rights  of  freedom  of  trade  under 
Article  19  (1)  (g)  and  the  freedom,  of  inter-State 
trade  and  commerce  under  Article 301 as  against 
the national interest.  Such a limitation  is inherent 
in the exercise of those rights.‖ 
 
 
(vi). 
In Cooverjee B. Bharucha v. Excise Commissioner 
(1954 AIR (SC) 220), the Court held that:- 
Laws  prohibiting 
―It  was  not  disputed  that  in  order  to 
 
determine  the  reasonableness  of  the  restriction 
regard  must  be  had  to  the  nature  of  the  business 
and  the  conditions  prevailing  in  that  trade.  It  is 
obvious that these factors must differ from trade to 
trade  and  no  hard  and  fast  rules  concerning  all 
trades can be laid down. It can also not be denied 
that  the  State  has  the  power  to  prohibit  trades 
which  are  illegal  or  immoral  or  injurious  to  the 
health and welfare of the public.  
 
in  noxious  or 
trades 
dangerous  goods  or  trafficking  in  women  cannot 
beheld to  be  illegal as enacting a  prohibition and 
not  a  mere  regulation.  The  nature  of  the  business 
is, therefore, an important element in deciding the 
reasonableness  of  the  restrictions.  The  right  of 
every  citizen  to  pursue  any  lawful  trade  or 
business  is  obviously  subject  to  such  reasonable 
conditions  as  may  be  deemed  by  the  governing 
authority  of  the  country  essential  to  the  safety, 
health, peace, order and morals of the community. 
Some  occupations  by  the  noise  made  in  their 
pursuit,  some  by  the  odours  they  engender,  and 
some  by  the  dangers  accompanying  them,  require 
regulations as to the locality in which they may be 
conducted.  Some,  by  the  dangerous  character  of 
the  articles  used,  manufactured  or  sold,  Require 
also special qualifications in the parties permitted 
to use, manufacture or sell them.‖ 
45 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii). 
In  Municipal  Corporation  of 
the  City  of 
Ahmedabad vs. Jan Mohammed Usmanbhai (1986) 3 SCC 
20, the Court held that:- 
―When the validity of a law placing restriction on 
the  exercise  of  a  fundamental  right  in  Article 
19(1)(g)  is  challenged,  the  onus  of  proving  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  Court  that  the  restriction  is 
reasonable lies upon the State. If the law requires 
that an act which is inherently dangerous, noxious 
or injurious to the public interest, health or safety 
or  is  likely  to  prove  a  nuisance  to  the  community 
shall  be  done  under  a  permit  or  a  licence  of  an  
executive  authority,  it  is  not  per  se  unreasonable 
and no person may claim a licence or a permit  to 
do that act as of right. Where the law providing for 
grant  of  a  licence  or  permit  confers  a  discretion 
upon  an  administrative  authority  regulated  by 
permit confers a discretion upon an administrative 
authority regulated by rules or principles, express 
or implied, and exercisable in consonance with the 
rules  of  natural  justice,  it  will  be  presumed  to 
impose  a  reasonable  restriction.  Where,  however, 
power  is  entrusted  to  an  administrative  agency  to 
grant  or  withhold  a  permit  or  licence  in  its 
uncontrolled  discretion  the  law  ex  facie  infringes 
the  fundamental  right  under  Article  19(1)(g). 
Imposition  of  restriction  on  the  exercise  of  a 
fundamental right may be in the form of control or 
prohibition.  But  when 
the  exercise  of  a 
fundamental  right  is  prohibited,  the  burden  of 
proving that a total ban on the exercise of the right 
alone  may  ensure  the  maintenance  of  the  interest 
of  general  public  lies  heavily  upon  the  State.  In 
this  background  of  legal  position  the  appellants 
have  to  establish  that  the  restriction  put  on  the 
fundamental  right  of  the  respondents  to  carry  on 
their  trade  or  business  in  beef  was  a  reasonable 
one. The Court must in considering the validity of 
the  impugned  law  imposing  prohibition  on  the 
carrying  on  of  a  business  or  a  profession  attempt 
an  evaluation  of  its  direct  and  immediate  impact 
upon the fundamental rights of the citizens affected 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
46 
thereby  an  the  larger  public  interest  sought  to  be 
achieved,  the  necessity  to  restrict  the  citizen‘s 
freedom,  the  inherent pernicious  nature  of the  act 
prohibited  or  its  capacity  or  tendency  to  be 
harmful  to  the  general  public,  the  possibility  of 
achieving  the  object  by  imposing  a  less  drastic 
restraint,  and  in  the  absence  of  exceptional 
situations  such  as  the  prevalence  of  a  state  of 
emergency,  national  or  local,  or  the  necessity  to 
maintain  necessary  supplies  or  the  necessity  to 
stop  activities  inherently  dangerous,  the  existence 
of  a  machinery  to  satisfy  the  administrative 
authority  that  a  case  for  imposing  restriction  is 
made  out  or  a  less  drastic  restriction  may  ensure 
the objection intended to be achieved.‖  
 
 
(viii). 
In  Abdul  Hakim  Quraishi  and  others  vs.  State  of 
Bihar (AIR 1961 SC 448), the Court held that:- 
'reasonable' 
―The phrase 'reasonable restriction' connotes that 
the limitation imposed on a person in enjoyment of 
the right should not be arbitrary or of an excessive 
nature, beyond what is required in the interests of 
the  public.  The  word 
implies 
intelligent care and deliberation, that is, the choice 
of  a  course  which  reason  dictates.  Legislation 
which  arbitrarily  or  excessively  invades  the  right 
cannot  be  said 
the  quality  of 
reasonableness  and  unless  it  strikes  a  proper 
balance between the freedom guaranteed in Article 
19(1)(g) and the social control permitted by clause 
(6) of  Article 19,  it must be held  to  be  wanting in 
that quality." 
to  contain 
 
 
(ix). 
In  Mohammad  Yasin  vs.  Town  Area  Committee, 
Jalalabad and another (AIR 1952 SC 115), the Court held 
that:- 
―Under Article 19(1)(g) the citizen has the right to 
carry  on  any  occupation,  trade  or  business  which 
right  under  that  clause  is  apparently  to  be 
unfettered.  The  only  restriction  to  this  unfettered 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
47 
right  is  the  authority  of  the  State  to  make  a  law 
relating  to  the  carrying  on  of  such  occupation, 
trade  or  business  as  mentioned  in  Clause  (6)  of 
that  article  as  amended  by  the  constitution  (First 
Amendment)  Act,  1951,  If,  therefore,  the  licence 
fee cannot be justified on the basis of any valid law 
no question of its reasonableness can arise, for, an 
illegal impost must at all times be an unreasonable 
restriction and will necessarily infringe the right of 
the  citizen  to  carry  on  his  occupation,  trade  or 
business  under  Article  19(1)(g)  and 
such 
infringement  can  properly  be  made  the  subject-
matter  of  a  challenge  under  art  32  of  the 
Constitution.‖ 
 
43. 
The  test  of  reasonableness  settled  in  above  case  law  is  that 
Court  should  consider  not  only  factors  such  as  the  duration  and  the 
extent of the restrictions but also the circumstances and the manner in 
which  they  are  imposed.  There  are  no  abstract  standard  or  general 
pattern of reasonableness, Court has to bear in mind that the nature of 
the rights infringed through such restriction should be proportionate to 
the urgency of the evil sought to be remedied by said restriction. The 
restriction on fundamental right can only be upheld if it is established 
that it seeks to impose reasonable restriction in the interest of general 
public and a less drastic restriction will not have ensured the interest 
of the general public. 
44. 
Under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution,  the  restrictions 
imposed  are  not  only  required  to  be  imposed  by  law  but  the  said 
restrictions must also be reasonable as held in Arshad Mahmood case 
supra. Generally speaking the validity of primarily legislation such as 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
48 
Act  of  the  Parliament  is  not  open    to  challenge  on  the  grounds  of 
reasonableness  and  reasonableness  is  available  to  challenge  the 
validity of subordinate legislation such as rules or regulation or act of 
the  executive  but  this  general  rule  does  not  apply  where  under  the 
Constitution, a right conferred is subject to reasonableness restriction 
imposed by law in the public interest etc. Indeed under Article 18 of 
the  Constitution,  a  restriction  can  be  imposed  through  a  licensing 
system on profession and trade in the collective interest of society and 
general public.  
45. 
No doubt the fundamental rights are sacred and cannot be 
transgressed, however, fundamental rights have no real meaning if the 
State itself has in danger or disorganized, because a disorganized State 
will not be in a position to guarantee the rights of citizens. Therefore, 
the  State  has  to  maintain  equilibrium  between  interest  of  the 
individual and the need to impose reasonable limits on the enjoyment 
of  those  rights  in  the  interest  of  collective  good  of  the  society.  It  is 
here  that  Court  is  called  upon  to  hold  the  balance  between  public 
interest  and  reasonableness  of  restriction  imposed  by  law  which 
encroached upon the right and in case the Court finds that legislation 
has  transgressed  reasonable  limits  envisaged  by  the  Constitution,  it 
will not hesitate to strike it down as ultra vires. 
46. 
We  now  apply  the  above  test  of  reasonableness  to  the 
impugned  section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance  1984  which  regulate  fee 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
49 
structure  of  unaided  private  schools,  to  examine  if  this  enactment 
infringes  any  of  the  fundamental  rights.  In  Pakistan,  the  registration 
and  regulation  of  private  educational  institutions  including  their  fee 
structure, 
is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  Previously 
the  Punjab 
Educational  (Control  of  unrecognized  Private  Institutions)  Act,  1953 
(Act  of  1953)  was  promulgated  on  25.01.1954,  which  inter  alia 
provided  that  all  unrecognized  private  institutions  shall  apply  for 
registration in prescribed manner under the Act. The said law further 
provided that  if any  person  runs an unrecognized  private  educational 
institution  without  its  registration  under  the  Act  of  1953,  he  will  be 
guilty  of  an  offence  punishable  on  conviction  with  fine.  The  Act  of 
1953 was repealed and through the West Pakistan Registration of un-
recognized  Educational  Institutions  Ordinance,  1962  (Ordinance  of 
1962), 
the  registering  authority  was  required 
to  ensure 
that 
unrecognized  private  educational  institution,  fulfilled  the  conditions 
specified in the schedule to the Ordinance of 1962. Clause (v) of the 
Schedule  to  the  Ordinance  of  1962  relates  to  the  rates  of  tuition  fee 
and subscription which is reproduced hereunder:- 
―(v).      that the rates of tuition fees and subscriptions 
charged are not in excess of the scales prescribed or 
approved by the Department; and‖ 
 
The Ordinance of 1962 was also repealed and finally the Ordinance of 
1984 was promulgated. The said Ordinance of 1984 was applicable to 
all privately managed colleges, schools or institutions notified as such 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
50 
by Government. Section 7 of the Ordinance 1984 relates to conditions 
of registration including payment of fee. For convenience, said section 
7 is reproduced hereunder:- 
―7.      Conditions  of  Registration.–  An  institution  shall 
comply  with  such  conditions  of  registration  including 
payment of fees as may be prescribed.‖ 
 
Under  section  13  of  Ordinance  of  1984,  the  Rules  of  1984  were 
framed.  Rule  12  deals  with  the  conditions  for  registration  including 
charging of fees and other charges by the institutions. Sub rule (ii) of 
rule  12  provides  that  fees  and  other  charges  shall  not  be  fixed  or 
raised  beyond  reasonable  limits.  For  ready  reference,  sub-rule  (ii)  of 
rule 12 is reproduced hereunder:- 
 
 
The fees and other charges levied, shall not 
―(ii) 
be fixed or raised beyond reasonable limits.‖ 
 
47. 
The  perusal  of  clause  (v)  of  repealed  Ordinance  1962, 
section  7  of  the  Ordinance  1984  and  rule  12(ii)  of  Rules  of  1984 
shows  that  fees to be  charged by  educational  institutions  was  always 
regulated  by  the  authority  even  prior  to  impugned  section  7-A  of 
Ordinance  1984.  It  is  also  admitted  position  that  section  7  of  the 
Ordinance  1984  and  rule  12(ii)  of  the  Rules  of  1984  are  not  under 
challenge. Therefore, it cannot be argued that under Article 18 of the 
Constitution, the fixation of reasonable fee by educational institutions 
cannot  be  regulated  through  section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance  of  1984. 
The Article 18 of the Constitution is in many ways unique. It boxed in 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
51 
simultaneously  fundamental  rights  and  also  authorizes  State  to 
prescribe  qualifications  and  conditions  for  exercise  of 
those 
fundamental  rights.  The  right  of  profession,  occupation,  trade  and 
business  relates  to  economy  of  the  country,  therefore,  through  this 
Article,  state  retained  powers  to  regulate  economic  matters.  The 
regulation  of  fee  structure  of  un-aided  schools  fall  within  exceptions 
provided for under Article 18 of the Constitution. 
48. 
However,  while  imposing  fee  regulation, balance  must  be 
drawn between cost of fee and quality of education. While consumers 
are always seeking lower costs in any economy and the welfare state 
in its attempts to help the consumer reduces costs at the expense of the 
producers. This reduction of price may be seen as a positive impact by 
the consumers in the short-term but in the long-run the effects may be 
disastrous.  Because  when  producers  see  no  chance  of  increasing 
prices  they  end  up  cutting  costs,  hence  unable  to  function  efficiently 
and  also  lose  incentive  to  perform  better.  The  regulation  of  fees 
therefore if applied arbitrary will have the unintended consequence of 
lowering the standards of private schools. 
49. 
The  hard  reality  that  emerges  is  that  private  educational 
institutions are a necessity in the present day context. It is not possible 
to do without them because the Government is in no position to meet 
the demand which call for substantial outlays. While education is one 
of  the  most  important  functions  of  the  State  it  has  no  monopoly 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
52 
therein  and  therefore,  private  educational  institutions  have  a  role  to 
play.  No  doubt,  we  have  entered  into  an  era  of  liberalization  of 
economy  and  in  such  an  economy,  private  players  are  undoubtedly 
given  much  more  freedom 
in  economic  activities 
including 
profession, business, occupation  etc.  as  these  are  not  normal  forte  of 
the State and the State should have minimal role therein.  However, it 
is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  occupation  of  education  cannot  be 
treated at par with other economic activities. In this field, State cannot 
remain  a  mute  spectator  and  has  to  necessarily  step  in  to  prevent 
possible  exploitation,  profiteering  and  commercialization  by  the 
private  sector  through  regulatory  regime  as  well  by  providing 
Regulations under the relevant statutes. 
Judicial  Precedents  from  Pakistan  and  Indian  Jurisdiction 
on  Regulatory  Mechanism  by  State  on  un-aided  Private 
Schools and Law settled therein. 
 
50. 
The  regulatory  mechanism  by  State  of  un-aided  private 
schools remained a subject of discussion in various judgments before 
Indian  and  Pakistani  Courts.  Some  of  these  cases  and  law  settled  in 
these judgments  which will be beneficial for matter under discussion 
are as under:- 
 
(i).    In  Mohni  Jain  v.  State  of  Karnataka  &  others  (1992  3 
SCC 666), the Court held that:-  
to  education‖ 
―The  ―right 
the 
fundamental  rights  enshrined  under  Part  III  of  the 
Constitution.  The  State  is  under  a  constitutional  mandate 
to  provide  educational  institutions  at  all  levels  for  the 
is  concomitant 
to 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
53 
benefit  of  the  citizens.  The  educational  institutions  must 
function to the best advantage of the citizens. Opportunity 
to  acquire  education  cannot  be  confined  to  the  richer 
section of the society.‖ 
 
 
(ii). 
In  Unni  Krishnan  vs.  State  of  A.P.  (1993)  1  Supreme 
Court cases 645), Court held that:- 
the  main  source,  apart 
―So  far  as  unaided  institutions  are  concerned,  it  is 
obvious  that  they  cannot  be  compelled  to  charge  the 
same fee as is charged in Government institutions. If they 
do so voluntarily, it is perfectly welcome but they cannot 
be  compelled  to  do  so,  for  the  simple  reason  that  they 
have  to  meet  the  cost  of  imparting  education  from  their 
own  resources—and 
from 
donations/charities, if any, can only be the fees collected 
from  the  students.  It  is  here  that  the  concepts  of  ‗self-
financing  educational 
institutions‘  and  ‗cost  based 
educational institutions‘ come in. This situation presents 
several  difficult  problems.  How  does  one  determine  the 
‗cost  of  education‘  and  how  and  by  whom  can  it  be 
regulated?  The  cost  of  education  may  vary,  even  within 
the  same  faculty,  from  institution  to  institution.  The 
facilities  provided,  equipment,  infrastructure,  standard 
and  quality  of  education  obtaining  may  vary  from 
institution to institution. 
 
The obligations created by Article 41, 45 and 46 of 
the Constitution can be discharged by the State either by 
its  own  or  by  aiding, 
establishing 
recognizing  and/or  granting  affiliation 
to  private 
institutions  and  merely  recognition  or 
educational 
affiliation  is  granted  it  may  not  be  insisted  that  the 
private educational institution shall charge only that fee 
as  is  charged  for  similar  courses  in  governmental 
institutions.  The  private  educational  institutions  have  to 
and are entitled to charge a higher fee, not exceeding the 
ceiling fixed in that behalf. The admission of students and 
the  charging  of 
these  private  educational 
institutions  shall  be  governed  by  the  scheme  evolved 
herein.‖ 
institutions  of 
fee 
in 
   
 
(iii).  In  T.M.A.  Pai  Foundation  &  Ors  vs. State  of  Karnatake 
& others (2002) 8 SCC 481), it was held that:-  
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
54 
teaching 
teachers  who  have 
―An educational institution is established for the purpose 
of imparting education of the type made available by the 
institution.  Different  courses  of  study  are  usually  taught 
by 
to  be  recruited  as  per 
qualifications that may be prescribed. It is no secret that 
better  working  conditions  will  attract  better  teachers. 
More  amenities  will  ensure  that  better  students  seek 
admission to that institution. One cannot lose sight of the 
fact that providing good amenities to the students in the 
form  of  competent 
faculty  and  other 
infrastructure costs money. It has, therefore, to be left to 
the institution, if it chooses not to seek any aid from the 
government,  to  determine  the  scale  of  fee  that  it  can 
charge  from  the  students.  One  also  cannot  lose  sight  of 
the fact that we live in a competitive world today, where 
professional education is in demand. We have been given 
to  understand  that  a  large  number  of  professional  and 
other  institutions  have  been  started  by  private  parties 
who  do  not  seek  any  government  aid.  In  a  sense,  a 
prospective  student  has  various  options  open  to him/her 
where,  therefore,  normally  economic  forces  have  a  role 
to  play.  The  decision  on  the  fee  to  be  charged  must 
necessarily  be  left  to  the  private  educational  institution 
that  does  not  seek  or  is  not  dependent  upon  any  funds 
from the government.  
 
We,  however,  wish  to  emphasize  one  point,  and 
that is that inasmuch as the occupation of education is, in 
a  sense,  regarded  as  charitable,  the  government  can 
provide  regulations 
that  will  ensure  excellence  in 
education,  while  forbidding  the  charging  of  capitation 
fee and profiteering by the institution. Since the object of 
setting  up  an  educational  institution  is  not  required  for 
the purpose of fulfilling that object. To put it differently, 
in  the  establishment  of  an  educational  institution,  the 
object  should  not  be  to  make  a  profit,  inasmuch  as 
education  is  essentially  charitable  in  nature.  There  can, 
however, be a reasonable revenue surplus, which may be 
generated  by  the  educational  institution  for  the  purpose 
of  development  of  education  and  expansion  of  the 
institution.‖ 
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
55 
(iv).  In  Islamic  Academy  of  Education  And…  vs.  State  of 
Karnataka  And  others,  (2003)  6  SCC  697),  Supreme  Court  of 
India held that:-  
―So far as the first question is concerned, in our view the 
majority judgment is very clear. There can be no fixing of 
a  rigid  fee  structure  by  the  government.  Each  institute 
must have the freedom to fix its own free structure taking 
into  consideration the  need to generate  funds  to run the 
institution  and  to  provide  facilities  necessary  for  the 
benefit  of  the  students.  They  must  also  be  able  to 
generate  surplus  which  must  be  used  for  the  betterment 
and  growth  of  that  educational  institution.  In  paragraph 
56  of  the  judgment,  it  has  been  categorically  laid  down 
that  the  decision  on  the  fees  to  be  charged  must 
necessarily be left to the private educational institutions 
that  do  not seek  and  which  are not  dependent  upon any 
funds  from  the  Government.  Each  institute  will  be 
entitled  to  have  its  own  fee  structure.  The  fee  structure 
for  each  institute    must  be  fixed  keeping  in  mind  the 
infrastructure  and  facilities  available,  the  investments 
made, salaries paid to the teachers and staff, future plans 
for expansion and/or betterment of the institution etc. Of 
course  there  can  be  no  profiteering  and  capitation  fees 
cannot be charged. It thus needs to be emphasized that as 
per  the  majority  judgment  imparting  of  education  is 
essentially  charitable  in  nature.  Thus  the  surplus/profit 
that can be generated must be only for the benefit/use of 
that  educational  institution,  profits/surplus  cannot  be 
diverted for any other use or purpose and cannot be used 
for  personal  gain  or 
for  any  other  business  or 
enterprise.‖ 
 
 
 
 
 
(v).    In P.A. Inamdar vs. State of Maharashtra, (2005) 6 SCC 
537), it was held that:- 
 
―To  set  up  a  reasonable  fee  structure  is  also  a 
component  of  ―the  right  to  establish  and  administer  an 
institution‖  within 
the  meaning  of  Article  30(1) 
institution is free to devise  its own fee structure subject 
to the limitation that there can be no profiteering and no 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
56 
 
 
 
 
capitation fee can be charged directly or indirectly, or in 
any form……………………………………………………….. 
 
Capitation  fee  cannot  be  permitted  to  be  charge 
 
and  no  seat  can  be  permitted  to  be  appropriated  by 
payment  of  capitation  fee.  ―Profession‖  has  to  be 
distinguished  from  ―business‖  or  a  mere  ―occupation‖. 
While in business, and to a certain extent in occupation, 
there  is  also  profit  motive,  profession  is  primarily  a 
service  to  society  wherein  earning  is  secondary  or 
incidental.  A  student  who  gets  a  professional  degree  by 
payment  of  capitation 
fee,  once  qualified  as  a 
professional, is likely to aim more at earning rather than 
serving and that becomes a bane to society. The charging 
of  capitation  fee  by  unaided  minority  and  non-minority 
institutions 
just  not 
permissible.  Similarly,  profiteering 
is  also  not 
permissible. Despite the legal position, this Court cannot 
shut its eyes to the hard realities of commercialization of 
education  and  evil  practices  being  adopted  by  many 
institutions  to  earn  large  amounts  for  their  private  or 
selfish  ends.  If  capitation  fee  and  profiteering  is  to  be 
checked, the method of admission has to be regulated so 
that the admissions are based on merit and transparency 
and  the  students  are  not  exploited.  It  is  permissible  to 
regulate  admission  and  fee  structure  for  achieving  the 
purpose just stated. 
 
for  professional  courses 
is 
(vi).   In  case  of  Society  for  Unaided  Private  School  of 
Rajasthan vs. Union of India (2012 AIR SC 3445), Court held 
that:- 
―Indeed  by,  virtue  of  Section  12(2)  read  with  Section 
2(n)(iv),  private  unaided  school  would  be  entitled  to  be 
reimbursed  with  the  expenditure  incurred  by  it  in 
providing  free  expenditure  incurred  by  it  in  providing 
free  and  compulsory  education  to  children  belonging  to 
the above category to the extent of per child expenditure 
incurred  by  the  State  in  a  school  specified  in  Section 
2(n)(i)  or  the  actual  amount  charged  from  the  child, 
whichever  is  less.  Such  a  restriction  is  in  the  interest  of 
the  general  public.  It  is  also  a  reasonable  restriction. 
Such  measures  address  two  aspects,  viz.,  upholding  the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
57 
fundamental right of the private management to establish 
an unaided educational institution of their choice and, at 
the same time, securing the interests of the children in the 
locality,  in  particular,  those  who  may  not  be  able  to 
pursue education due to inability to pay fees or charges 
of the private unaided schools. 
for  children‘s  rights, 
 
Primarily  responsibility 
therefore,  lies  with  the  State  and  the  State  has  to  be 
respect, protect State and the State has to respect, protect 
and  fulfill  children‘s  rights  and  has  also  got  a  duty  to 
regulate the private institutions that care for children, to 
protect  children  from  economic  exploitation,  hazardous 
work  and  to  ensure  human  treatment  of  children.  Non-
State  actors  exercising 
like 
establishing and running private educational institutions 
are also expected to respect and protect the rights of the 
child, but they are, not expected to surrender their rights 
constitutionally guaranteed. 
the  State 
functions 
 
 
(vii).   In  Modern  School  vs.  Union  of  India  (AIR  2004  SC 
2236), held that:- 
fee 
the 
structure 
 
―The first point for determination is—whether the 
Director  of  Education  has  the  authority  to  regulate  the 
fees of unaided schools? 
 
At  the  outset,  before  analyzing  the  provisions  of 
1973  Act,  we  may  state  that  it  is  now  well  settled  by 
catena  of  decisions  of  this  Court  that  in  the  matter  of 
determination  of 
the  unaided 
educational  institutions  exercises  a  great  autonomy  as, 
they, like any other citizen carrying on an occupation are 
entitled  to  a  reasonable  surplus  for  development  of 
education  and  expansion  of 
institution.  Such 
institutions,  it  has  been  held,  have  to  plan  their 
investment and expenditure so as to generate profit. What 
is,  however,  prohibited 
is  commercialization  of 
education.  However,  in  none  of  the  earlier  cases,  this 
Court  has  defined  the  concept  of  reasonable  surplus, 
profit, income and yield, which are the terms used in the 
various provisions of 1973 Act.‖  
the 
 
 
 
(viii). In  Anti-Corruption  and  Crime  Investigation  Cell  vs.  State 
of Punjab & others (2013 (2) CLT 488), the Court held that:- 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
58 
―Fee charges should be commensurate with the facilities 
provided  by  the  institution.  Fees  should  normally  be 
charged  under  the  heads  prescribed  by  the  Department 
of  Education  of  the  State/U.T.  for  schools  for  different 
categories.  No  capitation  fee  or  voluntary  donations  for 
gaining admission in the school or for any other purpose 
should be charged/collected in the name of the school. In 
case  of  such  malpractices,  the  Board  may  take  drastic 
action leading to disaffiliation of the school.‖ 
(ix).   In  Modern  Dental  College  and  Research  Centre  and 
another  vs.  Madhya  Pradesh  and  others  (2016  AIR  (SC) 
2601), Court held that:- 
―In  modern  times,  all  over  the  world,  education  is  big 
business.  On  account  of  consumerism,  the  students  all 
over the world are restless. That schools in private sector 
which  charge  fees  may  be  charitable  provided  they  are 
not  run  as  profit-making  ventures.  That  educational 
charity  must  be  established  for  the  benefit  of  the  public 
rather  than for the benefit of the individuals. That while 
individuals  may  derive  benefits  from  an  educational 
charity,  the  main  purpose  of  the  charity  must  be  for  the 
benefit of the public.‖ 
(x).  In  Modern  Dental  College  v.  State  of  Madhya  Pradesh 
(AIR 2009 SC 2432), it was held that:- 
―In  para  91  of  Inamdar's  case  (supra),  it  has  been 
observed:  
 
 
 
 
"The  right  to  establish  an  educational  institution, 
for  charity  or  for  profit,  being  an  occupation,  is 
protected 
by 
the 
Constitution...." 
19(1)(g) 
Articles 
of 
 
is  a 
institution 
Thus, it is clear that the right to establish and run 
 
an  educational 
fundamental  right 
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. Of 
course  under  Article  19(6)  of 
the  Constitution, 
reasonable  restrictions  can  be  placed  on  such  a 
fundamental  right,  and  hence  we  have  to  examine 
whether such restriction are reasonable or not.‖ 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
(xi).  In  Father  Thomas  Shingare    Vs.  State  of  Maharashtra 
(AIR 2002 SC 463), the Court held that:- 
―It  is  a  question  of  fact  in  each  case  whether  the  limit 
imposed  by  the  Government  regarding  approved  fees 
would  hamper  the  right  under  Article  30(1)  of  the 
Constitution  in  so  far  as  they  apply  to  any  unaided 
educational  institution  established  and  administered  by 
the  minorities.  If  the  legislature  feels  that  the  nefarious 
practice  of  misusing  school  administration  for  making 
huge profit by collecting exorbitant sums from parents by 
calling such sums either as fees or donations, should be 
curbed,  the  legislature  would  be  within  its  powers  to 
enact  measures  for  that  purpose.  Similarly,  if  the 
management of an educational institution collects money 
from  persons  as  quid  pro  quo 
them 
appointments  on  the  teaching  or  non-  teaching  staff  of 
such  institution,  the  legislature  would  be  acting  within 
the ambit of its authority by bringing measures to arrest 
such  unethical  practices.  Such  pursuits  are  detestable 
whether  done  by  minorities  or  majorities.  No  minority 
can  legitimately  claim  immunity  to  carry  on  such 
practices  under  the  cover  of  Article  30(1)  of  the 
Constitution. The protection envisaged therein is not for 
shielding such commercialized activities intended to reap 
rich dividends by holding education as a facade.‖  
for  giving 
(xii).  In  India  Medical  Association  vs.    Union  of  India  and 
others (AIR 2011 SC 2365), the Court held that:- 
―The  Delhi  Professional  Colleges  or 
Institutions 
(Prohibition of Capitation Fee, Regulation of Admission, 
Fixation of Non-Exploitative Fee And Other Measures to 
Ensure  Equity  And  Excellence)  Act,  2007  (Delhi  Act  80 
of 2007) or any provisions thereof do not suffer from any 
constitutional infirmities. The validity of the Delhi Act 80 
of 2007, and its provisions, are accordingly upheld.‖ 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
60 
 
(xii).  In  Charutar  Arogya  Mandal  v.  State  of  Gujarat  (AIR 
2011 (SCW) 2475), the Court while discussing case law on the 
subject held that:- 
―In T.M.A. Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka, 
 
2002  (8)  SCC  481,  this  court  declared  that  every 
institution is free to devise its own fee structure subject to 
the  limitations  that  there  can  be  no  capitation  fee  or 
profiteering,  directly  or  indirectly.  This  court  also 
clarified  that  charging  of  fees  in  a  manner  that  a 
reasonable  surplus  is  left  to  meet  the  cost  of  expansion 
and  augmentation  of  facilitates,  would  not  amount  to 
profiteering.  In  Islamic  Academy  of  Education  v.  State 
of Karnataka, 2003 (6) SCC 697, this court directed the 
state  Governments  to  set  up  two  committees  -  one  to 
regulate  admissions  and  the  other  to  regulate  the  fee 
structure. The fee structure committee was authorized to 
decide  whether  the  fees  proposed  by  a  college  were 
justified  or  whether  they  amounted  to  profiteering  or 
charging  capitation  fee;  and  if  necessary  to  prescribe  a 
fee  structure  different  from  what  was  proposed  by  the 
institutions.  In  P.A.  Inamdar  v.  State  of  Maharashtra, 
2005 (6) SCC 537, this Court reiterated that while every 
institution is free to devise its own fee structure, the same 
can  be  regulated  to  prevent  profiteering  and  to  ensure 
that  no  capitation  fee  is  charged,  either  directly  or 
indirectly,  or  in  any  form;  that  if  capitation  fee  and 
profiteering  are  to be  checked,  the  method  of admission 
has to be regulated so that the admissions are based on 
merit  and  are  transparent  and  the  students  are  not 
exploited;  and  that  it  is,  therefore,  permissible  to 
regulate  admissions  and  fee  structure  for  achieving  the 
same.‖ 
 
 
(xiv).  In Rohilkhand Medical College and Hospital, Bareilly v. 
Medical Council of India (2013 (15) SCC 516), Court observed 
as under:- 
―We think, this is an apt occasion to ponder over whether 
we  have  achieved 
the  desired  goals,  eloquently 
highlighted  by  the  Constitution  Bench  judgments  of  this 
Court  in  T.M.A.  Pai  Foundation  and  others  v.  State  of 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
61 
Karnataka  and  others  2003(2)  S.C.T.  385  :  (2002)  8 
SCC  481  and  P.A.  Inamdar  and  others  v.  State  of 
Maharashtra and others, 2005(3) S.C.T. 697 : (2005) 6 
SCC  537.  TMA  Pai  Foundation  case  (supra)  has  stated 
that there is nothing wrong if the entrance test being held 
by self-financial institutions or by a group of institutions 
but the entrance test they conduct should satisfy the triple 
test of being fair, transparent and not exploitative. TMA 
Pai Foundation (supra) and Inamdar (supra) repeatedly 
stated  that  the  object  of  establishing  an  educational 
institution is not to make profit and imparting education 
is charitable in nature. Court has repeatedly said that the 
common  entrance  test  conducted  by  private  educational 
institutions must be one enjoined to ensure the fulfillment 
of  twin  object  of  transparency  and  merits  and  no 
capitation  fee  be  charged  and  there  should  not  be 
profiteering.  Facts,  however,  give  contrary  picture.  In 
Inamdar,  this  Court,  in  categorical  terms,  has  declared 
that no capitation fee be permitted to be charged and no 
seat  can  be  permitted  to  be  appropriated  by  payment  of 
capitation fee.‖ 
(xv).   In Modern Dental College and Research Centre v. State 
of Madhya Pradesh (2016 AIR (SC) 2601), Court held that for 
fixing the fee structure, following considerations are to be kept 
in mind:-  
 
 
(a) the infrastructure and facilities available; 
(b) investment made, salaries paid to teachers and staff; 
(c) 
for  expansion  and/or  betterment  of 
institution  subject  to  two  restrictions,  viz.  non-profiteering 
and non-charging of capitation fees." 
future  plans 
(xvi).  In  M/s  Pushpagiri  Medical  Society  vs.  State  of  Kerala 
and other (2004 AIR (SCW) 7491), it was held that:- 
―The  other  question  is  regarding  the  fee  structure.  In 
terms  of  the  decision  in  Islamic  Academy's  case,  the 
Government of Kerala appointed a Committee headed by 
Justice R. T. Thomas, a former Judge of this Court. The 
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
62 
said  Committee  has  fixed  the  fee  at  Rs.1.13  lakh  as  the 
maximum annual fee to be collected from each student of 
the private self-financing medical colleges.‖ 
 
51. 
In  Pakistan,  Courts  have  also  discussed  the  extent  of 
authority of State to regulate private institutions as under:- 
 
(I).  In  EDUCATIONAL  SERVICES  (PVT.)  LIMITED  and  4 
others  vs.  FEDERATION  OF  PAKISTAN  and  another  (PLD 
2016  Islamabad  141),  Islamabad  High  Court  after  discussing 
Indian case law held as under:- 
 
  
―In light of the above judgments and relevant provisions 
of the Act, the following principles are deduced: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
 PEIRA has the authority to fix the fee but the same 
cannot  be  done  in  arbitrary  manner  without 
calling for record of expenses and examination of 
requirements  of  individual  Private  Educational 
Institution. 
 The  factors  which  the  PEIRA  has  to  take  into 
consideration  in  fixation  of  the  fee  should  be 
formulated in the  Rules  which  it has  the power to 
frame under the Act. 
 The broad guidelines which PEIRA has to keep in 
consideration  before  fixation  of  the  price  and/or 
formulation  of  Rules  and  Regulations  are  as 
follows: 
a) The privately managed Educational Institutions 
can  only  maintain  high  standards  of  education  if 
they hire highly qualified teachers; 
b)  Provide  adequate  buildings  comprising  all  the 
facilities; 
c) Escalation in utility bills and other charges; 
d) Payment of rents on commercial rates. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
  
iv. 
63 
 The  Private  Educational  Institutions  should  not 
make  windfall  profits,  however,  are  entitled  to 
return for services rendered. 
  
  
 
In view of above discussion, sections 4(c), 5(1)(b) 
&  5(1)(h)  are  not  ultra  vires  Article  18.  Under  the 
referred  Article 
freedom  of  Trade,  Occupation  or 
Profession  is  subject  to  such  qualification  as  may  be 
prescribed  by  law,  however,  there  can  be  no  arbitrary 
fixation  of  the  fee  by  the  Authority  or  even  clog  on 
enhancement  of  the  same  rather  it  has  to  be  done  after 
taking  into  consideration  the  expenses/costs  of  the 
petitioners  and  naturally  the  profit  on  the  services 
provided.  In  this  behalf  the  principles  of  natural  justice 
are  to  be  complied  with.  The  Authority  needs  to  frame 
rules/regulations keeping in view the above observations; 
also  the  Authority  while  making  or  framing  such 
Rules/Regulations  can  invite  suggestions  from  Private 
Educational  Institutions  to  make  them  comprehensive 
and in line with the above provisions of law. 
  
(II). 
In  Shahrukh  Shakeel  Khan  and  2  others  vs.  Province  of 
Sindh through Chief Secretary and 4 others (PLD 2017 Sindh 
198), learned Division Bench of Sindh High Court held that:- 
“with  regards  arbitrary  increases  in  fees  by  private 
schools, it is evident from the forgoing discussion that the 
current  mechanism  provided  for  in  the  form  of  the  said 
Ordinance  and  rules  though  looks  glossy,  however,  the 
loggerhead  position  of  parents  against  the  schools  and 
vice  versa  is  a  clear  depiction  of  the  fact  that  private 
schools are not following the  said  mechanism  and  there 
is no compulsion on these to do so from the Department. 
It is painful to note that no statement has been provided 
by the Department as to its receipt of each year's audited 
accounts report from private schools and its enforcement 
of  the  restricted  5%  increase  of  the  tuition  fees. 
Department to strictly act in accordance with law and to 
ensure  compliance  of  the  rules  and  regulations  and 
submit  quarterly  reports  to  this  court  in  respect  of  such 
audit and 5% rule. Petitions filed by parents/students are 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
64 
thus  allowed  in  the  term  that  respondent  schools  shall 
only  increase  tuition  fees  no  more  than  5%  per  annum 
from the date of their registration for three years and in 
case  there  has  been  no  re-registration  after  the  said 
period of three  years,  fees shall not  be  increased unless 
school re-registers itself; and‖ 
(III).  In Arif Yousif Chohan and 9 others vs. Province of Sindh 
through  Secretary  Education,  Government  of  Sindh,  Karachi 
and 5 others (2017 YLR Note 385) Court held as under:- 
 
―It has been further emphasized by the respondents that 
neither  the  administration  nor  teachers  are  causing  any 
kind of harassment to the students for recovery of fee and 
they  are  only  maintaining  a  note  for  the  parents  in  the 
dairy  of  students  for  payment  of  fee  in  time,  which 
otherwise  is  a  general  practice  and  procedure  in  vogue 
in all educational institutions and it cannot be counted as 
harassment  or  de-moralization  by  the  administration  to 
the  students.  Moreover,  the  issue  of  calling  the  record 
and  audit  reports  from  the  year  2009  and  onwards  for 
scrutiny i.e. income and expenditure of the School, which 
absolutely  involves  factual  controversy  as  such  same  is 
beyond the ambit of this Court.‖ 
 
 
(IV).  In  Pir  Liaqat  Ali  Shah  vs.  Government  of  N.W.F.P. 
through Secretary and 7 others (PLD 2011 Peshawar 143):- 
and 
something  more 
―Yes  education  has  become  an  industry  and  an 
enterprise but it should not be shorn of humanistic and 
philanthropic  considerations,  otherwise 
the  very 
purpose  of  education  which  could  be  none  else  but 
character-building 
than 
memorizing  a  few  useful  lessons,  shall  stand  defeated. 
The  private  sector  of  education  cannot  be  taken  away 
from the umbrella of the Code so as to allow it to grow 
into  a  wild  forest  of  money  yielding  trees:  We, 
therefore,  do  not  feel  inclined  to  declare  the  Code 
ineffective  or  ultra  vires.  The  argument  that  such 
questions  can  be  raised  before 
the  Regulatory 
Authority  in  view  of  section  13-A  of  the  N.-W.F.P. 
Registration  and  Functioning  of  Private  Educational 
Institutions  Ordinance,  2001  is  not  without  substance. 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
65 
filed  complaints  before 
We  have  been  told  that  many  of  the  petitioners  have 
already 
the  Regulatory 
Authority  but  they  have  not  been  decided  so  far.  We, 
therefore, direct the Regulatory Authority to dispose of 
the  complaints,  thus,  filed.  Those  who  have  not  filed 
may,  if  so  advised,  file the  same,  which,  too,  are 
directed to be disposed of as early as possible.‖ 
 
In  Beacons  House  School  System  vs.  Province  of  Sindh 
(V). 
(C.P.D. No.5812/2015), Court held that school fee can be 
regulated through licencing system. 
52. 
The  above  case  law  from  Indian  and  Pakistani  jurisdiction 
on educational institutions shows that in T.M.A. Pai Foundation case 
supra,  the  question  of  regulation  and  fees  and  admission  to  provide 
professional  engineering  and  medical  colleges  was  in  issue.  In  said 
judgments (in Para 57), the Supreme Court held that education by its 
very  nature  is  a  charitable  occupation  and  the  State  can  provide 
regulation  that  are  necessary  to  ensure  excellence  in  education  and 
profiteering is not done by private educational institutions. However, 
the  Court  held  that  reasonable  revenue  surplus  which  may  be 
generated  by 
the  educational 
institution  for 
the  purpose  of 
development of education and expansion of institution is permissible. 
The T.M.A. Pai case supra caused much confusion amongst the State 
Government in India and private educational institutions, as they both 
interpreted the said judgments for their own benefit.  On one hand the 
educational institution thought that they have complete autonomy with 
regard  to  their  own  fee  structure  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  State 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
66 
interpreted  it  as  the  educational  institutions  are  subject  to  reasonable 
restriction  including  fixation  of  their  fees.  This  confusion  was 
highlighted  in  Islamic  Academy  of  Education  and  others  case  supra 
where (in Para 7) the Supreme Court while interpreting the T.M.A. Pai 
case held that although there can be no fixation of rigid fee structure 
by  the  Government  and  that  each  institute  must  have  the  freedom  to 
fix its own fee structure taking into consideration the need to generate 
funds to run the institution and to provide facilities necessary for the 
benefit  of  students,  however,  the  Supreme  Court  constituted  a 
committee  that  was  to  regulate  fee  charged  by  private  educational 
institutions.  The  Court  further  held  that  there  can  be  no  profiteering 
and capitation fee and the surplus/profit must be for the benefit/use of 
that  educational  institution  and  cannot  be  diverted  for  any  other 
purpose or for personal gain or any other business or enterprise.  
53. 
Subsequently in P.A. Inamdar case supra, the ratio settled in 
Islamic  Academy  case  was  sought  to  be  reviewed.  However,  the 
Supreme Court upheld the mechanism brought in for determination of 
school  fees  and  admission  process  and  held  that  committees 
constituted for monitoring admission and determining fee structure in 
Islamic Academy case was regulatory measure aimed at protecting the 
interest  of  the  students‟  community  as  a  whole.  The  Supreme  Court 
(in  Para  20  of  the  judgment)  also  held  that  scheme  evolved  for 
monitoring admission and fee fixation are reasonable restrictions and 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
67 
not  violative  of  fundamental  right  of  the  private  educational 
institutions  under  Article  19(1)(g)  of  the  Indian  Constitution.  Finally 
in Tamil Nadu Nursery Matriculation case (2010 (4) CTC 353) after 
discussing    entire  case  law  including  T.M.A.  Pai  case,  Islamic 
Academy  case  and  P.A.  Inamdar  case,  the  Court  held  that  State  has 
the right to regulate the school fee charged by private schools so far as 
it strikes a balance between autonomy of institutions and measures to 
be taken to prevent commercialization of education.  
54. 
In the light of aforesaid judgments, the present position and 
jurisdiction developed in India regarding regulation of fees charged by 
private  educational  institutions  is  that  Government  has  power  to 
regulate school fees charged by private educational institutions but it 
must  draw  a  balance  to  let  institutions  to  fix  its  fee  taking  into 
consideration  the  need  to  generate  funds  to  run  the  institutions  and 
ensure excellence in education.  
55. 
The  recent  cases  regarding  educational  institutions  in 
Pakistani  Courts  show  that  Islamabad  High  Court  in  the  case  of 
Educational  Services  Private  Limited  (PLD  2016  Islamabad  141) 
held  that  regulatory  authority  has  the  power  to  fix  the  fee  but  same 
cannot  be  done  in  arbitrary  manner  without  calling  for  record  of 
expenses  and  examination 
requirement  of 
individual  private 
educational institution. It was further held that the factors which are to 
be  considered  in  fixation  of  fee  should  be  formulated  in  the  rules 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
68 
which  rule  making  authority  has  power  to  do  so  under  the  relevant 
Act.  The  Peshawar  High  Court  in  case  titled  Peshawar  Bar 
Association  vs.  Government  of  K.P.K.  (W.P.  No.2093-P/2016)  vide 
judgment dated 08.11.2017 held that schools are charging fees which 
does  not  commensurate  with  the  facilities  they  are  providing, 
therefore, the authority should device a policy in order to regulate the 
tuition  fee  and  the  minimum  standards  in  which  the  school  is  to 
operate.  The  Sindh  High  Court  in  case  of  Beacons  House  School 
System vs. Province of Sindh  (CP D  No.5812/2015)  held that Article 
18  of  the  Constitution  postulates  that  through  a  licensing  system, 
reasonable  restrictions  can  be  imposed  upon  a  lawful  profession  or 
trade. Further held that running of a school being a trade or business, 
it  is  well  within  the  authority  of  the  State  to  regulate  this  business 
through a licensing system. However, the regulations/restrictions must 
be reasonable.  
56. 
The  close  scrutiny  of  above  case  law  by  Pakistani  Courts 
shows  that  there  is  a  consensus  that  fee  structure  can  be  regulated 
through  a  licensing  system  under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution, 
however  the  said  restrictions/regulations  must  be  reasonable  and 
should  not  impinge  upon  the  fundamental  rights  of  the  private 
educational  institutions.  In  other  words,  the  ratio  settled  by  Indian 
Courts  to  draw  a  balance between  regulating  the  fee structure and  to 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
69 
maintain minimum autonomy of the schools for quality of service and 
excellence of education was also maintained by Pakistani Courts.  
57. 
The  petitioner  schools  are  mainly  aggrieved  of  sub-section 
(1),  (5),  (6),  (7)  and  (8)  of  section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance  1984.  We 
have already found that regulation regarding private schools fee is not 
a new phenomenon and State can regulate it through licencing system. 
However,  we  now  examine  the  above  impugned  sub-sections  of 
section 7-A, separately on the touchstone of test of reasonableness and 
balancing  as  elucidated  by  Pakistani  and  Indian  Courts.  Learned 
counsel  for  the  private  schools  argued  that  impugned  sub-section  (1) 
of  section  7-A  substituted  through  Act  of  2017  is  discriminatory,  as 
under  said  sub-clause,  section  7-A  has  not  been  made  applicable  to 
schools  charging  fee  less  than  Rs.4,000/-.  This  argument  has  no 
substance.  The  equal  protection  of  law  under  Article  25  of  the 
Constitution does not envisage that every citizen is to be treated alike 
in all circumstances, but it contemplates that persons similarly stated 
or similarly placed are to be treated alike. Reasonable classification is 
permissible on the basis of intelligible differentia which distinguishes 
persons  or  things  that  are  group  together  from  those  who  have  been 
left out. The classification between schools who are charging less than 
Rs.4,000/-  fee  and  schools  which  are  charging  fee  more  than 
Rs.4,000/- is a reasonable classification for applicability of section 7-
A  between  schools  who  are  already  charging  less  fee  and  schools 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
70 
which are charging higher fee. Therefore, this classification is neither 
unreasonable nor violative of doctrine of equality as settled by august 
Supreme  Court  in  I.A.  Sharwani  and  others  vs.  Government  of 
Pakistan through Secretary, Finance  Division, Islamabad and others 
(1991 SCMR 1041). The question of discrimination with certain other 
Government aided and controlled educational institutions is a subject 
matter of separate writ petition, therefore, we need not to discuss it at 
this stage in these petitions. 
58. 
The remaining provisions of sub-section (2), (3), (7), (8), (9) 
and (10) of impugned section 7-A of the Ordinance 1984 as amended 
through  Act  of  2017  shows  that  these  sub-clauses  merely  provide  a 
mechanism 
to  regulate 
the 
increase 
in  fee  structure.  These 
requirements through licensing system are not only permissible under 
law but are also reasonable and justified as it does not imbalance the 
equilibrium between right of the State to regulate the fee structure and 
the  autonomy  of  the  private  educational  institutions  to  justify  the 
increase in fees in order to ensure quality and excellence in education. 
Therefore,  these  conditions  undertaken  by  section  7-A  of  the 
Ordinance  1984,  does  not  run  afoul  to  the  fundamental  rights  of 
petitioner schools managements.   
59. 
However,  original  sub-clause  (1)  of  section  7-A  (which 
impose complete bar on increase of fee for academic year 2015-2016 
at the rate higher than the fee charged for academic year 2014-2015), 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
71 
sub-clause (5) of section 7-A of the Ordinance 1984, which imposes a 
maximum limit of 5% (under Ordinance of 2015 and Act of 2016) and 
8%  (amended  through  Act of 2017),  is the  root cause of  controversy 
between  the  parties.  These  particular  provisions  need  closer  analysis 
to  determine  if  these  particular  sub-clauses  amount  to  unreasonable 
restriction  on  the  fundamental  right  of  the  private  educational 
institutions, therefore, not sustainable or otherwise.  
60. 
One  of  the  contention  of  learned  Additional  Advocate 
General  to  justify  the  complete  bar  under  sub-clause  (1)  and 
maximum cap of 5% and 8% under sub-clause (5) is that under Article 
18  of  the  Constitution,  only  lawful  trade  or  business  can  be  entered 
upon and that also subject to qualifications and regulations under the 
licensing  system,  therefore,  Article  18  is  not  a  fundamental  right, 
hence  State  can  ban  a  profession,  occupation,  trade  or  business  by 
declaring  it  unlawful  and  forbidden  by  law.  He  in  the  circumstances 
submitted  that  legislation  could  legally  declare  charging  of  fee  more 
than 5% and 8% or higher than previous academic year unlawful and 
forbidden  by  law.  We  have  carefully  considered  this  argument.  No 
doubt  Article  18  prescribed  that  every  citizen  shall  have  the  right  to 
enter upon lawful profession, occupation, trade or business. However, 
the  word  lawful  intends  to  exclude  profession,  trade  and  business 
which  is  inherently  vicious,  pernicious  and  is  condemned  by  all 
civilized  societies.  The  word  lawful  intend  to  exclude  res  extra 
72 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
commercium  (outside  commerce).  This  expression  does  not  entitle 
citizens to carry out business in activities which are immoral, criminal 
and trade in any article or goods which are obnoxious and injurious to 
health, safety and welfare of general public. There cannot be business 
in  crime.  This  maxim  was  also  recognized  by  honourable  Supreme 
Court in Watan Party case (PLD 2011 SC 997). No doubt the august 
Supreme Court in case of Zameer Ahmad Khan (PLD 1975 SC 667) 
(relied  upon  by  learned  Additional  Advocate  General  himself)  held 
that  State  under  Article  18  can  ban  unlawful  profession  or  trade,  for 
instance,  prostitution,  trafficking  in  women,  gambling,  trade  in 
narcotics,  or  dangerous  drugs  etc.  However,  in  our  view  it  will  be 
fallacy  to  hold  that  education  or  running  of  educational  institution  is 
inherently vicious or pernicious or condemned by civilized society. In 
case of Navendra Kumar supra, Court held that the word restriction to 
include  cases  of  “prohibition”  also,  however,  when  the  restriction 
reaches  the  stage  of  prohibition  special  care  has  to  be  taken  by  the 
Court to see that the test of reasonableness is satisfied. The greater the 
restriction, the more the need for strict scrutiny by the Court.  
61. 
The  Supreme  Court  of  India  in  the  case  of  Action 
Committee,  Unaided  Private  Schools  (2009)  10  SCC  1,  held  that 
doctrine  of  res  extra  commercium  being  not  applicable  in  relation  to 
imparting of education for profit by unaided institution or even aided 
private  institutions,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  that  how  restrictions 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
73 
relating  on  this  doctrine  which  is  wholly  inapplicable  could  be 
extended.  The  august  Supreme  Court  in  Arshad  Mahmood  case  and 
East West Steam Shipping Company case held that restrictions under 
Article 18 must be reasonable and should bear true relation to trade or 
profession  for  the  purpose  of  permitting  general  welfare.  Therefore, 
we  are  not  convinced  with  the  argument  of  learned  Additional 
Advocate  General  that  State  could  ban  or  declare  unlawful  the 
increase more than 5% or 8% higher than the previous academic year 
by declaring such increase as unlawful trade or business.  This would 
otherwise lead to an absurd result.  
62. 
To  justify  reasonableness  of  5%  and  8%  capping  or  not 
more  than  the  previous  academic  year,  under  above  sub-clauses,  the 
learned Additional Advocate General also vehemently argued that cap 
of  5%  and  8%  and  complete  restriction  on  increase  not  more  than 
previous academic year, is in the interest of the public at large in the 
present  case.  No  doubt  whenever  the  interest  of  community  collides 
with  the  fundamental  rights  of  individual,  the  interest  of  the 
community will have over-riding effect over such rights. However, in 
the present case, it is admitted by respondents  Government itself that 
impugned  section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance  of  1984  has  not  been  made 
applicable  to  almost  98%  of  the  unaided  private  schools  who  are 
charging  monthly  fee  less  than  Rs.4,000/-.  Further  it  is  not  disputed 
that  out  of  remaining  2%  of  private  schools  to  whom  impugned 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
74 
section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance  of  1984  is  made  applicable,  only  few 
parents  filed  complaints  before  the  promulgation  of  the  Ordinance 
2015  and  Acts  of  2016  and  2017.  Once  almost  98%  of  students  and 
parents  are  not  benefitting  out  of  the  impugned  section  7-A  of  the 
Ordinance 1984, it cannot be said that petitioners‟ fundamental rights 
should be denied to give way to the interest of community. 
63. 
The restriction on fundamental rights can only be upheld if 
it  is  established  that  it  seeks  to  impose  reasonable  restriction  in  the 
interest  of  public  at  large  and  a  less  drastic  restriction  will  not  have 
ensued  the  interest  of  general  public.  This  is  a  principle  of 
proportionality  which  if  violated  will  automatically  render  the 
condition  as  unreasonable  restriction.  Aharan  Barak  (a  renowned 
jurist and visiting Professor of Yale Law School, U.S.A.) in his book 
“Proportionality”  quoted  requirement  of  proportionality  by  As 
Professor Grimm as under:- 
 
 
  ―Laws  could  restrict  human  rights,  but  only  in  order  to 
make conflicting rights compatible or to protect the rights 
of  other  persons  or  important  community  interests…  Any 
restriction  of  human 
rights  not  only  needs  a 
constitutionally valid reason but also to be proportional to 
the rank and importance of the right at stake.‖ 
D  Smith  in  his  Book  Judicial  Review  (7th  Edition)  reproduced  the 
view of House of lords on proportionality in following terms:- 
  “In  Daly…the  House  of  Lords  adopted  a  test  of 
proportionality adopted by the Privy Council in de Freitas 
vs.  Permanent  Secretary  of  Ministry  of  Agriculture, 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
75 
Fisheries,  Land  and  Housing.  Drawing  on  South  African, 
Canadian and Zimbabwean authority, it was said that: 
 
―When  determining  whether  a  limitation  (by  an 
act, rule or decision) is arbitrary or excessive, the 
Court should ask itself: ‗whether: (i) the legislative 
objective is sufficiently important to justify limiting 
a fundamental rights; (ii) the measures designed to 
meet the legislative object are rationally connected 
to it; and (iii) the means used to impair the right or 
freedom  are  no  more 
to 
accomplish the objective‖. 
 
is  necessary 
than 
When above principle of proportionality is applied in present case, we 
have noted that the rationale for capping of fee to 5% and 8% and not 
more  than  previous  academic  year,  is  to  prevent  profiteering  by  the 
educational  institutions.  This  extreme  restriction  across  the  board  on 
every  educational  institution,  regardless  of  its  costs,  expense  and 
actual  profit,  is  absolutely  un-proportionate  and  unreasonable  as 
profiteering  could  be  stopped  through  less  restrictive  alternatives, 
including  assessment  of  increase  of  fee  on  case  to  case  basis  after 
analyzing the actual costs and income of the institution on the basis of 
relevant data. 
64.  
In the East and West Steam Shipping Company case supra, 
section  6  of  the  Control  of  Ship  Act,  1947  was  challenged  being 
violative  of  Article  12  of  1956  Constitution  (almost  same  as  Article 
18  of  the  Constitution),  as  it  allowed  the  Central  Government  to  fix 
the  rate  at  which  a  ship  could  be  hired  or  rate  that  could  be  charged 
for  carriage of passenger  and  cargo. The august  Supreme  Court  with 
majority view held that impugned Act was not violative of Article 12 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
76 
of 1956 Constitution, because certain special circumstances exist that 
justified  the  impugned  Act.  While  discussing  whether  impugned  Act 
amounts  to  reasonable  restriction  in  the  public  interest,  the  Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court (at page 62) observed that “because special conditions 
exist in which Control of Shipping  imposes restriction on free use of 
ships in order to provide for national needs which cannot otherwise be 
made”.  We  have  noted  that  in  instant  matters  original  sub-clause  (1) 
and sub-clause 5 of section 7-A of Ordinance of 1984, for capping the 
maximum  limit  for  increase  in  private  schools  fee  has  not  been 
enacted on account of any special circumstances and conditions but in 
the ordinary course as a simple regulatory regime under the licensing 
system 
in 
the  educational 
institutions.  Further  admittedly 
the 
impugned  provision  of  section  7-A  of  Ordinance  1984  not  made 
applicable  to  almost  98%  of  private  educational  institutions    and 
parents  in  those  schools,  who  are  charging  fee  less  than  Rs.4,000/-. 
Therefore, it cannot be said that fixation of limit is for the collective 
good of the society. The test of reasonable restriction to fix the upper 
limit  laid  down  in  East  West  Shipping  Company  case,  hence  is  not 
applicable in the present case.   
65. 
Reasonableness  of  restriction  is  to  be  determined  in  an 
objective  manner  and  from  the  standpoint  of  interest  of  the  general 
public and not from the stand point of the interest of the persons upon 
whom the restrictions have been imposed. Canalisation of a particular 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
77 
business  of  even  a  specified  individual  is  reasonable  where  the 
interests  and  economy  of  the  country  demand.  Indeed  absolute  or 
unrestricted  individual  rights  do  not  and  cannot  exist  in  any  modern 
state and it must yield to the common good. However, the Court must 
balance  the  individual  right  of  trade  and  business  against  national 
interest.  In  present  case,  when  98%  students  and  parents  of  unaided 
private  schools  are  not  benefiting  from  this  restriction,  then  this 
restriction of 5% and 8% maximum limit or complete ban on increase 
more  than  previous  academic  year,  on  private  schools  is  un-
proportionate  to  welfare  of  public  and  consequently  unreasonable 
restriction on fundamental rights. 
66. 
No  doubt  the  profiteering  and  capitation  of  fee  is  not 
permitted,  however,  it  cannot  be  presumed  that  any  fee  beyond 
maximum  limit  of  5%  and  8%  or  more  than  previous  academic  year 
will  be  profiteering.  Whether  increase  more  than  5%  or  8%  or  more 
than previous academic year is justified or amounts to profiteering can 
only  be  determined  after  the  factual  assessment  is  made  by  the 
Executives.  Fixing  the  cap  of  5%  or  8%  or  not  more  than  previous 
academic  year,  by  presuming  that  any  increase  before  this  cap  will 
always  be  illegal  and  profiteering,  is  not  a  reasonable  restriction  on 
fundamental  right  of  petitioners  on  trade,  business  and  occupation. 
When  the  validity  of  a  law  placing  restriction  on  the  exercise  of  a 
fundamental right in Article 18 of the Constitution is challenged, the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
78 
onus  of proving to the  satisfaction  of the Court that the  restriction is 
reasonable  lies  upon  the  State.  Further  where  legislative  enactment 
abridges any of the fundamental right enumerated in the Constitution, 
it could be struck down by Courts. 
67. 
There is no cavil that like any other industry or business, the 
private schools are also to be regulated, however, it is not reasonable 
to impose cap of 5% or 8% or total bar on increase more than previous 
academic year across the board, on all private educational institutions 
by  simply  disregarding  inflation  and  costs  incurred  by  those 
institutions.  Indeed  to  control  profiteering,  a  cap  can  be  imposed  on 
the  profits  but  cap  on  gross  income,  without  taking  into  account  the 
inflation and actual cost will amount to take away the right of property 
under Articles 23 and 24 of the Constitution.  
68. 
Right  to  property  under  Article  23  and  24  of  the 
Constitution  including  right  to  possess,  use  and  dispose  of  the 
property. Although deprivation of the right to use and obtain a profit 
from  the  property  is  not  in  every  case  independently  sufficient  to 
establish  a  taking  of  property,  however,  it  is  clearly  relevant  factor 
when  a  particular  legislation  is  examined  on  the  touchstone  of 
reasonableness  of  a  restriction  on  fundamental  right.  The  restriction 
which  is  expropriatory  and  confiscatory  in  nature  should  not  be 
imposed in such a way as to deprive a person of his right to property. 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
79 
69. 
The  cap  of  5%  or  8%  or  not  more  than  previous  academic 
year without considering the actual costs will not only be confiscatory 
or  expropriatory  and  would  amount  to  taking  away  the  property 
without  compensation  but  this  cap  can  actually  be  counterproductive 
and  in  the  long  term  may  work  against  the  interest  of  students  as  it 
will  affect  the  quality  education  and  standards  of  private  schools, 
hence would actually amount to violation of right to quality education 
of students. 
70. 
  Though minimum standard  of schools are required to be 
maintained, in order to impart better and quality education, however, 
many  schools  are  having  much  better  facilities,  are  known  for  their 
high  standards.  Since  such  schools  are  unaided,  the  main  source  of 
generating the  funds to  cater  to the  aforesaid is  the tuition  fees  to be 
charged from the students. Therefore, some amount of autonomy  has 
to  be  conferred  upon  these  institutions.  But  at  the  same  time,  these 
education  institutions  cannot  be  allowed  to  use  the  education  as 
business  ventures  indulging  in  profiteering.  It  is  also  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  under  the  garb  of  increasing  fee,  these  schools  should  not 
indulge in commercialization.  
71. 
This  was  conceded  by  learned  counsel  for  the  schools 
themselves that commercialization and exploitation is not permissible. 
Private schools may fix the fees and charges payable by the students, 
however  increase  cannot  be  such  which  is  exploitative  in  nature  and 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
80 
travels  into  the  arena  of  commercialization.  In  such  situation,  the 
Government  is  equipped  with  necessary  powers  to  take  regulatory 
measures  and  check  commercialization.    The  Government  under 
Ordinance  1984  has  requisite  power  to  resort  to  regulatory  measures 
and  control  the  activities  of  such  institutions  to  ensure  that  these 
education  institutions  keep  playing  vital  and  pivotal  role  to  spread 
education but at same time not indulge in profiteering. 
72. 
Under  Article  25-A  of 
the  Constitution, 
it 
is 
the 
responsibility of the State to provide free of cost education to students 
between age 5-16 year, which the State has admittedly failed to do so. 
In  the  circumstances,  the  State  cannot  pass  on  its  responsibility  to 
private  schools  regarding  quality  education  and  then  insist  that  these 
schools must freeze fees and can only increase by 5% or 8% or cannot 
more  than  previous  academic  year.  The  sole  purpose  for  fixation  of 
the  fee  and  regulation  of  the  same  under  the  Ordinance  1984  and 
Rules  of  1984  is  to  prevent  public  from  extortion,  exploitation  or 
unreasonable  profiteering  on  the  part  of  educational  institutions.  The 
purpose of law is not to deprive private educational institutions from 
reasonable justified gains out of their business. 
73. 
Ordinarily any restriction so imposed which has the effect of 
permitting  or  effectuating  the  fundamental  rights  and  principle  of 
policy can be presumed to be reasonable restriction in public interest. 
The  reasonableness  has  to  be  decided  both  from  the  procedural  and 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
81 
substantive  aspect.  It  is  imperative  that  for  the  consideration  of 
reasonableness  of  restriction  imposed  by  a  statute,  the  Court  should 
examine  whether  the  restriction  is not  arbitrary  and  has  achieved  the 
purpose  as  envisaged  in  Article  18  of  the  Constitution  by  imposing 
restrictions  on  fundamental  rights.  Sindh  High  Court  in  (PLD  1957 
(W.P.)  Karachi  854)  titled  Salah  ud  Din  vs.  Pakistan  regarding 
restriction  on  the  maximum  price  of  beef  held  that  fixing  at  will  of 
maximum  price  of  mutton  and  beef  without  reference  to  quality  and 
without control of the price at source may be a character of scheme of 
permits but does not a system of licensing. The above observation is 
squarely  applicable  in  the present  case  where  without  controlling the 
source  of  increase  in  costs  including  security,  electricity,  rent  etc. 
incurred  by  private  educational  institutions,  the  State  has  caped  the 
upper limit of the tuition fee. In this way, the idea of quality education 
will be eradicated which is not only against the fundamental rights of 
trade  and  business  of  the  petitioners  but  also  fundamental  rights  of 
students to have quality education. 
74. 
We have also noted that under impugned sub-clauses (1) and 
(5) of section 7-A of the Ordinance of 1984, while imposing cap, no 
distinction  has  been  made  between  categories  of  schools  which  are 
charging  high  fee  but  providing  quality  education,  facilities  and 
services and the educational institutions which are relatively mediocre 
but  charging  high  fee.  The  cap  of  maximum  limit  has  been  imposed 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
82 
on both these categories of schools, which is violative of Article 25 of 
the  Constitution,  for  failure  to  discriminate  between  two  different 
categories of schools. 
75. 
Mr.  Justice  Fazal  Karim  (renowned  Jurist  and  former 
Judge  of  Supreme  Court)  in  his  book  (“Judicial  Review  of  Public 
Actions, Second Edition), discussed this facet of discrimination under 
Article 25 of the Constitution as under:- 
―Though  the  right  governed  by  this  Article  is  violated 
 
when  the  State,  through  its  legislative  and  executive  organs, 
treats  differently  persons  in  analogous  situations,  without 
providing  an objective and reasonable justification, yet, this is 
not the only facet of the prohibition of discrimination. The right 
not  to  be  discriminated  against  is,  it  has  been  held  by  the 
European  Court  of  Human  Rights,  ―also  violated  when  states 
without  an  objective  and  reasonable  justification  fail  to  treat 
differently persons whose situations are significantly different.‖ 
 
The  Indian  Supreme  Court  in  K.T.  Moopil  Nair  v.  State  of  Kerala, 
(AIR  1961  SC  552)  held  that  lack  of  classification  amongst  unequal 
creates inequality. Similarly in State of Kerala v. Haji K. Kutty, (AIR 
1969 SC 378) Court held that where persons essentially dissimilar are 
treated by imposition of uniform tax, it amounts to denial of equality. 
The august Supreme Court in Elahi Cotton (PLD 1997 SC 582) held 
that  Article  25  including  obligation  of  the  State  to  differentiate.  The 
same view was also expressed by this Court in Ghulam Mustafa Insari 
v. Government of Punjab (2005 SCJ 158) and Ahmad Yar Chohan v. 
Federal Public Service Commission (1998 MLD 1832).  
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
83 
76. 
Further  under  Article  25-A  of  the  Constitution,  it  is  the 
responsibility of the State to provide free and compulsory education to 
all children of the age of 5-16 years. Beside Article 25-A, the State is 
also obliged under Articles 9, 37(b) and 38(d) to ensure education to 
its citizens. The State has also to ensure that no exploitation has been 
made  by  any  one  including  educational  institution  in  violation  of 
Article  3  of  the  Constitution.  We  have  noted  that  in  pursuance  to 
Article  25-A  of  the  Constitution,  “The  Punjab  Free  and  Compulsory 
Education Act, 2014” (Act of 2014) was promulgated on 10.11.2014. 
However, we have been informed by the learned Additional Advocate 
General  that  till  date,  this  law  has  not  been  notified  by  the 
Government,  hence  has  not  been  enforced.  This  shows  the  slackness 
and  apathy  on  the  part  of  Government  itself  to  enforce  the 
fundamental  right  of  education  guaranteed  under  Article  25-A  of  the 
Constitution  on  one  hand  and  then  fix  maximum  limit  on  private 
educational institutions in garb of public interest. The Government is 
expected  to immediately  notify  the  Act  of  2014  which  also  inter  alia 
deals  with  the  responsibility  of  private  schools  for  free  education  to 
certain  number  of  students.  No  doubt  under  Article  25-A,  it  is  the 
responsibility  of  the  State  to  provide  free  education  to  children 
between age 5-16 but unaided private educational institutions are  not 
bound  to  provide  completely  free  education  to  all  students  under 
Article  25-A  of the  Constitution.  On  question  regarding  applicability 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
84 
of  Article  25-A  on  other  semi  aided  Government  controlled 
educational  institutions,  separate  writ  petition  is  pending,  therefore, 
we do not feel appropriate to decide this issue in these petitions. 
77. 
One  of  the  arguments  of  petitioner  private  schools  is  that 
impugned  freezing  of  maximum  fee  amounts  to  legislative  judgment 
which  is  not  permissible  under  the  principle  of  separation  of  power. 
We  have  considered  this  argument.  As  already  discussed  above,  the 
reasonable  restrictions  can  be  imposed  on  professions  and  trade 
through  licencing  system  under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution  in  the 
public  interest.  The  august  Supreme  Court  in  East  West  Steam 
Shipping  Company  case  supra  held  that  even  rates  can  be  fixed  if 
special  conditions  and  circumstances  exist  in  the  public  interest  for 
imposing  these  restrictions  which  however  is  lacking  in  present  case 
as  already  discussed  above.  The  impugned  restriction  of  maximum 
limit  may  be  unreasonable,  un-proportionate  and  therefore,  impinge 
upon  fundamental  rights  but  it  is  not  encroachment  on  judicial 
functions in violation of separation of power. It is not out of place to 
note  that  there  are  number  of  statutes  for  the  fixation  of  prices  in 
Pakistan including section 12 of the Drugs Act, 1976, section 3 of the 
Punjab  Essential  Articles  (Control)  Act,  1973,  section  26  of  the 
Punjab  Cotton  Control  Ordinance,  1966,  section  3  of  the  Punjab 
Foodstuffs (Control) Act, 1958 and section 16 of the Sugar Factories 
Control Act, 1950. The price control itself is not unconstitutional but 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
85 
it  should  not  be  unreasonable  and  unnecessary  and  unwarranted 
interference with individual fundamental rights.  
78. 
The  concept  of  “legislative  judgment”  is  that  where 
enactment by the legislature is of such a nature, which impinge upon 
judicial  power  of  the  judiciary,  by  either  taking  away  the  power  of 
judiciary  to  decide  a  particular  case  through  a  judicial  process  or 
nullifies a judgment of the Court without adverting to any flaw on the 
basis  of  which  the  judgment  was  passed.  The  fixation  of  maximum 
limit of fee by private educational institutions is not an enactment of 
the  legislature  in  the  domain  of  the  judiciary,  because  no  judgment 
render  or  to  be  rendered  by  any  Court  is  under  dispute  and  no 
presumption of criminality is associated with the petitioner. Further no 
power  of  any  Court  has  been  usurped  by  impugned  legislation  and 
petitioner‟s  right to have  recourse  to  Court  of law  remains available. 
79. 
The  case  law  relied  upon  by  the  petitioners  in  this  regard 
i.e. Mobashir Hassan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265), 
Naseer Ahmed Khan v. GOP (PLD 1980 Lahore 684), Government of 
Punjab  vs.  Naseer  Ahmad  Khan  (2001  CLC  1422),  Government  of 
Punjab v. Naseer Ahmed Khan (2010 SCMR 431) and Nat. Industrial 
Coop  Credit  Corp. v. Province of Punjab   (PLD  1992  Lahore  462), 
are  also  distinguishable  and  not  applicable  to  the  facts  and 
circumstances  of  this  case.  In  case  of  Mobashir  Hasan  supra,  the 
Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  held  that  legislation  is  not  empowered  to 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
86 
declare  a  judgment  or  order  of  conviction  by  Court  void  except  in 
civil  cases.  In  case  of  Naseer  Ahmad  Khan  supra,  the  house  was 
rented to Military Secretary of Governor which was required back by 
the  landlord  or  to  pay  the  rent.  But  instead  of  paying  rent,  the  MLR 
was issued to acquire the said house for Rs.86,000/- which according 
to the petitioner was worth Rs.16,00,000/-. In these circumstances, the 
Court  held  that  law  regarding  taking  away  of  property  must  be 
rationale  and  reasonable  and  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  in  appeal 
upheld  this  judgment  and  also  declared  impugned  law  a  “legislative 
judgment”  which  was  further  upheld  by  august  Supreme  Court.  In 
case  of  National  Industrial  Corporation  supra,  102  societies  were 
declared  undesirable  through  an  Ordinance  and  Court  held  that  this 
amounts to exercise of judicial power which is not permissible. In all 
the above cases, the principle of separation of power was found to be 
violated,  as  legislature  tried  to  encroach  upon  the  judicial  powers  of 
the judiciary. This situation is not prevalent in the present case, where 
no judicial functions have been encroached upon and at best this is an 
unreasonable restriction on the fundamental rights of the petitioner or 
the  discretion  of  the  Executive  to  determine  whether  fee  increased 
beyond 5%  and  8% or  more  than previous  academic  year  is  justified 
or not.  
80. 
One of the arguments of petitioner schools is that impugned 
legislation  amounts  to  a  “Bill  of  Attainder”,  which  is  prohibited  under 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
87 
law. The above argument is also misconceived. The bill of attainder is a 
legislative  act  directed  against  a  designated  person  pronouncing  him 
guilty  of  a  crime  without  trial  or  conviction  without  recognized  due 
process of law. The said concept is a criminal law doctrine which is not 
applicable in present case as no punitive measure of any kind has been 
taken against private educational institutions.    
81. 
The  next  argument  of  the  petitioner  schools  is  that 
legislature  was  required  to  follow  due  process  of  law  including 
hearing to the petitioners before imposing maximum limit on increase 
of  fee.  We  have  carefully  considered  this  argument.  The  Hon‟ble 
Supreme  Court  in  Fauji  Foundation  and  another  vs.  Shamim  ur 
Rehman  (PLD  1983  SC  457)  (para  158  of  the  judgment)  held  that 
procedural  aspect  of  the  due  process  is  not  a  limitation  on  the 
legislative  power.  However  in  Province  of  Punjab  vs.  National 
Industrial Co-operation Credit Corporation (2000 SCMR 567) (page 
598),  the  august  Supreme  Court  held  that  there  can  be  exceptional 
cases  requiring  immediate  legislation  but  in  such  situation,  ex  post 
facto  hearing can be provided to the party effected by such emergent 
legislation. The relevant observations are reproduced as under:- 
there 
can  be 
exceptional 
―However, 
situations  or 
circumstances  in  which  action  may  have  to  be  taken  without 
prior notice in public interest or for the larger good and benefit 
of the community but in such cases also the law should provide 
for an ex post facto hearing so that in case it is later on found 
that  in  a  particular  case  adverse  action  was  not  warranted, 
such  adverse  action  be  withdraw.  Principle  of  trichotomy  of 
powers  does  not  require  that  in  every  case  without  exception 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
88 
the  law  should  always  provide  for  a  prior  hearing  before  a 
judicial  or  quasi-judicial  form.  As  observed,  there  can  be 
exceptional  cases  requiring  immediate  legislation  in  which 
situations  ex  post  facto  hearing  can  be  provided  to  the  party 
affected by such emergent legislation.‖  
 
In  the  light  of  above  discussion,  we  are  of  the  view  that  though 
legislation  was  not  required  to  give  hearing  to  the  petitioners  before 
passing  of  the  impugned  provision  of  section  7-A,  however,  the  ex 
post facto hearing mechanism should have been provided to determine 
if fee beyond 5% or 8% is justified or not. This requirement is further 
entrenched in law  after  insertion of  Article  10-A  of the  Constitution, 
which makes the due process as fundamental right. 
82. 
The  impugned  provision  of  sub-section  (7)  of  section  7-A 
(introduced through Ordinance of 2015) provided that the Incharge shall 
either refund to the students within seven days from the commencement 
of  the  Ordinance  2015,  the  additional  fee  already  charged  or  adjust  it 
with  the  fee  immediately  payable  by  students.  The  petitioner  school 
argument  is  that  this  provision  cannot  be  applied  retrospectively. 
Though it is well settled law that even vested rights can be taken away 
by express words and necessary intendment by legislature. In this regard 
reliance is placed on Messrs Haider Automobile Ltd. vs. Pakistan (PLD 
1969  SC  623)  and  Molasses  Trading  &  Export  (Pvt.)  Limited  vs. 
Federation of Pakistan and others (1993 SCMR 1905). However, when 
we  already  found  that  the  complete  bar  through  original  sub-clause  (1) 
of  section  7-A  (introduced  by  Ordinance  2015)  on  increase  of  fee  for 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
89 
academic  year  2015-2016  not  more  than  fee  charged  in  previous 
academic year to be unreasonable restriction on fundamental rights, then 
this subsection (7) of section 7-A has to be read down also. According to 
literal approach of reading statute, the statute has to be read literally by 
giving  the  words  used  therein,  ordinary  natural  and  grammatical 
meaning.  Any  addition  and  subtraction  of  words  in  statute  are  not 
justified  except  where  for  the  interpretation  thereof,  the  principle  of 
reading  in  and  reading  down  may  be  pressed  into  service  in  certain 
cases.  
83. 
The  argument  of  Dr.  Khalid  Ranjha  Advocate  was  that 
impugned  section  7-A  of  Ordinance  of  1984  could  only  be  amended 
through  Act  of  the  Parliament  and  not  through  Ordinance,  has  no 
basis:  Firstly  for  the reason that after  Ordinance  2015, the impugned 
section 7-A was inserted through Act of 2016 and finally through Act 
of  2017  and  secondly  under  Article  128,  the  Governor  exercises 
legislative power and not merely executive power as held by Hon‟ble 
Supreme  Court  in  Fauji  Foundation  and  another  vs.  Shamim  ur 
Rehman (PLD 1983 SC 457). 
84. 
Learned  counsel  for  one  of  the  petitioner  schools  also 
challenged the validity of 5% and 8% cap on the touchstone of Article 
253  of  the  Constitution,  which  permits  Parliament  to  prescribe  the 
maximum  limit  as  to  the  property  which  may  be  owned,  held, 
possessed  or  controlled  by  any  person.  The  argument  of  the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
90 
petitioners‟ counsel is that the power to prescribe the maximum  limit 
being of the Parliament, the Provincial Legislation has no jurisdiction 
to  impose  this  limit.  No  rebuttal  argument  has  been  addressed  by 
respondents  on  this  legal  question.  However,  as  we  have  already 
found  the  cap  of  5%  and  8%  or  complete  bar  on  increase  more  than 
previous academic year to be unreasonable restriction on fundamental 
rights  and  not  sustainable  under  Article  18  of  the  Constitution, 
therefore, we need not dilate upon this particular legal question which 
may be decided in some other appropriate proceedings. 
 
ORDER OF THE COURT. 
85. 
For  reasons  recorded  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  these 
petitions are decided in following terms:-  
1.  The unaided private educational institutions can be 
regulated by State through licencing system under 
Article 18 of the Constitution.  
2.  The  mechanism  provided  to  determine  reasonable 
fee  of  private  educational  institutions,  through 
impugned section 7-A of the Ordinance 1984, is a 
valid  legislation.  However,  the  complete  bar  on 
increase of fee for academic year 2015-2016 at the 
rate higher than the fee charged for academic year 
2014-2015  through  original  sub-section  (1)  of 
section  7-A  (through  Ordinance  2015)  and  the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
91 
maximum  limit  in  increase  of  annual  fee  @5% 
under  subsection  (5)  of  section  7-A  of  the 
Ordinance 1984 (inserted through Ordinance 2015 
and Act of 2016) and maximum limit of 8% under 
subsection  (5)  of  section  7-A  of  the  Ordinance 
1984 (amended through Act of 2017) are found to 
be  unreasonable  and  un-proportionate  restrictions 
on petitioner schools fundamental rights, therefore 
ultra vires of the Constitution, hence struck down. 
The original subsection (7) of section 7-A (through 
Ordinance  2015)  regarding  refund  of  fee,  is  also 
read down accordingly. 
3.  For any increase already made in fee for academic 
year  2015-2016  at  a  rate  higher  than  the  fee 
charged  for  the  class  during  academic  year  2014-
2015  or  beyond  5%  for  next  academic  year  i.e. 
2016-2017  (after  promulgation  of  Ordinance  of 
2015 and Act of 2016) and increase more than 8% 
for  academic  year  2017-2018  (after  promulgation 
of  Act  of 2017), the  relevant private  schools  shall 
submit  supportive  material  etc.,  justifying  the 
above  said  increases,  with  the  authority  within 
period  of  30  days  from  the  announcement  of  this 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
92 
judgment.  In  case,  no  such  material  is  submitted 
within  stipulated 
time  or  said 
increases  are 
otherwise  not  found  justified  by  the  concerned 
authority, the amount received more than previous 
academic  year  for  academic  year  2015-2016  or 
beyond  limit  of  5%  for  academic  year  2016-2017 
or  beyond  limit  of  8%  for  academic  year  2017-
2018, as the case may be, shall either immediately 
be  refunded  to  the  students/parents  or  adjusted  in 
the next fee bill of the school of those students. 
4.  The  Provincial  Government  is  directed  to  notify 
within  reasonable  time  “The  Punjab  Free  and 
Compulsory  Education  Act,  2014 
to  ensure 
enforcement  of  fundamental  rights  of  education 
under  Article  25-A  of  the  Constitution  and  also 
responsibility  of  private  schools  under  section  13 
of said Act.  
5.  The  respondent  Government  shall  frame  uniform 
regulatory  regime  through  rules  under  section  13 
of  the  Ordinance  of  1984,  within  90  days  of  this 
judgment  to  determine  the  increase  claimed  by 
schools  in  fee  by  also  considering  the  following 
factors:- 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
93 
i). 
The actual cost and expenses incurred 
and 
profits  made 
by 
private 
educational institutions. 
ii).  The  quality  of  teachers,  adequacy  of 
building  and  other  facilities  available 
in the school. 
iii).  The  increase  in  the  utility  bills  and 
other  charges  comparing 
to 
the 
previous years.  
iv).  Payment  of  rent  etc.  on  actual  basis 
and its increase. 
v). 
The  fixation  and  increase  in  fee 
should 
commensurate  with 
the 
facilities  being  provided  to  students 
which  must  be  examined  before 
increase of any fee. 
vi).  The  acceptance  or  rejection  of  any 
proposed 
increase  must  be  done 
through  a  speaking  and  reasoned 
order. 
vii).  Time  frame  and  deadline  must  be 
clearly  spelt  out  in  rules  to  file  the 
proposed increased and its decision. 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
94 
viii).  Fee  of  each  grade/class  should  be  fix 
to ensure that said fee is not different 
for same grade/class in same campus. 
6.  The registering authority shall also ensure that parents 
are not compelled to purchase text books, uniform or 
other  material  from  a  particular  vendor  or  provider 
and  schools  do  not  charge  any  amount  other  than 
tuition fee, admission  fee  or prescribed  security  from 
the parents. 
7.  The  registering  authority  shall  give  representation  to 
parents of private school in the proceeding of increase 
in fee and such proceeding shall be done in open and 
transparent manner.   
8.  An  effective  parents/students  complaint  handling 
procedure be established by using modern information 
technology.  Further  the  procedure  shall  also  be  laid 
down for expeditious disposal of those complaints.  
9.  A  complete  data  of  teachers  and  supporting  staff 
being  hired  by  private  schools should  be  obtained by 
registering 
authority 
showing 
educational 
qualifications/experience and track  record of teachers 
and supporting staff on annual basis. 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
95 
10.  A  periodic  inspection  of  private  school  be  carried 
out to check the provision of facilities to students as 
undertook  by  private  schools  at 
the 
time  of 
registration and thereafter from time to time.  
86. 
The petitions in appendix A & B are disposed of in terms 
of Order of the Court including directions given in Para 85 above. 
87. 
Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  we  must  place  on  record 
our  appreciation  for  the  hard  work  undertaken  and  the  valuable 
assistance  rendered  by  learned  counsel  namely  Mr.  Shahid  Hamid 
Advocate,  Khawaja  Haris  Advocate,  Mr.  Faisal  Hussain  Naqvi 
Advocate, Khawaja Ahmad Hosain Advocate, Mr. Shan Gull Additional 
Advocate General, Mr. Shezad Atta Elahi Advocate, Dr. Khalid Ranjha 
Advocate, Mr. Asad Ullah Saddiqui Advocate, Mr. Muhammad Haroon 
Mumtaz  Advocate,  Mr.  Hassan  Makhdoom  Advocate,  Mr.  Tafazzul 
Rizvi  Advocate,  Mr.  A.  K.  Dogar  Advocate,  Syed  Shahab  Qutab 
Advocate,  Mr.  Waqas  Meer  Advocate,  Mr.  Muhammad  Javed  Arshad 
Advocate and Mr. Muhammad Azhar Siddique Advocate.  
88. 
We would also like to pay our tribute to Mrs. Asma Jahangir 
Advocate, a staunch human rights activist, a leading lawyer and fearless 
supporter of democracy and rule of law in Pakistan. Mrs. Asma Jahangir 
Advocate is no more amongst us but she will always be beacon of light 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
96 
and  a  source  of  inspiration  for  all  Pakistanis  who  strongly  believe  in  a 
democracy and rule of law in Pakistan. 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
        
Riaz Ahmad 
 (ABID AZIZ SHEIKH) 
     
 JUDGE 
           
                
(SHAHID KARIM)              
(SHAMS MEHMOOD MIRZA) 
JUDGE 
 
 
                          
JUDGE 
 
Shahid  Karim,  J.:--  I  have  read  in  draft  the  opinion  of  my  learned 
brother Abid Aziz Sheikh, J. and concur in it.  Owing to the importance 
of the issue involved, I have added a note of my own. 
 
(SHAHID KARIM) 
       JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
Announced in open Court on 05.04.2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
                
(ABID AZIZ SHEIKH) 
           JUDGE 
(SHAMS MEHMOOD MIRZA) 
                            JUDGE 
 
JUDGE 
(SHAHID KARIM)              
 
 
 
 
Judgment approved for reporting. 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
       
 
           
            
 
 
(ABID AZIZ SHEIKH) 
 
 JUDGE 
97 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
Shahid Karim J:-- 
 
At the centre of the controversy is a challenge to section 7A 
of 
the  Punjab  Private  Educational  Institutions  (Promotion  and 
Regulation)  Ordinance, 1984  which  was inserted  by  the  Punjab  Private 
Educational Institutions (Promotion and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 
2017 (Section 7A).  The constitutional and legal landscape as well as the 
able  oral  arguments  of  the  counsels  has  been  admirably  set  out  in  the 
proposed judgment of my learned brother Abid Aziz Sheikh, J., which I 
gratefully adopt. 
 
2. 
Article 18: 
In  the  beginning,  some  general  observations  regarding  the 
fundamental  right  enshrined  in  Article  18  of  the  Constitution  may  be 
made.    This  fundamental  right  is  at  the  forefront  of  the  arguments 
addressed  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  and  the  precise 
scope  of  this  right  was  at  the  heart  of  the  arguments  addressed  by 
counsels of both the sides of the aisle. 
3. 
Let  us  begin  by  some  observations  by  Lord  Parker  in 
Adelaide  Steamship  Co.  (1913)  AC  718  (PC),  as  regards  the  right  to 
carry  on  trade  or  business  which  is  inherent  in  every  member  of  the 
community at common law: 
―At common law every member of the community is 
entitled to carry on any trade or business he chooses 
and  in  such  manner  as  he  thinks  most  desirable  in 
his  own  interest  and  inasmuch  as  every  right 
connotes  an  obligation,  no  one  can 
lawfully 
interfere  with  another  in  the  free  exercise  of  his 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
98 
for 
such 
excuse 
trade or business, unless there exists some just cause 
or 
interference…Speaking 
generally,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  every  individual 
member of the  community  that he should be  free  to 
earn his livelihood in any lawful manner and in the 
interest  of  the  community  that  every  individual 
should have this freedom.‘ 
4. 
The above observations were quoted by Cornelius J. in  East 
 
and  West  Steamship  Co.  v.  Pakistan  (PLD  1958  SC  (Pak)  41,  68). 
While  dilating  upon  the  reasons  underlying  the  grant  of  fundamental 
right by Article 18, Cornelius J. went on to say that: 
―We  may,  therefore,  safely  conclude  that  among  the 
considerations which guided the Constitution makers in 
the drafting of Article 12 (the present Article 18), so as 
to secure freedom to the citizens of Pakistan to conduct 
any lawful trade, the place of greatest importance must 
be  given,  firstly,  to  the  necessity  of  ensuring  to  every 
individual  member of  the  community, a  right to  engage 
in  lawful  trade  according  to  his  choice  and  to  exercise 
that  trade  in  a  mode  settled  -  by  him  at  his  own 
discretion  and  choice,  within  the  legal  requirements, 
and secondly that the interests of the community should 
be  advanced,  by  the  grant  of  such  liberty  to  individual 
citizens,  and  that  every  action  which  tends  to  interfere 
with  that liberty should  be repressed,  since  it  would  be 
injurious to the interests of the State.‖ 
 
5. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  right  concerns  and  protects  an 
economic  life  of  a  citizen  and  the  right  to  engage  in  any  profession  or 
occupation  or  trade or  business.   These  are  different forms  and  sources 
of  livelihood  and  thus  this  right  is  inextricably  linked  with  the  right  of 
life  and  liberty  guaranteed  by  Article  9  of  the  Constitution.    This  right 
will also have to be read with Article 38 of the Constitution (one of the 
principles  of  policy)  which  enjoins  on  the  State  amongst  others  to 
99 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
“provide  for  all  citizens,  within  the  available  resources  of  the  country, 
facilities  for  work  and  adequate  livelihood  with  reasonable  rest  and 
leisure”. It is in this sense that the reasonable restrictions imposed by the 
State  may  also  be  construed  by  the  courts  so  that  a  regulation which is 
confiscatory in nature may not impinge upon the positive obligation cast 
under Article 38 on the  State.  It was reiterated in  Muhammad Yasin v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan 
through  Secretary,  Establish  Division, 
Islamabad and others (PLD 2012 SC 132) that: 
―Article 18 and the rights guaranteed by it are 
concerned  with  the  economic  life  of  the  nation 
and its citizens‖. 
 
6. 
To  quote  Cornelius  J.,  once  again  in  East  and  West 
Steamship Co. case: 
―in  unequivocal  terms  that  every  citizen  shall  have 
the right to conduct any lawful trade or business. In 
so  doing,  the  Article  merely  furnishes  a  fresh  and 
authoritative  declaration  of  a  pre-existing  right 
under the common law.‖ 
 
7. 
In  granting  the  right,  Article  18  uses  different  expressions 
such  as  profession,  occupation,  trade  or  business  but  does  not  define 
them.  However, these are all general terms and as will be seen they run 
into  each  other.    It  will  not  be  required  in  this  case  to  engage  in  the 
nuanced  debate  as  whether  the  petitioners  conduct  trade  or  business  or 
carry on an occupation.  For, the petitioners do not quarrel that they run 
the schools as an occupation and while doing so conduct a business too. 
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
100 
 
8. 
Article 25A: 
As  a  prefatory,  Article  25A  is  addressed  to  the  State  and  is 
concerned  with  positive  or  affirmative  obligation  on  the  State  to  take 
positive  measures  to  protect  the  fundamental  rights.    Such  a  positive 
obligation having  been  cast  by  a  certain  fundamental  right  on the  State 
has received judicial recognition.  In  A v UK (1999) 27 EHRR 611, the 
European  Court  of  Human  Rights  was  considering  the  case  of  a  child 
who had petitioned to the Court on the basis that the State had failed to 
protect him from the ill-treatment of his stepfather.  It was held that: 
―…the  obligation  on  the  High  Contracting  Parties 
under  Article  1  of  the  Convention  to  secure  to 
everyone  within  their  jurisdiction  the  rights  and 
freedoms  defined  in  the  Convention,  taken  together 
with  Article  3,  requires  states  to  take  measures 
designed  to  ensure  that  individuals  within  their 
jurisdiction are not subjected to torture or inhuman 
or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment,  including 
such 
private 
individuals  …  Children  and  other  vulnerable 
individuals,  in  particular,  are  entitled  to  state 
protection in the form of effective deterrence against 
such serious breaches of personal integrity.‖ 
administered 
ill-treatment 
by 
9. 
The positive state obligation has been recognized in Pakistan 
 
too.    Thus,  in  Ms.  Shehla  Zia  and  others  v.  WAPDA  (PLD  1994  SC 
693)  effective  measures  were  directed  to  be  taken  to  prevent  serious 
damage to life and violation of other fundamental rights.  Similarly, in 
Suo Motu Case No.16 of 2011 (PLD 2011 SC 997) relating to law and 
order situation in Karachi it was held that: 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
101 
―It is the duty of the state to protect and safeguard 
these fundamental rights including right to life and 
liberty envisaged by Article 9.‖ 
 
10.  Article 25A has brought a paradigm shift in the concept of right to 
education.  It is a fundamental right now and casts an obligation on the 
state.  It says that :- 
shall  provide 
―25A.  The  State 
free  and 
compulsory education to all children of the age of 
five  to  sixteen  years  in  such  manner  as  may  be 
determined by law.‖ 
 
11. 
Thus  the  parents  can  invoke  the  court‟s  jurisdiction  to 
enforce the right and a corresponding duty on the state.  But the parents 
in these  petitions have  not chosen to  do that.   They  have  made  a  value 
choice  to  send  their  children  to  private  schools  and  to  pay  a  fee  being 
charged by those schools.  It can be argued that the choice that they had 
was a limited choice and was compelled on account of state‟s failure to 
fulfill  its  duty.    That  argument  cannot  be  brushed  under  the  carpet  and 
which leads to the further argument that fees ought to be regulated and 
cannot  be  left  at  the  whim  of  schools.    However  for  other  compelling 
reasons  too,  regulation  can  be  teased  out  of  Article  18  and  so  the 
question  remains  merely  of  how  much?  Other  factors  like  quality  and 
standard of education, by itself, would be sufficient to make out a strong 
case  for  regulation.    Peripherally,  therefore  the  regulation  of  fee  would 
be covered by the broader concept of an overarching need for regulation 
of  the  education  sector  by  the  Government  of  Punjab  (GOP).    Article 
25A encapsulates the right of education as a fundamental right to inhere 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
102 
in every child between the ages five and sixteen.  It the duty of the state 
to ensure that the right is guaranteed to every child of that age.  In fact, it 
is more in the nature of a duty than a right which the state is required to 
fulfill.  And for the accomplishment of the purpose, the State must enact 
laws laying down the manner in which this is to be achieved.  Thus the 
provision  is  not  merely  a  painting  to  be  looked  at  without  more.  
Included in the concept of free and compulsory education is the right to 
receive education of high quality and this is a penumbra of the right to 
education.    It  would  be  naïve  to  detach  the  two  from  each  other  and  if 
the  child  has  a  right  to  free  education,  he  also  has  a  right  to  good 
education in a Rights-based  democracy.  The two are enmeshed to form 
one  whole  right.    In  most  cases  the  parents  have  had  to  fall  back  on 
private schools for lack of qualitative element in the available sources of 
education though  free  education  was  available.   Thus  the two elements 
must exist in tandem with each other.  But the GOP cannot shirk its duty 
by  firstly  permitting  private  schools  to  commence  their  business  and 
then  to  regulate  them  so  oppressively  that  they  virtually  end  up 
imparting  free  education.    The  State  cannot  be  permitted  to  fulfill  its 
duty  under  Article  25A  by  the  machination of  placing  a  cap on the  fee 
structure, and thereby to achieve the object of Article 25A in that garb. 
 
12. 
Free Market: 
Mr. Ahmad Hasan, Advocate argued that government has no 
role  in  the  determination  of  fees  in  a  free  market  economy.    This 
argument  is  not  only  presumptuous  but  also  does  not  chime  with  the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
103 
structure  of  our  Constitution.    The  term  „free  market  economy‟  and 
„capitalist system of economy‟ are relative terms and vary in their sweep 
from one economist to another.  Also this argument runs counter to the 
right under  Article  18  which  is hedged  in  by  the  concept of  regulation.  
But  a  reading  of  the  constitution  would  show  that  the  framers  have 
punctuated  our  Constitution  with  Islamic  social  welfare  values  and 
which  does  not  leave  it  entirely  to  free  market  forces  to  determine  the 
course  of  an  economic  activity.    Justice  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  wrote 
that  the  “Constitution  is  not  intended  to  embody  a  particular  economic 
theory”, (Lochner v New York, 198 US 45, 75 (1905)) while rejecting the 
tenets of Laissez-faire capitalism. 
13. 
Adam Smith once said: 
―Merchants  seldom  meet 
for 
merriment  or  diversion,  but  the  conversation  often 
ends in a conspiracy against the public‖. 
together,  even 
 
14. 
The  intention  and  purpose  of  a  ceiling  seems  to  present  to 
GOP  a  “conspiracy  against  the  public”.    It  is  a  different  question 
whether  that  purpose  comports  with  the  Constitution  or  not.    The 
purpose,  though  laudable,  must  be  constitutional  as  “there  is  but  one 
step from the sublime to the ridiculous”.  
(Napoleon Bonaparte). 
15. 
Article  3  of  the  Constitution  embodies  a  quintessentially 
Islamic concept of elimination of Exploitation: 
3.  The  State  shall  ensure  the  elimination  of  all 
forms of exploitation and the gradual fulfillment of 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
104 
the fundamental principle, from each according to 
his ability to each according to his work. 
 
16. 
Justice  Saqib  Nisar  in  Rawalpindi  Bar  Association  v. 
Federation, (PLD 2015 SC 401) addressed the question thus: 
―The  principles,  ‗from  each  according  to  his 
ability, to each according to his work‘ is of course 
a  fundamental principle of Marxism-Leninism. (In 
fact this language has been copies out from Article 
12  of  the  Constitution  of  USSR,  as  it  then  was 
which  is  of  course  based  on  the  writings  of  Karl 
Marx).‖ 
 
17. 
 Article  3, thus, enjoins upon  the  State the  duty  to  eliminate 
exploitation  and  this  also  provides  a  raison  d‘etre  for  regulation  of  the 
Education  Sector  and  puts  paid  to  the  argument  that  GOP  must  not 
intervene in the regulatory measure of fixing fees on this basis.  It is the 
constitutional duty of GOP to balance the mandate of Article 3 with the 
rights of the petitioners to conduct an economic activity. 
18. 
But in this case, in our opinion, the petitioners have a better 
reading  of  the  Constitution  whey  they  say  that  capping  impinges  upon 
their  rights  guaranteed  by  the  constitution  and  does  little  to  ameliorate 
the  plight  of  the  public  who  opt  for  private  schools  as  means  of 
education for their children.  As explicated, the purpose maybe based on 
good faith, yet the purpose will be best served by fulfilling the duties by 
the  state  enumerated  in  the  Constitution  and  which,  if  done  faithfully, 
will enlarge the choice of schools for parents so that they are not driven 
by circumstances to send their children to private schools.   
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
105 
19. 
The purpose of providing a qualification and limitation on the 
right  is  to  serve  a  public  purpose.    But  if  the  law  serves  the  economic 
object  of  causing  any  harm,  that  made  the  law  in  pith  and  substance 
oppressive  and  unreasonable  in  relation  to  property  and  civil  rights  of 
the  persons  affected.    This  begs  the  question:  What  were  typically  the 
public  purposes  which  would  qualify  as  such?    To  quote  from  the 
Supreme Court of Canada: 
“Public  peace,  order,  security,  health,  morality: 
these  are  the  ordinary  though  not  exclusive  ends 
served by the law”.  (1949 SC R1, 50).   
 
20. 
Doubtless, legislation on food and drugs standards have been 
upheld  on  the  basis  that  the  legislation  satisfied  the  requirements  of  a 
typically  criminal  public  purpose.   Thus, there  is  a  secure  criminal  law 
foundation  for  the  legislation.    The  criminal  quality  of  an  act  will  arm 
the  legislature  to  provide  for  regulation  permitted  by  Article  18.  
Inherent in the concept of regulation is the need felt by the legislature to 
do  so  for  fear  that  if  not  regulated,  the  trade  or  profession  will  run 
against the public interest and will cause harm.  Courts have permitted, 
and examples abound, the regulation of prices of essential commodities 
and  food  stuff  but  not  by  prejudging  the  price  as  the  chancellor‟s  foot, 
but  rather  based  on  empirical  data  and  other  economic  factors  which 
impact  the  question  of  such  determination.    “It  is  well  established  that 
food  and  drug  legislation  making  illegal  the  manufacture  or  sale  of 
dangerous  products,  adulterated  products  or  misbranded  products  is 
106 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
within  the  criminal  law  power”.  (R.  v  Wetmore  (1983)  2  SCR  284-
Supreme Court of Canada.) 
21. 
Similarly  in  RJR-McDonald  v.  Canada  (1995)  3  SCR  199, 
the  Supreme  Court  of  Canada  had to  review  the validity  of  the  Federal 
Tobacco  Products  Control  Act,  which  prohibited  the  advertising  of 
cigarettes  and  other  tobacco  products.    The  Supreme  Court  viewed  the 
controversy  on  the  touchstone  of  the  criminal  law  power  of  the 
parliament  and  the  court  was  unanimous  that  the  protection  of  public 
health supplied the required purpose, to support the exercise of criminal-
law power.  Thus, an underlying criminal law power has typically been 
used  by  the  parliaments  to  enact  laws  for  the  protection  of  health  etc.  
There are reasons which compel a legislature to declare a profession as 
lawful or unlawful.  GOP cited Drugs Act, 1976 (Act of 1976) and The 
Punjab Marriage Functions Act, 2016 (Act of 2016) as instances of laws 
which have fixed prices.  These laws are materially different and do not 
by way of legislation impose a price leaving nothing in the hands of the 
administrative authorities to determine in each case.  The Act of 2016 in 
any case does not fix prices but merely regulates the quantity of food to 
be  served  which  has  little  or  no  impact  on  the  economic  activity  being 
generated.  In case of Act of 1976, the fixation of prices is done by the 
Registration  Board  and  any  decision  taken  is  subject  to  appeal.    Thus 
comparisons between the two are odious and unnecessary.  However, the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
107 
question still remains whether the fees of educational institutions can be 
fixed on the same analogy. 
Fixing of Prices and Article 18: 
22. 
Plainly  and  clearly,  the  power  to  regulate  is  a  legislative 
power and the executive cannot exercise it unless granted by law  made 
by  the  competent legislature.   Now  what  is  the power  to  regulate?  It is 
assumed and Article 18 makes it clear that regulation may be done by a 
licensing system.  The system of regulation has been given a wide sweep 
in our jurisdiction and a legislature possesses the power to regulate trade 
or intercourse in order to protect the public welfare.  This is the common 
thread  which  runs  through  all  regulation  by  license  and  public  welfare 
provides  the  justification  for  doing  so.    The  following  observations  of 
Ruth  Bader  Ginsberg,  J.  made  in  NFIB  v  Sebalius,  132  S.  Ct.  2566 
(2012) resonate in our minds while determining the issue: 
―Our  precedent  has  recognized  Congress‘  large 
authority  to  set 
the 
economic and social welfare realm‖. 
the  Nations‘  course 
in 
23. 
In  Gibbons  v  Ogden  (1924)  22  US1,  Chief  Justice  Marshall 
 
while  describing  the  power  of  the  Congress  to  regulate  inter-state 
commerce said:- 
―It is the power to regulate; that is, to prescribe the 
rule  by  which  commerce  is  to  be  governed.    This 
power, like all other vested in Congress, is complete 
in  itself,  may  be  exercised  to  its  utmost  extent  and 
acknowledges no limitations other than as prescribed 
in the Constitution‖ 
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
108 
24. 
Similarly, in National Labour Relations Board v Jones (301) 
US1,  37,  Chief  Justice  Charles  Evans  Hughes  observed  that  power  to 
regulate implies a power to foster, protect, control and restrain. 
25. 
Does  the  power  to  regulate  include  the  power  to  prohibit? 
The cases of East and West Steamship Co. (PLD 1958 SC (Pak) 41) and 
Government of Pakistan v Akhlaque Hosain (PLD 1965 SC 527) can be 
cited from  our  jurisdiction  which espouse  this  view.   However, in  East 
and  West  Steamship,  Justice  Cornelius  seems  to  have  taken  a  different 
view of the meaning of power to regulate.  I shall revert to this aspect in 
the later part of this opinion.  At the other end of the spectrum is the case 
of  Sardaran  v  Municipality  (PLD  1964  SC  397),  which  holds  that  any 
attempt  to  squeeze  out  a  lawful  profession  or  to  render  it  extinct  is 
inconsistent  with  the  right  under  Article  18.    But  here  we  are  not 
considering the effect of a prohibition in respect of a trade or profession 
but, in essence, a prohibition to charge fee beyond a certain limit and so 
whether  it  is  unreasonable  regulation  or  not.    Thus  the  question  at  the 
heart of it is that of regulation and not of prohibition.  Be that as it may, 
it would suffice to refer to Arshad Mahmood and others v. Government 
of  Punjab  through  Secretary  and  others  (PLD  2005  SC  193)  which  is 
the  current  view  on  the  subject  of  whether  regulation  would  include  a 
complete prohibition.  This is a seven-members Bench judgment and has 
watered  down  the  holding  in  East  and  West  Steamship  Co..    The  view 
that by the act of regulation a complete prohibition may be put in place 
109 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
did not find favour in Arshad Mahmood with the Supreme Court.  It was 
held that: 
―Perusal of above definition persuades us to hold 
that  there  cannot  be  denial  of  the  Government's 
authority  to  regulate  a  lawful  business  or  trade, 
but question would arise whether under the garb of 
such  authority,  the  Government  can  prohibit  or 
prevent  running  of  such  a  business  or  trade.  To 
find out the answer to this question, reference may 
be  made  to  the  case  of  Municipal  Corporation  of 
the  City  of  Toranto  v.  Virgo  (1896  AC  88,  93), 
where  Lord  Davey  while  discussing  a  statutory 
power  conferred  on  a  Municipal  Council  to  make 
bye-laws  for  regulating  and  governing  a  trade 
made the following observation:-- 
the 
involve 
trade  may 
"No  doubt  the  regulation and  governance  of 
a 
imposition  of 
restrictions on this exercise ……..Where such 
restrictions  are  in  the  opinion  of  the  public 
authority necessary to prevent a nuisance or 
for  the  maintenance  of  order.  But  their 
Lordships 
is  marked 
distinction 
the 
prohibition  or  prevention  of  a  trade  and  the 
regulation or governance of it, and indeed a 
power to regulate and govern seems to imply 
the continued existence of that which is to be 
regulated or governed." 
think 
to  be  drawn  between 
there 
that 
―As such, following this principle and also keeping 
in  view  other  provisions  of  the  Constitution, 
including  Article  3,  9,  18  as  well  as  Article  38  of 
the Constitution, which deals with the principles of 
State  policy,  we  are  inclined  to  hold  that  if  the 
definition of word "regulation" as laid down in the 
judgments  cited  herein  above,  is  applied  to  hold 
that  under  licencing  system,  unless  the  business  is 
unlawful  or  indecency  is  involved  therein,  the 
legislature  can  enact  laws,  which  will  promote  a 
free  competition  in  the  fields  of  trade,  commerce 
and  industry.  At  any  rate,  if  restrictions  are  to  be 
imposed  to  regulate  such  trade  or  business,  those 
should  not  be  arbitrary  or  excessive  in  nature, 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
110 
barring  a  majority  of  persons  to  enjoy  such  trade. 
In  the  instant  case,  as  per  the  requirement  of 
Section 69-A of the Ordinance, the appellants, who 
are  the  owners  of  the  stage  carriages  as  per  the 
definition  under  section  (2)37  of  the  Ordinance, 
would  not  be  in  a  position  to  run  the  business  on 
the  specified  routes,  franchise  of  which  has  been 
offered  to  the  respondents  because  it  has  been 
inferred  from  the  facts  of  the  case  put  forward  by 
parties'  counsel  that  for  one  route  they  have  to 
arrange  a  fleet  of  stage  carriages.  Obviously  the 
appellants  are  not  in  a  position  to  arrange  such 
fleet, on account of their financial position or being 
Un-influential  person.  They  are  also  not  in  a 
position  to  obtain  hefty  loans  from  the  financial 
institutions,  as  have  been  given  to  respondents  at 
70%  and  30%  ratio,  and  thus  unable  to  compete 
with 
such 
conditions  would  appear  to  be  not  only  arbitrary 
but  oppressive  in  nature  and  tend  to  deprive  them 
from  enjoying  the  fundamental  right  of  freedom  of 
trade  and  business,  as  per  Article  18  of  the 
Constitution.  Therefore, 
it 
becomes duty  of  the Court  to see  the  nature  of  the 
restrictions  and  procedure  prescribed  therein  for 
regulating  the  trade  and  if  it  comes  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  restrictions  are  not  reasonable 
then the same are bound to be struck down.‖ 
respondents.  Consequently, 
in  such  situation 
the 
26. 
In  this  context  Mr.  Shan  argued  that  by  so  providing  it  was 
unlawful to charge any fee in excess of the cap and so the protection of 
Article 18 was not available.  His argument runs an ingenious course.  In 
„On Reading the Constitution‘, Laurence H. Tribe and Michael C. Dorf 
had this to say about such an interpretative method:- 
―In  beginning  to  sort  out  good  and  bad  ways  of 
arguing about what this Constitution means, we can 
make considerable headway by inquiring what it is 
about  some  modes  of  discourse,  some  modes  of 
conversation  that  are  put  forth  as  ―constitutional 
argument,‖ that makes them suspect from the start. 
What 
it  about  some  purported  modes  of 
constitutional analysis that makes them implausible 
is 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
111 
candidates for ways of reading the Constitution we 
actually have? 
 
27. 
Mr.  Shan  says  he  is  entitled  to  this  view  on  the  strength  of 
Government of Pakistan v Zameer Ahmad (PLD 1975 SC 667).  But the 
crux of the holding in Zameer Ahmad are the following observations:- 
―Prostitution,  trafficking  in  women,  gambling, 
trade 
in  narcotics  or  dangerous  drugs,  are 
commonplace  instances  of  unlawful  profession  or 
trade.    These  are  inherently  dangerous  to  public 
health or welfare‖. 
28. 
It was further held that: 
 
―…Therefore,  on  the  wording  of  Article  18  of  the 
Constitution,  the  right  to  enter  upon  a  profession 
or occupation or to conduct trade or business can 
hardly  be  described  to  be  a  constitutional  or 
fundamental  right  when  such  right  may be  denied 
by law.  In this respect our Constitution stands in 
sharp contrast with the corresponding provision of 
the  Indian  Constitution  which  omits  the  use  of 
word ‗lawful‘ in the relevant provision.‖ 
 
29. 
The  above  two  observations  will  have  to  be  read  in 
conjunction  with  each  other  and  in  a  continuum.    It  refers  to  the 
declaration of a trade or business as unlawful and not a part of it.  The 
former is prohibition and the latter regulation. 
30. 
In contrast, Justice Kaikaus in Progress of Pakistan Company 
Ltd. v Registrar Joint Stock Companies (PLD 1958 (WP) Lahore 887, 
910)  explicated  the  true  nature  of  the  right  under  Article  18  and  the 
concept of „lawful‟ as used in the following words:- 
―The  Article  entitles  the  citizens  of  Pakistan  to 
carry  on  any  business,  trade,  or  profession  with 
this condition only that the individual acts involved 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
112 
in  it  are  not  unlawful.  If  an  act  involved  in  a 
business, trade, profession, or  occupation, is such 
that  if  performed  otherwise  than  as  a  part  of  a 
business,  trade,  profession  or  occupation,  it  is 
unlawful,  then  it  cannot  become  lawful  just 
because  it  is  performed  as  a  part  of  a  business, 
trade  or  profession,  that  is,  as  a  part  of  activity 
indulged  in  for  the  purpose  of  profit  or  income. 
That  is  the  only  limitation  placed  on  the  right  to 
carry  on  a  business  etc.  The  object  of  the  Article 
was to grant the citizen the fullest right to carry on 
any business etc., but the word "lawful" had to be 
put  in  because  if  it  did  not  exist  the  citizen  may 
have  claimed to  make  a  business of  an  act  that is 
an offence or is prohibited. Theft is unlawful and, 
therefore,  no  person  can  make  a  business  of  it. 
Blackmail  is  an  offence  and  no  citizen  can  claim 
that  as  it  is  his  occupation,  he  is  entitled  to 
blackmail  people.  It  is  on  account  of  the  word 
"lawful"  in  this  Article  that  the  thief  the  black-
mailer  and  others  whose  business 
involves 
unlawful  acts  are  prevented  from  putting  forward 
an argument which may have been open to them if 
this  word  did  not  occur  in  Article  12.  But  the 
Article  debars  the  legislature  from  making  a 
business  as  such  unlawful  the  individual  act 
involved in which is not unlawful. It can make any 
act involved in a business unlawful and the citizen 
would  be  debarred  from  doing  that  act  but  the 
legislature  cannot  say  that  while  the  act  involved 
in a profession will be lawful if not performed as a 
part of business etc., the doing of the same act as a 
part of a business will be unlawful. There is no bar 
to  the  legislature  providing  that  sale  of  tobacco 
shall be an offence. But it cannot say that while the 
sale  of  tobacco  will  not  be  an  offence,  no  person 
shall carry a business of sale of tobacco. As I have 
already stated it is not a possible interpretation of 
this  Article  that  the  legislature  can  prohibit  any 
business  etc.  If  an  act  when  done  not  for  the 
purpose  of  business,  trade,  or  profession,  is  not 
unlawful,  the  legislature  is  debarred  from  saying 
that  when  done  as  a  part  of  business,  trade  it 
profession,  it shall  be  lawful.  That is  the meaning 
of saying that the citizens can carry on any lawful 
business etc. It is lawful if the activity involved in 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
113 
it,  is  not,  apart  from  its  being  carried  on  as  a 
profession, unlawful. 
fundamental  rights, 
from  commentaries  on 
to  carry  on  any  business, 
 If  the  intention  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  was 
absolutely to guarantee to the citizens of Pakistan 
the  right 
trade, 
whatsoever  and  not  to  subject  the  right  even  to 
reasonable restrictions as is provided with respect 
to  some  other 
the  only 
qualification  of  its  exercise  being  that  it  could  be 
subject to a licensing system and to an exception of 
monopoly in favour of the State, what would be the 
wording  of  the  Article  ?  The  wording  would  be 
exactly  as  Article  12  now  stands.  The  word 
"lawful"  would have  to be put in because if it did 
not  exist,  the  citizen  could  claim,  as  already 
observed,  that  he  had  the  right  to  commit.  theft, 
dacoity,  blackmail  or  any  other  offence,  because 
he had adopted it as a means of income. This plea 
would  be  open  to  him  because,  as  will  be 
abundantly  clear 
the 
Income  Tax  Act,  the  view  that  even  an  unlawful 
business is a business has been taken in a number 
of  cases.  The  absence  of  the  word  "lawful"  in  the 
corresponding  Article  19  (9)  of 
the  Indian 
Constitution  had  created  a  difficulty.  It  had  been 
argued  that  a  business,  trade,  etc.,  included  even 
an  unlawful  trade.  Indian  Courts  had been forced 
to  hold  that  business  etc.,  in  Article  19  (9)  could 
only  refer  to  lawful  business  for  otherwise  even 
offences when committed as part of business could 
be subjected to only reasonable restrictions in the 
public interest. This was a forced construction, for 
on being pronounced unlawful a business does not 
cease 
to  be  business,  and  Article  12  has 
recognised  this.  The absence  in this  Article  of  the 
words  "subject  to  reasonable  restriction"  as  it 
exists 
to 
fundamental rights is by itself proof of the fact that 
the  intention  was  to  give  a  right  of  business 
unhampered  in  any  way  by  legislation.  I  would 
hold  that  Article  12  guarantees  to  the  citizen  the 
right  to  carry  on  any  business,  occupation,  trade, 
or  profession  (subject  to a licensing system  and a 
monopoly  of  the  State)  with  this  limitation  only 
that  the  citizen  is  not  entitled  by  virtue  of  the 
Article  to  do  an  act  which,  when  done  otherwise 
some  other  Articles 
relating 
in 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
114 
than as part of a business etc., was unlawful. There 
is no other limitation of this fundamental right.‖ 
These  rules  were  reiterated  by  Justice  Kaikaus  in  Akhlaque  Hussain‟s 
case. 
31.  We  must  also  bear  in  mind  a  primary  rule  of  interpretation 
regarding  the  use  of  the  term  „reasonable  restriction‟  in  some  of  the 
fundamental rights.  As a general rule, primary legislation is not open to 
challenge  on  the  ground  of  reasonableness  but  this  rule  is  inapplicable 
where, under the Constitution, a right is subject to reasonable restriction 
imposed  by  law  in  the  public  interest.   And  this  is  precisely  the  raison 
d‘etre  for  7A  to  be  challenged.  The  discussion  regarding  fundamental 
rights  is  incomplete  without  quoting  the  deathless  lines  of  Muhammad 
Munir CJ in Jibendra Kishore case (PLD 1957 SC (Pak) 9): 
―The very conception of a fundamental right is that 
it  being  a  right  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution 
cannot  be  taken  away  by  the  law  and  it  is  not  only 
technically  inartistic  but  a  fraud  on  the  citizens  for 
the  makers  of  a  Constitution  to  say  that  a  right  is 
fundamental  but  that  it  may  be  taken  away  by  the 
law.‖ 
 
32. 
Thus  it  will  be  a  fraud  on  the  Constitution  to  say  that  a 
fundamental  right  may  be  taken  away  by  law.    To  reiterate,  the  only 
limitation is “that the citizen is not entitled by virtue of the Article to do 
an  act, which, when done otherwise  than as part of a  business etc. was 
unlawful”.    The  charging  of  fee  beyond  8%  is  not  unlawful  otherwise 
than as part of a business and thus no limitation can be placed so as to 
declare it unlawful as an act. 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
115 
33. 
Mr.  Shaan‟s  premise  is  that  since  there  is  a  ceiling  imposed 
by law, the right, if any, vesting in the petitioners has been taken away 
and  thus  seeking  its  protection  is  not  permissible.    Therefore,  a  part  of 
the right is protected by Article 18 but beyond a certain ceiling, it is not.  
In  short,  the  petitioners  will  be  deemed  to  carry  on  a  lawful  trade  or 
business as long as they do not raise the fee beyond 8%.  The argument 
is  nuanced  and too tenuous  to be  sustained.  If  accepted, it  will lead to 
dangerous  results.    It  is  merely  a  matter  of  semantics  to  reach  such  a 
result.    Doubtless,  the  legislature  can  declare  a  trade  or  profession  as 
unlawful and which will mean that that business, trade or profession, as 
a whole has been declared as unlawful and it will not be lawful to enter 
upon it.  In that sense any act ancillary to that trade or profession will be 
unlawful too.  But if a profession, business or occupation is lawful and 
there is no prohibition on its activity then that profession or occupation 
can  only  be  regulated  by  a  licensing  system  or  otherwise  within  the 
enumerations of Article 18.  Price fixation is a facet of regulation as we 
believe it is and so by so fixing a price (or placing a cap as in the present 
case) the legislature is merely imposing a regulation and no more.  The 
distinction,  though  subtle,  is  of  crucial  importance.    If  it  is  deemed 
unlawful, the petitioners lose their right to invoke Article 18 to their aid, 
but  if  it  is  merely  a  regulatory  measure  the  petitioners  can  invoke  the 
vice  of  unreasonableness  to  have  the  measure  struck  down.    For 
regulation can only be to the extent of being reasonable as was held by 
116 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
Justice  Cornelius  in  East  and  West  Steamship  Co.  case  and  Arshad 
Mahmood.  As adumbrated, regulation might include prohibition as well 
(East and West Steamship Co. case) but again, if a prohibition is placed 
by exercise of licensing powers, that is being done within the regulatory 
enterprise  which  governs  that  trade  or  occupation.    Thus  the  only 
limitation on a lawful trade or business is regulation by licensing system 
or in the interest of free competition.  If this were not the case, it would 
effectively give power in the hands of GOP to wield it at will who may 
also one day choose to impose a complete ban on charging of fee by the 
petitioners.    Will  that  serve  the  public  interest?    The  answer  is 
undoubtedly  in  the  negative.    Will  it  not  be  a  contradiction  in  terms  to 
say  that  though  the  petitioners  may  carry  on  the  business  of  running  a 
private  school  but  they  cannot  charge  a  fee  for  it.    This  will  be 
tantamount  to  saying  that  private  schools  cannot  conduct  that  business, 
in fact.  To put it in other words, though the business is lawful, no one 
can conduct that business because of an unsavory and grossly  stringent 
regulation.    The  effect  of  regulation  cannot  be  to  make  the  conduct  of 
business  or  profession  as  unlawful.    Hence  the  adage;  what  cannot  be 
done directly, cannot be achieved indirectly, too. 
34. 
This  brings  us  to  the  inherent  fallacy  of  the  GOP‟s 
arguments.  If by raising the fee beyond 8% makes the act unlawful and 
unpalatable and hence not protected as a fundamental right under Article 
18, can it be argued that the petitioners are stripped of the protection of 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
117 
all  other  fundamental  rights  such  as  right  to  property,  liberty  and  due 
process.  Surely if the right guaranteed by Article 18 is taken away, the 
act can be challenged on the touchstone of those rights and the tests laid 
therein  will  have  to  be  satisfied.    The  petitioners  can  indeed  plead 
property rights and due process to block any attempt to cap fees. 
Licensing System: 
35. 
The question, in the context of Article 18, which engaged this 
Court  was  the  true  nature  of  the  prohibition  in  section  7A.   Whether  it 
was  by  way  of  a  qualification  or  a  condition  of  regulation?    This 
question  need  not  detain  us  for  long.    The  conditions  imposed  on  the 
private schools are an amalgam of both qualifications and conditions of 
a  license.    The  law  and  the  rules  provide  certain  qualifications  for  the 
schools to have themselves registered and to enter the gate.  The GOP, 
however, continues to keep a watchful eye by way of regulations while 
the  school  operates  and  such  regulation  can  only  be  undertaken  by  a 
licensing  system.    That  is  the  mandate  of  Constitution  and  so  the  GOP 
and the petitioners must resign to this legal proposition.  Otherwise, the 
whole edifice must fall.  If this were not the case, the GOP will scramble 
to find a legal basis for the entire structure which has all the contours of 
a regulatory regime.  Thus in our opinion, the regulation by GOP has all 
the  trappings  of  a  licensing  system  and  we  harbour  no  qualms  on  that 
account. 
36.  License  is  a  “permit  from  government  etc.  to  marry,  print 
something,  preach,  carry  on  some  trade  etc.”  (Concise  Oxford 
118 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
Dictionary).    Also  in  American  Jurisprudence, (33rd  vol.) the  definition 
is thus stated:- 
―In its specific sense, to license means to confer on 
a person the right to do something which otherwise 
he would not have the right to do.  A license is in 
the  nature  of  special  privilege  rather  than  a  right 
common to all and is often required as a condition 
precedent  to  the  right  to  carry  on  business  or  to 
hold  certain  classes  of  property  within 
the 
jurisdiction.‖ 
 
37.  A  system,  in  the  opinion  of  Justice  Cornelius  in  East  and  West 
Steamship case: 
in 
the 
relevant 
―would 
respect  mean  an 
arrangement by way of regulation, applicable to a 
complex  whole  namely  the  trade  of  shipping  in 
general.    It  would  provide  for  rules  applicable 
uniformly,  subject  to  suitable  classification  in 
relation to the entire trade of shipping.  Again, it is 
inherent  in  the  use  of  the  expression  licensing 
system that the actions of the State in respect of the 
trade  should  be  in  the  nature  of  permissions 
granted  to  do  certain  acts  provided  certain 
conditions are satisfied; it goes entirely beyond the 
meaning  of  the  expression  ‗licensing‘  to  interpret 
it  as  a  check  upon  even  the  primary  process 
involved in the trade which is being licensed.‖ 
38. 
Thus the system of licensing does not confer a license on the 
 
GOP  to  place  “a  check  upon  even  the  primary  process  involved  in  the 
trade which is being licensed”.  It is nobody‟s case that the petitioner do 
not  conduct  a business or  even  trade; that  they  do  so  for profit, though 
the  primary  purpose  of  imparting  quality  education  is  not  lost  sight  of 
upon them; that high quality education is not inexpensive.  All of these 
are lawful acts and the business and trade being conducted is lawful too.  
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
119 
What circumstances would then compel the GOP to impose a condition 
which  is  not  only  imprudent  but  is  pernicious  and  virtually  takes  away 
the imprimatur? The petitioners contend that they can certainly make out 
a case for increase of fee beyond 8% upon cogent and rational grounds.  
But to what avail would that be since the legislature has tied the hands of 
the authorities to grant such a permission and hence the petitioners shall 
have  to  either  shut  down  or  scale  down  their  expenses  to  manageable 
levels.  The petitioners may carry on with their business but the standard 
and quality of education will have to be reconfigured to comport to the 
ceiling imposed by GOP.  A spiral effect will set in and one can imagine 
the rest. 
39. 
However  we  agree  with  the  Sindh  High  Court  judgment 
(CPD-5812 of 2015) that the regulation of privately managed schools is 
by a licensing system and ought to be treated as such.  In this case, Rule 
7(3)  of  the  Sindh  Private  Educational  Institutions  (Regulation  and 
Control) Rules 2002 was challenged. 
40. 
At the same time, the words of Lord Woolf (R v. Secretary of 
State ex p. Fayed (1997) 1 All ER 228, 240) must resonate emphatically 
in  all  such  cases  which  lay  down  a  duty  to  act  fairly  in  granting  and 
regulating license: 
―But even if what a person applying for a license docs is 
to seek a privilege, the days when it used to be said that a 
person seeking a privilege is not entitled to be heard are 
long  gone.    The  granting  authority  has  in  the  case  of  a 
license also a duty to act fairly‖.   
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
120 
41. 
  The  above  statement  applies,  a  fortiori,  to  the  regulatory 
authorities  after  a  license  is  granted  and  must  be  taken  to  have  been 
embedded  in the  procedural  formalities  to  be  followed.   Section  7A, in 
my  opinion,  takes  away  that  right  to  be  treated  fairly  and  a 
corresponding duty to act with fairness. 
42. 
Chief Justice Marshall (of US Supreme Court) said: 
The power to tax involves the power to destroy‖ 
 
Many  years  later,  Justice  Holmes  completed  the 
phrase by inserting an important rider: 
―The power to tax is not the power to destroy while 
this court sits‖ 
(277 US 218, 222) 
43. 
By analogy, the business of the petitioners cannot be allowed 
to  be  destroyed  in  the  guise  of  regulation,  while  this  Court  sits,  by 
providing a cap.  The argument of the GoP in support of such a cap runs 
on a slender margin.  The petitioners do not dispute that fixing of fees is 
part  of  regulation.    But  the  subtle  distinction  has  to  be  borne  in  mind 
here.    Regulation  would  involve  the  process  of  considering  the  request 
of a school to increase fees to a certain level and to permit or refuse that 
increase.  It may also include permission to increase to a certain extent 
on the basis of data before the authority.  However, on the contrary, this 
does  not  include  the  power  to  fix  fees  without  regard  to  attending 
circumstances and in oblivion of the good faith underpinning the request 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
121 
for  a  reasonable  increase.    That  would  constitute  an  unreasonable 
restraint on the rights. 
44. 
In  most  part,  the  petitioners  argue  that  the  fixation  of  a 
ceiling is expropriatory and confiscatory.  It impacts the schools in such 
a way as to render them uncompetitive and has the effect of driving them 
out  of  business.    Any  law  which  has  that  egregious  effect  triggers  a 
challenge on the basis of Article 18 and an inevitable intervention by the 
court.  Section 7A is peremptory in nature and forecloses any right of the 
petitioners  to  put  forth  their  valid  claim  for  an  increase.    In  a  nub, 
section  7A  has  stonewalled  any  investigation  into  an  increase  beyond 
8%.  GoP contends that the figure of 8% was arrived at upon empirical 
data  regarding  inflationary  trends  etc.    If  such  is  the  basis,  can  the 
petitioners  not  raise  a  countervailing  argument  that  those  factors  are 
fickle and plastic in nature and are prone to changes which are rapid and 
uncertain.    The  data  is,  at  best,  unilateral  and  one-sided  and  perhaps 
compiled to suit the GOP‟s purpose and may be upended by competing 
and more reliable data.  More importantly, is there a mechanism in place 
to  guide  the  legislature  to  bring  changes  in  law  on  regular  intervals  in 
this respect?  In the enactment of laws, no such rule can be relied upon 
and  it  is  naïve  to  expect  the  legislature  to  undertake  that  exercise 
periodically  or  for  the  petitioners  to  reach  out  to  the  legislature  with  a 
plea that  an  amendment is  necessitated by  the legislature.    And  what if 
only  a  couple  of  schools  seek  an  increase  beyond  8%.    Will  the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
122 
legislature change the law for those couple of schools? Certainly not.  It 
was  said  in  Gadoon  Textile  Mills  v  WAPDA  (1997  SCMR  641,  835) 
that: 
is 
therefore  no  room  here 
the 
―There 
philosophy  that  the  end  justifies  the  means;  the 
end, however, laudable, cannot be justified, if it is 
violative of the right guaranteed by Article 18‖.  
  
for 
45. 
And  in  Government of  Pakistan  v  Muhammad  Ashraf  (PLD 
1993 SC 176, 185), the following observations aptly apply to the instant 
case: 
 
46. 
―Any  legislation  whereby  either  the  prices  of 
marketable commodities are fixed in such a way as 
to  bring  them  below  the  cost  of  production  and 
thereby make it impossible for a citizen to carry on 
his business or whereby taxes are imposed in such 
a way as to result in acquiring property of those on 
whom  the  incidence  of  taxation  falls,  would  be 
violative  of  the  fundamental  right  to  carry  on 
business or to hold property as guaranteed by the 
Constitution.‖ 
 
Other Rights 
The arguments of GOP stir a debate about “how not to read 
the  Constitution”.    (The  chapter  in  a  book  by  Laurence  H.  Tribe  and 
Michael C. Dorf titled On Reading the Constitution).  The authors began 
by the notion that: 
―Those  who  wrote  the  document,  and  those  who 
voted to ratify it, were undoubtedly projecting their 
wishes into an indefinite future. If writing is wish-
projection,  is  reading  merely  an  exercise  in  wish-
fulfillment  —  not  fulfillment  of  the  wishes  of  the 
authors,  who  couldn‘t  begin  to  have  foreseen  the 
way  things  would  unfold,  but  fulfillment  of  the 
wishes  of  readers,  who  perhaps  use  the  language 
of the Constitution simply as a mirror to dress up 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
123 
language  of  our  most 
their  own  political  or  moral  preferences  in  the 
hallowed 
fundamental 
document?  Justice  Joseph  Story  feared  that  that 
might happen when he wrote in 1845: ―How easily 
men  satisfy  themselves  that  the  Constitution  is 
exactly what they wish it to be.‖ 
 
47. 
Moving  on,  the  authors  identified  two  ways  not  to  read  the 
Constitution  which  have  an  important  bearing  on  these  cases  and  in 
particular  in  the  context  of  GoP‟s  argument  that  Article  18  cannot  be 
invoked beyond a certain ceiling imposed by law.  It was said that: 
“Two  additional  ways  not  to  read  the 
Constitution  are  readily  apparent;  we  will  call 
them  reading  by  dis-integration  and  reading  by 
hyper-integration. 
When  we  say  reading  by  ―dis-integration,‖ 
we  mean  approaching  the  Constitution  in  ways 
that ignore the salient fact that its parts are linked 
into  a  whole  —  that  it  is  a  constitution,  and  not 
merely  an  unconnected  bunch  of  separate  clauses 
and  provisions  with  separate  histories,  that  must 
be  interpreted.  When  we  say  reading  by  ―hyper-
integration,‖  we  mean 
the 
Constitution  in  ways  that  ignore  the  no  less 
important  fact  that  the  whole  contains  distinct 
parts — parts that were, in some instances, added 
at  widely  separated  points  in  American  history; 
parts  that  were  favored  and  opposed  by  greatly 
disparate  groups;  parts  that  reflect  quite  distinct, 
and often radically incompatible, premises.‖ 
approaching 
 
48. 
Thus different provisions are woven into a tapestry and form 
a  whole.    But  it  is  important  not  to  fall  prey  to  these  two  methods  of 
interpretation  and  to  maintain  a  balance  which  shuns  either  dis-
integration or hyper-integration.  When GOP argues that it is unlawful to 
conduct  the  business  by  the  petitioners beyond  8%  it  is  being guilty  of 
disintegration.  Even the very imposition of a ceiling on the ground that 
124 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
Article  18  permits  GOP  to  do  so  would  mean  “approaching  the 
Constitution in ways that ignore the salient fact that its parts are linked 
with  a  whole—that  it  is  a  Constitution  and  not  merely  an  unconnected 
bunch of separate clauses”.  So constitutional concepts like “due process 
of  law”  (Article  10A)  and  “right  to  property”  (Articles  23  and  24)  and 
right to life and liberty (Article 9) cannot be ignored while interpreting 
section  7A  which  must  accord  with  the  method  which  shuns  dis-
integration.    The  concept  of  dis-integration  and  its  vices  is  further 
illustrated in the following words: 
―Consider  more  closely,  then,  the  first  fallacy  — 
that  of  disintegration.  Let  me  begin  with  a 
straightforward example, one which was a favorite 
of  Chief  Justice  Warren  E.  Burger.  The  Fifth 
Amendment  says  that  ―no  person  .  .  .  shall  be 
deprived  of  life,  liberty,  or  property,  without  due 
process  of  law.‖  Chief  Justice  Burger  used  to 
argue,  as  have  others,  that  the  authors  of  that 
language  obviously  must  have  contemplated  that, 
with  ―due  process  of  law,‖  a  person  may  be 
deprived  of  life.  Therefore,  the  argument  goes, 
capital  punishment  is  constitutional.  It‘s  very 
simple; why should the Court struggle over it? The 
conclusion  may  or  may  not  be  right;  I  find  the 
question  whether 
is 
constitutional  to  be  among  the  most  perplexing. 
But the proposed method of resolving that question 
is profoundly disintegrated and is not really a way 
of interpreting this Constitution, because the Fifth 
Amendment is only part of the document. There is 
also the Eighth Amendment, ratified as a separate 
part  of  the  Constitution.  It  says  that  ―cruel  and 
unusual punishments‖ shall not be imposed. Is the 
death  penalty,  then,  cruel  and  unusual?  The 
answer  must  be:  it  depends.  Quite  clearly,  it  was 
not  considered  cruel  and  unusual  in  1791,  when 
both 
the  Eighth 
Amendment  were  ratified.  But  it  might  be  so 
the  Fifth  Amendment  and 
penalty 
death 
the 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
125 
constitutional 
clause 
today?  That  another 
evidently  contemplates 
that  death  might  be 
inflicted by government without offense to that part 
of  the  Constitution  doesn‘t  answer  the  question. 
Indeed,  if  the  Fifth  Amendment  did  answer  it,  we 
would  be  left  with  another  dilemma,  since  it  also 
seems to sanction hacking off people‘s limbs — by 
its command that no person shall be ―twice put in 
jeopardy  of  life  or  limb.‖  Yet  no  one  would 
seriously  argue  today  that  bodily  mutilation, 
employed  on  occasion  as  a  punishment  during 
colonial times, could withstand scrutiny under the 
Eighth Amendment. Again, it seems to be that what 
the  Fifth  Amendment  suggests  as  an  answer 
becomes  only  a  question  once 
the  Eighth 
Amendment 
is  consulted.  Consider  another 
example.  It  has  been  urged  by  some,  including 
Mark  Tushnet  of  Georgetown  University,  that  we 
ought  to  read  the  Constitution  as  requiring 
socialism  —  as  obliterating  the  institution  of 
private property. How else, he asks, can we make 
sense  of  the  ideal  of  equality  which  underlies  the 
constitutional  mandate  of  the  equal  protection  of 
the  laws?32  If  all  the  Constitution  contained  was 
an  equal  protection  clause,  I  suppose  something 
might be said for that view. But the view becomes 
untenable  if  we  also  remember  that,  in  various  of 
its  parts, 
the  Constitution  expressly  affirms, 
sanctifies,  and  protects  the  institution  of  private 
property.  It  says  that  neither  the  state  nor  the 
federal  government  may  deprive  anyone  of 
property  without  ―due  process  of  law,‖  and  that 
―private  property  [shall  not]  be  taken  for  public 
use  without 
is  a 
disintegrated  ―reading‖  of  the  Constitution  to  lift 
one  provision out, hold it up to the light, see  how 
far  you  can  run  with  it,  and  forget  that  it  is 
immersed in a larger whole.‖ 
just  compensation.‖33 
It 
49. 
Article 10A of the Constitution reads thus: 
 
―10A. For the determination of his civil rights and 
obligations or in any criminal charge against him 
a  person  shall  be  entitled  to  a  fair  trial  and  due 
process.‖ 
 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
126 
50.  Also  we  may  allude  to  Article  23  which  guarantees  rights  to 
property and is couched as under: 
―23.  Every citizen shall have the right to acquire, 
hold  and  dispose  of  property  in  any  part  of 
Pakistan,  subject  to  the  Constitution  and  any 
reasonable  restrictions  imposed  by  law  in  the 
public interest.‖ 
 
51. 
Are  the  petitioners  not  entitled  to  due  process  of  law  in  the 
determination  of  these  rights?    Due  process  (substantive  as  well  as 
procedural) in this case would involve a right to present the case of the 
petitioners  for  an  increase  in  fee  which  strikes  a  balance  between  the 
regulatory  purpose  and  public interest on  one hand and the  right of the 
petitioners  to  acquire  and  hold  property  on  the  other.    By  providing  a 
cap, that due process is being denied to them.  Thus even if the charging 
of fee beyond a ceiling is unlawful, it is a matter of due process that any 
such  declaration  must  be  preceded  by  a  process  based  on  fairness  and 
proportionality.    The  exercise  of  a  regulatory  power  in  such  a  way 
cannot be countenanced and in our opinion not only that section 7A is an 
unreasonable  exercise  of  regulatory  authority,  it  also  offends  the  due 
process  clause  and  right  to  hold  property.    After  all,  the  petitioners 
conduct a business and trade and it is not the GoP‟s case that beyond a 
certain level, the property or profit earned shall vest in GOP.  Thus the 
countervailing argument of profiteering can only succeed if due process 
is  followed  to  objectively  analyse  when  the  profits  morph  into 
profiteering  so  as  to  sully  the  stream  of  a  noble  profession  like 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
127 
education.  Here, the case of the petitioners is not that they are not being 
allowed  to  profiteer  but  that  they  are  not  allowed  to  meet  their  basic 
expenses which on account of inflation etc. have increased manifold.   
 
52. 
Life and Liberty: 
At  core,  this  case  is  mainly  about  protecting  individual 
liberty to make basic economic decisions. At the same time it is true that 
right  to  education  brings  forth  a  progressive  account  of  liberty  that 
creates  the  opportunity  for  the  people  to  have  the  freedom  to  have  a 
happier  life  and  to  have  the  liberty  to  pursue  their  own  happiness.  In 
“Uncertain  Justice,  The  Roberts  Court  and  the  Constitution”  by 
Lawrence  Tribe  and Joshua  Matz, the  authors quoted the  1944 State of 
the Union Address of FDR while proposing a Second Bill of Rights: 
“Arguing  that  familiar  ―political  rights‖  had 
―proved  inadequate,‖  he  explained  that  ―true 
individual  freedom  cannot  exist  without  economic 
security  and  independence.‖  After  all,  he  said, 
―necessitous  men  are  not 
fee  men.‖  FDR‘s 
remarkable  list  included  the  right  ―to  a  good 
education‖,  the  right  ―to  earn  enough  to  provide 
adequate  food  and  clothing  and  recreation,‖  and 
the  right 
the 
economic fears of old age, sickness, accident, and 
unemployment.‖  It  also  included  ―the  right  to 
adequate  medical  care  and  the  opportunity  to 
achieve and enjoy good health.” 
to  ―adequate  protection 
from 
53. 
Some of the political rights proposed by FDR are already part 
 
of our fundamental rights including right to education. I would however 
describe  the  right,  in  essence, as  the  right  “to  a good  education.” Good 
education  can  only  be  achieved  by  granting  the  liberty  and  freedom  to 
private schools to increase fees which commensurate with their need for 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
128 
providing  “good  education”  and  not  “any  education.”  Thus  a  balance 
ought  to  be  struck  between  the  petitioners‟  liberty  to  make  basic 
economic  decisions  and  the  right  to  a  good  education  which  inheres  in 
the  people. One  cannot be  curtailed  at  the  cost  of  the other. We  realise 
that the Act is a social legislation and is concerned with welfare rights. 
But  if  this  case  is  about  the  petitioners‟  liberty  to  make  economic 
choices, does it not also concern itself with the liberty of the students to 
have  the  freedom  to  receive  good  education.  Does  this  corresponding 
right  to  good  education  not  oblige  the  Government  to  give  certain 
leeway  to  the  private  schools  in  settling  and  fixing  fees  so  that  the 
requirements of good education are met. This is the crucial reason why 
Section  7A  places  an  unreasonable  restriction  on  the  rights  of  not  only 
the petitioners but also the students. In my opinion it denies the blessings 
of liberty to both. As historian Eric Foner writes, “to traditional notions 
of individualism and autonomy, Progressives wedded the idea that such 
freedom required the conscious creation of the social conditions for full 
human development”. (The story of American Freedom, 139-62) 
54. 
In  one  of  the  cases,  U.S  Supreme  Court  has  stated  that  the 
term liberty: 
―Denotes not merely freedom from bodily restraint 
but  also  the  right  of  the  individual  to  contract,  to 
engage  in  any  of  the  common  occupations  of  life, 
to  acquire  useful  knowledge,  to  marry  establish  a 
home  and  bring  up  children,  to  worship  God 
according  to  the  dictates  of  his  own  conscience 
and  generally  to  enjoy  those  privileges  long 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
129 
recognized… as essential to the orderly pursuit of 
happiness by free men.‖ 
(Board of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 572) 
 
55. 
Thus  to  engage in any  of  the common  occupations of life  is 
an  aspect  of  liberty.  Its  deprivation  and  linkage  to  procedural  due 
process  has  been  brought  forth  in  “Treatise  on  Constitutional  Law, 
Substance and Procedure (Fifth Edition) by Ronald D. Rotunda John E. 
Nowak in the following words: 
―It  would  appear  that  whenever  the  government 
takes  an  action  that  is  designed  to  deprive  an 
individual, or a limited group of individuals, of the 
freedom  to  engage  in  some  significant  area  of 
human  activity,  some  procedure  to  determine  the 
factual  basis  and  legality  for  such  action  being 
taken  is  required  by  the  due  process  clause.  The 
primary issues have arisen in terms of restrictions 
on  employment,  the  granting  or  withholding  of 
important occupational licenses, and injury  to  the 
reputation of an individual.‖ 
 
56. 
Thus, Section 7A, by its term, impinges upon the rights of the 
petitioners‟ to life and liberty which, inevitably, include a right to carry 
on  and  engage  in  any  occupation  and  business.  Further,  in  the  same 
treatise  the  government‟s  ability  to  regulate  an  area  of  human  activity 
and  the  treatment  of  individuals  for  special  limitations  of  freedom  was 
alluded to in the following pertinent observations: 
―The government‘s ability to regulate or eliminate 
an  area  of  activity  for  a  general  class  does  not 
mean  that 
it  should  be  able  to  single  out 
individuals  for  special  limitations  of  freedom  of 
action  without  granting  them  some  process  to 
determine  the  basis  for  such  an  action.  One  may 
sometimes  see  statements 
the  scope  of 
individual  liberty  is  to  be  defined  solely  by  state 
that 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
130 
law,  but  such  a  position  seems  clearly  erroneous. 
For  example,  while  the  state  need  not  let  anyone 
purchase  alcohol,  it  cannot  single  out  a  specific 
individual  for  a  denial  of  the  right  to  purchase 
alcohol without giving that individual a hearing to 
determine  whether  such  an  action  is  proper.  This 
does not amount to a restriction on the substantive 
powers of the state to regulate activities within its 
jurisdiction,  but  only  a  recognition  that  when  the 
state  acts  against  a specific  individual,  it  must  do 
so in a procedurally fair manner.‖ 
 
Public Interest: 
Price  fixation  has  its  provenance  in  the  element  of  public 
 
57. 
interest.    This  is  conceded  by  both  the  parties.    In  all  matters  which 
affect  the  public  in  general,  private  interest  must  be  subordinated  to 
public interested and education and its dissemination is one such matter.  
Thus  fixation  of  fees  and  its  charging  cannot  be  left  to  the  private 
enterprises  to  the  utter  detriment  of  the  students  and  their  parents.    Its 
regulation  must  be  conceded  to  the  executive  as  forming  an  important 
plank  of  our  national  life.    But  this  Court  is  prepared  to  more  closely 
scrutinize  economic  regulation  with  an  eye  towards  protecting  a  wide 
range  of  related  individual  rights.    Regulation  of  economic  activity 
impacts  whole swaths of  financial  corporate, and  consumer  sectors and 
invokes  an  expanded  judicial  role  in  shaping  rules  for  these  vital 
segments of economy.  The plea of public interest must be objective and 
not  subjective.    GoP  says  only  2%  or  less  of  the  population  comprises 
the  student  body  actually  affected  by  the  8%  ceiling.    This  begs  the 
question:  how  does  this  serve  the  public  interest  to  impose  that  ceiling 
since  the  increase  in  fee  does  not  affect  a  large  number  of  students 
W.P.No.29724/2015 
 
 
 
 
131 
generally.   How  can a  law have  an  element of public  interest if  it  does 
not  affect  an  overwhelming  majority  of  students?    This  begs  another 
question? Why have the parents of the small minority of students chosen 
to admit their children  to these  schools knowing  fully  well  the scale of 
their  fee?    Obviously  they  harbour the notion  that  these  schools  impart 
education of a higher quality as compared to the others.  Doubtless, they 
would want that quality education to be continued to be instilled in their 
children.  Is it not a contradiction in terms to seek to restrain the schools 
from  their  bona  fide  efforts  in  maintaining  the  standard  of  education 
which is their hallmark.  Thus restraining a school from increasing fee to 
a reasonable level in order to maintain a threshold standard is contrary to 
public  interest  in  itself.    For  public  interest  would  be  best  served  in 
enhancing the standards rather than lowering them.  If a school seeks an 
increase  in  fee in order  to bring  a  qualitative  change in the standard  of 
education  based  on  objective  criteria,  then  we  are  convinced  that  any 
ceiling is anathema to public interest. 
―If we want things to stay as they are, things will 
have to change. 
(Italian Novel, The Leopard) 
58. 
These  petitions  are  partly  allowed  in  terms  of  Order  of  the 
Court. 
                     
 
 
Rafaqat Ali*  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID KARIM) 
        JUDGE 
