    Stereo. H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT MULTAN BENCH,  
MULTAN 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
 
Muhammad Yousaf etc.   
versus  
The State etc. 
 
 
Criminal Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
versus  
The State etc. 
Bashir Ahmad 
Date of hearing 
 
 
 
The Appellants on bail by 
 
 
 
 
 
The Complainant by  
The State by  
 
 
 
           ======= 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28.02.2018 
Mr. Badar Raza Gilani 
Advocate 
 
Miss. Asma Khan, Advocate 
Mr. Iftikhar-ul-Haq, Addl.  
Prosecutor General.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asjad Javaid Ghural, J.  Through Criminal Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
under  Section  410  Cr.P.C.,  appellants  Muhammad  Yousaf,  Zakriya, 
Muhammad  Younas  and  Muhammad  Javed  have  challenged  the  vires  of 
judgment dated 29.01.2009 passed by a learned Additional Sessions Judge at 
Burewala in case FIR No.118 dated 08.08.2005, in respect of offences under 
Sections  302,  148  &  149  PPC,  registered  at  Police  Station,  Fateh  Shah, 
Burewala  District  Vehari  whereby  they  were  convicted  and  sentenced  as 
under:- 
 
 
“Under Section 302(b) PPC 
Imprisonment for life each and to pay the compensation of Rs.50,000/- each 
to the legal heirs of deceased Farooq Ahmad and in default thereof, to further 
undergo simple imprisonment for six months each.   
 
They were held entitled to the benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. 
2. 
Criminal Revision No.116 of 2009 filed by complainant Bashir Ahmad 
seeking enhancement of sentence of respondents No.2 to 5/appellants shall be 
decided through this common judgment. 
3. 
The  prosecution  story  unfolded in  the crime  report  (Ex.PA/1),  which 
was  registered  on  08.08.2005  on  the  written  complaint  (Ex.PA)  of  Bashir 
Ahmad  (PW-1),  is  that  on  06.08.2005  at  3/4:00  p.m.  he  was  present  in  his 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
2 
house when one Jamal Din, a member of brotheri, had come and insisted to 
accompany him to Chak No.327/E.B. for the settlement of his dispute with 
the in-laws.  The complainant alongwith his sons Farooq and Abdul Latif and 
Jamal Din had gone to Chak No.327/EB where both the rival parties had to 
gather in the Haveli of one Rafique Ahmad.  The complainant alongwith his 
son Abdul Latif sat in the house of Rafique Ahmad whereas his son Farooq 
Ahmad and one Safdar Ali, had gone to the Haveli of Rafique Ahmad.  They 
heard hue and cry from the Haveli, came out in the street and saw Muhammad 
Yousaf  (appellant)  armed  with  hatchet,  Muhammad  Zakriya  (appellant) 
armed  with  hatchet,  Abdul  Haq,  Muhammad  Younas  (appellant)  and 
Muhammad  Javed  (appellant)  armed  with  a  clubs  alongwith  two  unknown 
accused, who could be identified when come across, had entered in the Haveli 
of Rafique Ahmad.  Muhammad Yousaf raised a Lalkara to teach a lesson to 
Farooq Ahmad for coming to their village and gave hatchet blow at the right 
side of head, Muhammad Zakriya gave hatchet blow at the right side of head, 
Muhammad Javed gave club blow near the nose, Muhammad Javed gave club 
blow near the eye of Farooq Ahmad, who fell down.  Muhammad Zakriya and 
Muhammad  Yousaf  have  given  repeated  hatchet  blows  at  laying  Farooq 
Ahmad  on  different  parts  of  the  head  of  Farooq  Ahmad.    Two  unknown 
accused persons raised a Lalkara to give the same treatment whosoever comes 
forward.   On raising hue and cry of Safdar, the people of the vicinity gathered 
at the spot and on seeing them, the accused persons fled away alongwith their 
respective weapons.  They attended Farooq Ahmad and shifted him to hospital 
at Burewala from where he was referred to Nishtar Hospital, Multan.  Motive 
behind  the  occurrence  was  their  longstanding  murderous  enmity  with  the 
accused party.  
 
Farooq  Ahmed  expired  at  Nishtar  Hospital,  Lahore  on  05.09.2005  at 
1:25 a.m. whereupon offence under Section 302 PPC was added.  
4. 
Nisar  Ahmad,  SI  (PW-8)  had  drafted  the  complaint  (Ex.PA)  of 
complainant Bahsir Ahmed on 08.08.2005, which was dispatched to the police 
station  for  the  registration  of  case.    He  reached  at  the  place  of  occurrence, 
prepared  site  plan  without  scales  (Ex.PM)  and  recorded  the  statements  of 
witnesses  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.    Thereafter,  the  investigation  was 
entrusted  to  Waris  Ali,  SI,  who  had  been  martyred  before  recording  his 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
3 
statement.  Nasir Ahmad, SI had given secondary evidence and verified the 
signature and handwriting of said Waris Ali, SI on the documents prepared by 
him  during  investigation.    During  investigation,  appellants  Muhammad 
Yousaf  led  to  the  recovery  of  hatchet  (P-2)  from  Zakaria  hatchet  (P-3), 
Muhammad  Younas  Sota  (P-4),  Muhammad  Ashraf  Toki  (P-5)  and 
Muhammad  Arshad  Danda  (P-6),  which  were  taken  into  possession  vide 
recovery  memos  Ex.PC  to  Ex.PG  respectively.    After  the  completion  of 
investigation, the Station House Officer prepared challan and submitted the 
same before the learned trial court.  
5. 
Dr.  Rao  Iftikhar  Ahmad  (PW-7)  had  conducted  medico  legal 
examination of deceased Farooq Ahmed, in injured condition, on 06.08.2005 
and observed the following injuries:- 
A  lacerated  wound  4  cm  x  0.5  cm  x  bone  exposed  on 
middle of forehead. 
A Y shaped lacerated wound measuring 3 cm x 0.3 cm into 
bone exposed on front of head near hair margins.  
A lacerated wound measuring 2 cm x 0.2 cm x scalp deep 
on left side of head. 
A  lacerated  wound  measuring  4  cm  x  0.5  cm  x  bone 
exposed on back of right side of head.  
A  lacerated  wound  measuring  3.5  cm  x  0.3  cm  x  bone 
exposed closed to injury No.4. 
An incised wound 0.5 x 0.2 cm x skin deep on the bridge 
of nose. 
An incised wound 1 cm  x 0.3 cm x skin  deep below the 
right eye.  
“1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
 
The  patient  was  in  shock  and  unconscious  condition.  After  emergency 
treatment, he was referred to Nishtar Hospital.  
 
 He  had  conducted  post  mortem  examination  on  the  dead  body  of 
deceased  Farooq  Ahmed  on  06.09.2005  at  9:30  a.m.  and  observed  nine 
injuries  including  aforesaid  seven  injuries,  one  bed  sore  wound  and  an 
infaracted area.  The cause of death was head injuries from injury No.1 to 9 
resulting  in  brain  compression  and  trauma.  All  injuries  were  ante-mortem.  
The  probable  duration  between  injuries  and  death  was  one  month  whereas 
between death and post mortem 24 to 26-hours.  
6. 
At  the  commencement  of  trial,  the  prosecution  had  produced                  
10-witnesses.  The appellants and their co-accused Muhammad Arshad and 
Muhammad Ashraf, in their statements recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C., 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
4 
had denied and controverted all the allegations of fact levelled against them, 
they neither opted to  make statement under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C. on oath 
nor had they produced any witness in their defence.  
7. 
Learned  trial  Court,  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial,  had  convicted  and 
sentenced  the  appellants  supra  whereas  acquitted  co-accused  Muhammad 
Ashraf and Muhammad Arshad.  Hence, this criminal appeal as well as the 
connected revision petition.   
8. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submits that the appellants are quite 
innocent having nothing to do with the alleged occurrence; that the mode and 
manner of the occurrence as narrated in the crime report are quite different to 
that of the actual facts of the case; that there was delay of two days in reporting 
the matter to the police, which shows that either the eye witnesses were not 
present at the place of occurrence or the crime report was got lodged with due 
deliberation  and  consultation;  that  the  complainant  party  had  gone  to  the 
accused and invited trouble for themselves; that the deceased had died after 
bout one month of the alleged occurrence in the hospital but no statement of 
the  deceased,  while  in  injured  condition,  was  recorded;  that  neither  the 
investigating officer nor the complainant had tried to get record the statement 
of the deceased in the interregnum; that the claimed eye witnesses had made 
material improvements in their deposition before the learned trial court and 
changed  the  role  of  the  appellants  and  their  acquitted  co-accused;  that  the 
number of injuries mentioned in the post mortem examination report do not 
tally  with  the  injuries  as  ascribed  by  the  eye  witnesses  in  their  deposition 
before the learned trial court; that the unnatural conduct of the eye witnesses 
for not trying to rescue the deceased speaks volume with regard to the mode 
and manner of the occurrence; that the prosecution has withheld two material 
witnesses i.e. Jamal Din, who had convened the Panchayat and Muhammad 
Rafique,  where  the  Panchayat  was  to  be  convened,  which  shows  that  they 
were not ready to make false statement against the appellants; that the ocular 
account  is  in  contradiction  with  the  medical  evidence;  that  the  recovery  of 
weapons  of  offence  i.e.  Danda  as  well  as  hatchets  from  the  appellants 
remained inconsequential as the same were not stained with blood; that the 
appellants  had  been  implicated  in  this  case  due  to  their  longstanding 
murderous animosity with the complainant party; that no iota of evidence is 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
5 
available on record to connect the appellants with the murder in issue.  Finally, 
a prayer for the acquittal of the appellants has been made.       
9. 
Conversely,  learned  Additional  Prosecutor  General  appearing  for  the 
State assisted by learned counsel for the complainant has argued in vehemence 
that it was a day-light occurrence, where the identity of the appellants could 
not  be  questioned; that  after  sustaining injuries, the deceased was  provided 
first-aid and then medical treatment in Nishtar Hospital, Multan, which was 
the only reason of delay in reporting the matter to the police because to save 
the  life  of  the  deceased  was  more  precious  than  to  rush  towards  the  police 
station for the registration of case; that the eye witnesses had made inter-se 
consistent statements explaining the injuries, the names of the accused persons 
and the role played by them during the occurrence; that the medical evidence 
is  in  line  with  the  ocular  account  that  the  recovery  of  weapon  of  offence 
provide further corroboration to the ocular account; that the motive behind the 
occurrence was proved rather admitted by the defence; that the complainant 
being real father of the deceased would be the last person to falsely implicate 
the appellants in this case while letting-off the real culprits; that the evidence 
available on record has been well appraised by the learned trial Court, which 
does not warrant any interference by this Court.  
10. 
I  have  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants,  learned  Additional 
Prosecutor General appearing for the State assisted by learned counsel for the 
complainant and have perused the record with their able assistance.     
11.  This unfortunate incident had taken place on 06.08.2005 at 3/4:00 p.m. 
whereas the matter was reported to the police on 08.08.2005 at 3:30 p.m. with 
an inordinate delay of two days and absolutely no plausible explanation could 
be brought on record for such delay. This fact alone by itself indicates that the 
story mentioned in the crime report was an afterthought one and the case was 
registered with due consultation, deliberation and fabrication and, thus, casts 
serious doubt in the veracity of the prosecution.  Reliance may be placed on 
case titled “Mehmood Ahmed and three others versus The State and another” 
(1995  SCMR  127).    This  view  has  further  been  fortified  in  case  titled 
“NAZEER AHMAD versus GEHNE KHAN and others” (2011 SCMR 1473).  
12.  The  mainstay  of  the  prosecution  was  based  the  testimony  of  Bashir 
Ahmad  (PW-1), complainant/father  of deceased  Farooq  Ahmad, Safdar  Ali 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
6 
(PW-2), a nephew of the complainant and one Abdul Latif (PW-3), brother of 
the deceased.  All the aforesaid witnesses were closely related to the deceased 
and  they  were  not  resident  of  327/ED,  the  place  of  occurrence.    All  the 
aforesaid  claimed  eye  witnesses  claimed  to  have  visited  the  place  of 
occurrence alongwith the deceased in order to attend a Panchayat convened 
by  one  Jamal  Din  due  to  his  differences  with  his  in-laws  at  the  house  of 
Rafique Ahmad. The claimed presence of the said witnesses at the venue of 
occurrence could not be established through any other independent source of 
evidence.  The prosecution has withheld aforesaid Jamal Din and Muhammad 
Rafique, who were the best witnesses to prove the presence of eye witnesses 
at the venue of occurrence.  The non-production/withholding of said material 
witnesses  by  the  prosecution  draws  quite  possible  inference  under  Article 
129(g)  of  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  that  “had  they  been  produced 
before the learned trial court, they would have not support the prosecution 
version”.  Furthermore, none of the claimed eye witnesses had intervened to 
rescue  the  deceased  and  had  not  received  any  injury  during  the  occurrence 
especially  when  none  of  the  accused  persons  was  armed  with  any  fire  arm 
weapon, which could have scared the witnesses away.  In such circumstances, 
the presence of both the claimed eye witnesses at the venue of occurrence, at 
the  relevant  time,  is  not  free  from  doubt  especially  when  the  deceased, the 
complainant  and  the  eye  witnesses  remained  silent  for  about  02-days  in 
reporting the matter to the police.  I seek guidance from case titled “LIAQAT 
ALI  versus  THE  STATE”  (2008  SCMR  95)  wherein  it  has  been  held  as 
under:- 
“Having  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  having  gone 
through the evidence on record, we note that although P.W.7 who 
is first cousin and brother-in-law of Fazil deceased claims to have 
seen the occurrence from a distance of 30 ft. (as given in cross-
examination) and two other witnesses namely Musa and Ranjha 
were also attracted to the spot but none rescued Fazil deceased and 
appellant  had a free hand to  inflict as many  as 9 injuries on his 
person.  The explanation given by these witnesses that since Liaqat 
Ali  had  threatened  them  therefore,  they  could  not  go  near  Fazil 
deceased to rescue him is repellant to common sense as Liaquat 
Ali  was  not  armed  with  a  fire-arm  which  could  have  scared  the 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
7 
witnesses  away.    He  was  a  single  alleged  assailant  and  if  the 
witnesses  were  there  at  the  spot  they  could  have  easily 
overpowered him. This makes their presence at the spot doubtful.” 
 
The settled principle by now is that once the presence of a chance witness is 
found to be doubtful, the same is sufficient to discard the testimony as a whole.  
Reliance  is  placed  on  case  titled  “Mst.  RUKHSANA  BEGUM  and  others 
versus SAJJAD and others” (2017 SCMR 596), wherein it has been held as 
under:- 
“A  single  doubt  reasonably  showing  that  a  witness/witnesses’ 
presence on the crime spot was doubtful when a tragedy takes place 
would be sufficient to discard his/their testimony as a whole.  This 
principle  may  be  pressed 
into 
service 
in  cases 
such 
witness/witnesses are seriously inimical or appears to be a chance 
witness  because  judicial  mind  would  remain  disturbed  about  the 
truthfulness of the testimony of such witnesses provided in a murder 
case, is a fundamental principle of our criminal justice system.”  
 
13.  The  complainant  as well  as  the  eye  witnesses  while  appearing  in  the 
dock  in  the  courtroom  had  deposed  somewhat  different  to  that  of  the  story 
narrated by him before the police at the time of registration of the crime report.  
Earlier he had stated that appellant Muhammad Yousaf had given a hatchet 
blow at the right side of head, Muhammad Zakriya gave hatchet blow at left 
side  of  head  and  appellant  Javed  inflicted  a  Sota  blow  near  the  nose  of 
deceased  Muhammad  Farooq  whereas  no  role  was  assigned  to  appellant 
Muhammad  Younas  and  two  unknow  accused  persons  were  shown  to  be 
present at the venue of occurrence but no overt act for causing injuries to the 
deceased  was  attributed  to  them  but  surprisingly,  while  making  their 
statements  before  the  learned  trial  court,  he  named  two  unknown  accused 
persons as Muhammad Arshad and Muhammad Ashraf.  Muhammad Arshad 
was  saddled  with  the  responsibility  of  giving  Sota  blow  at  the  head  and 
Muhammad Ashraf was attributed the role of giving Toki blow on the back of 
head of deceased Farooq Ahmad.  Appellant Muhammad Younas, who had 
earlier not attributed any injury to the deceased or the witnesses, was alleged 
to  have  given  Sota  blow  near  the  eye  of  the  deceased,  which  was  earlier 
attributed  to  appellant  Javed.    Appellants  Zakriya,  Ashraf  (since  acquitted) 
and Yousaf while armed with hatchets, were given the main role of causing 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
8 
head  injuries  to  the  deceased.  They  had  further  been  saddled  with  the 
responsibility of giving successive hatchet blows whereas appellants Javed, 
Younas  and  Arshad  (since  acquitted)  had  given  successive  Sota  blows  on 
different parts of the body of the deceased when he was laying on the ground 
in  injured  condition.    Dr.  Rao  Iftikhar  Ahmed  (PW-7)  had  observed  seven 
injuries on the person of the deceased and out of them, injuries No.3, 5 & 7 
were found superficial in nature, which could have been caused by falling on 
some  hard  surface.  The  eye  witnesses  had  made  material  improvements  in 
their  deposition  before  the  learned  trial  court  due  to  which  the  entire 
prosecution  story  and  scenario  has  been  changed  and  the  role  of  each 
individual accused has been intermingled.      
 
Another important factor, which cast a thick shadow of doubt over the 
claim of all the eye witnesses alleging that one sharp edged injury at the head 
and two injuries with blunt object had specifically been attributed whereas a 
large  number  of  injuries  by  six  accused  persons  had  been inflicted  through 
sharp edged as well as blunt object but the medical evidence is contrary to that 
of  the  ocular  version.  As  per  medico-legal  report  (Ex.PJ)  of  the  deceased 
conducted  by  Dr.  Rao  Iftikhar  Ahmed  (PW-7)  when  he  was  in  injured 
condition, there were seven injuries on his person consisting of two incised 
caused  by  sharp-edged  weapon  and  five  lacerated  wounds  caused  by  some 
blunt object.  If the prosecution version is taken to be true then one injury at 
the backside of head was attributed to Ashraf having been caused with Toki 
and  the  remaining  only  sharp-edged  injury  was  attributed  to  appellants 
Yousaf,  Zakriya  and  Ashraf  (since  acquitted).  Same  was  the  position  with 
regard to the injuries caused by blunt object.  The eye witnesses had tried their 
level best to implicate the maximum number of accused persons and had given 
the role of causing sever injuries to the deceased whereas the injuries actually 
sustained by him are not coincide with the ocular account as ascribed by the 
prosecution.   During cross-examination, the claimed eye witnesses could not 
sustain  their  veracity  on  each  and  every  aspect  of  the  case,  they  were 
confronted with their previous statements Ex.DA & Ex.DB and at most of the 
times, they disowned their previous version recorded before the police stating 
that they had not got recorded in their statements what exactly written therein. 
I am of the considered view that either the  claimed eye witnesses were not 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
9 
present at the place of occurrence or they were intentionally suppressing some 
real facts for the reasons best known to them.   
14.  The acquitted co-accused Muhammad Arshad and Muhammad Ashraf 
were not named in the crime report, who were figured subsequently but they 
were  specifically  attributed  the  role  of  causing  head  injuries  with  their 
respective weapons i.e. Sota and Toki respectively but the same has not been 
believed by the learned trial Court and in consequence thereof, they had been 
acquitted of the charge.  At present no appeal against acquittal of aforesaid 
co-accused has been preferred either by the State or the complainant, which 
shows  their  satisfaction  over  their  innocence  and  non-involvement  in  this 
occurrence.  The role of acquitted co-accused is quite identical to that of the 
appellants and if the testimony of the claimed eye witnesses is not taken into 
consideration or accepted to be a true account to their extent, then how could 
it be believed to the extent of the appellants, who are facing the charge of an 
offence entailing the capital sentence.  When the co-accused, having identical 
role,  had  been  acquitted  of  the  charge  on  the  same  set  of  witnesses  by 
disbelieving the prosecution evidence to their extent, the same cannot be relied 
upon  to  the  extent  of  remaining  accused  persons,  in  absence  of  any 
independent  corroboration.  A  reference  may  be  made  to  a  case  titled 
“SHAHBAZ versus The STATE” (2016 SCMR 1763).  The relevant dictum 
is reproduced for ready reference:- 
“The law is settled by now that if some eye-witnesses are disbelieved against some 
accused persons attributed effective roles then the same eye-witnesses cannot be 
relied  upon  to  the  extent  of  the  other  accused  persons  in  the  absence  of  any 
independent corroboration.” 
 
15.  Dr.  Rao  Iftikhar  Ahmed  (PW-7)  had  conducted  medico-legal 
examination of the deceased, while in injured condition, on 06.08.2005 at 7:30 
p.m.  and  observed  seven  injuries  including  five  lacerated  and  two  incised 
wounds on left, right and back of head and on the bridge of the nose.  I have 
observed that the occurrence had taken place at 3/4:00 p.m. but the injured 
was taken to hospital after about 3/4 hours, which could only be possible when 
the injured remains unattended during the said period, otherwise it was quite 
possible  for  the  witnesses  to  shift  him  to  hospital  well  in  the  short  span  of 
time.  Moreover, the said medical officer had deposed that the police arrived 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
10 
in the hospital after about half an hour of arrival of the injured but on the other 
hand, the investigating officer had stated that the complainant brought medico 
legal report, presented the same to him at Adda Kabirwala, he recorded his 
statement  and  sent  the  complaint  (Ex.PA)  to  the  police  station  for  the 
registration of case.  Despite the availability of the police in the hospital, no 
crime report was got lodged by the complainant and the only inference could 
be drawn that the complainant party remained assessing and maneuvering the 
story and consumed time for managing the eye witnesses for the purpose of 
false implication of the appellants and their co-accused.  
16.  Farooq Ahmed deceased  expired  on  05.09.2005  in  Nishtar  Hospital, 
Multan and his post mortem examination was conducted on 06.09.2005 by the 
aforementioned medical officer and noted the aforementioned injuries.  The 
cause  of death  was  due  to  head injuries  resulting in brain  compression  and 
trauma.    The  duration  between  injuries  and  death  was  one  month  whereas 
between death and post mortem examination 24 to 26 hours.  The number and 
nature  of  the  injuries  do  not  coincide  with  the  ocular  version  as  discussed 
above and, thus, the medical evidence lends no support to the ocular account.  
17.  The motive, which led to the present tragedy was stated to be a blood 
feud.  This fact has been admitted by the accused persons in their statements 
recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C. stating that they had murderous enmity 
since year, 1986.  The motive behind the occurrence is though admitted one 
yet the same being double-edged weapons, alone is not sufficient to maintain 
the  conviction,  in  absence  of  confidence  inspiring  ocular  account  and 
corroboration from other independent source of evidence, which might have 
been the cause of murder in issue or at the same time false implication of the 
appellants.   
18.  The recovery of Dandas and hatchets is shown to have been effected at 
the  disclosure  and  pointation  of  the  appellant  but  the  same  being  neither 
stained with blood nor tainted and having common pattern, cannot be safely 
connected against the appellants with any degree of certainty especially when 
no report of Punjab Forensic Science Agency is available on the record.    
19.  Having  scanned  the  entire  prosecution  evidence,  a  conclusion  is 
inescapable  that  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  its  case  against  the 
appellants beyond reasonable shadow of doubt.  The claimed eye witnesses 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
11 
had appeared and adduced the evidence, which could not qualify to be a true 
account as they had improved their version and changed the entire prosecution 
story  with  regard  to  the  number  and  nature  of  the  injuries  sustained  by  the 
deceased,  names  and  roles  played  by  the  appellants  during  the  occurrence.  
The  role  of  the  appellants  was  intermingled  and  most  of  the  injuries 
specifically  attributed  to  the  appellants  were  non-existent.  Two  of  the             
co-accused  having  exactly  identical  role  rather  more  grievous  role  have 
already been acquitted of the charge and no appeal against their acquittal has 
been filed by the prosecution, which shows the complainant’s satisfaction qua 
their  innocence  and  at  the  same  time  indicates  the  real  possibility  of  their 
being falsehood.  The medical evidence lends no support to the ocular account.  
The recovery of weapons of offence has not been found consequential being 
not stained with blood and of common pattern.  So far as the admitted motive 
of longstanding murderous enmity between the parties is concerned, the same 
alone  being  corroboratory  and  double-edged  weapon,  is  not  sufficient  to 
maintain conviction of the appellants, without having been corroborated from 
any other independent source of the evidence.  I am of the considered view 
that  there  is  no  iota  of  the  evidence  with  the  prosecution  to  connect  the 
appellants with the murder in issue.   The prosecution has failed to substantiate 
the charge against the appellants beyond shadow of reasonable doubt and the 
accused would always be entitled to the benefit of doubt as a matter of right 
and not grace.  A reference may be placed to case titled “Tariq Pervaiz versus 
The State” (1995 SCMR 1345) and also case titled “MUHAMMAD AKRAM 
versus THE STATE” (2009 SCMR 230) wherein at page No.236, it has been 
held as under:- 
“It is an axiomatic principle of law that in case of doubt, the benefit of thereof must 
accrue in favour of the accused as matter of right and not of grace. It was observed 
by this Court in the case of Tariq Pervaiz v. The State 1995 SCMR 1345 that for 
giving  the  benefit  of  doubt,  it  was  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  many 
circumstances creating doubts.  If there is circumstance which created reasonable 
doubt in a prudent mind about the guilt of the accused, then the accused would be 
entitled to the benefit of doubt not as a matter of grace and concession but as a 
matter of right.” 
 
 
20.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  this  appeal  is  allowed,  the 
conviction  and  sentence  of  appellants  Muhammad  Yousaf,  Zakriya, 
Crl. Appeal No.703-J of 2009 
Crl. Revision No.116 of 2009 
 
 
12 
Muhammad  Younas  and  Muhammad  Javed  are  set  aside  and  they  are 
acquitted of the charge by extending the benefit of doubt to them.  They are 
present on bail, their bail bonds as well as the sureties stand discharged from 
the liability.  
21.  For  the  reasons  recorded  hereinabove,  Criminal  Revision  No.116  of 
2009 filed by complainant Bashir Ahmad seeking enhancement of sentence 
of respondents No.2 to 5, is without any merits, the same stands dismissed in 
limine. 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asif* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (Asjad Javaid Ghural) 
                    Judge 
Approved for Reporting.  
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
