     Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Civil Revision No.214918/2018  
(Khalid Meer etc.   Versus   Faqeerullah Minhaj etc.)  
 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of Hearing 
06.06.2018 
Petitioners by: 
Syed Muhammad Kalim Ahmad 
Khurshid, Advocate.   
Respondent No.3 by:   Mian Abdul Saeed, Advocate.  
Respondent No.3 in person.  
 
 
 
 
Atir Mahmood, J. : 
  This civil revision is directed against 
judgment  and  decree  dated  21.12.2017  passed  by  learned  Additional 
District  Judge,  Sheikhupura  who  dismissed  appeal  of  the  petitioners 
and upheld judgment and decree dated  09.12.2012 passed by learned 
Civil  Judge,  Sheikhupura  whereby  suit  of  respondent  No.3  for 
possession through specific performance was decreed.  
2. 
On  25.05.2018,  objection  was  taken  by  respondent  No.3  that 
this civil revision is barred by time. In response thereto, the petitioners 
have  filed  C.M.  No.3-C/2018  under  Section  151  of  CPC  for 
condonation  of  delay  which  has  duly  been  contested  by  respondent 
No.3 by filing written reply thereto.  
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  inter  alia  submits  that  the 
civil  revision  was  filed  within  time  on  21.03.2018  but  the  Office 
raised  objection  thereupon  and  returned  the  same  to  the  petitioners 
and compelled the petitioners to prepare Paper Books in which a lot of 
time was consumed and after doing the needful, the civil revision was 
re-filed  on  25.05.2018.  He  contends  that  since  the  revision  petition 
was filed within time, the same could not be treated as barred by time 
even if filed beyond the prescribed time limit. He argues that even if 
Civil Revision No.214918/2018 
2 
there  is  any  technical  flaw  in  the  revision  petition  or  it  is  barred  by 
time, the same could not deprive the revisional court of its corrective 
and supervisory jurisdiction. In support of his arguments, he has relied 
upon the law laid  down  in  cases  Mst.  Sabira Bi  v.  Ahmed  Khan  and 
another  (2000  SCMR  847),  Muhammad  Boota  v.  Bsharat  Ali  (PLD 
2014  Lahore  1),  Mst.  Banori  v.  Jilani  (deceased)  through  LRs  etc. 
(PLJ  2011  SC  895),  Farman  Ali  v.  Muhammad  Ishaq  and  others 
(PLD  2013  SC  392)  and  Hafeez  Ahmad  and  others  v.  Civil  Judge, 
Lahore and others (PLD 2012 SC 400). 
4. 
On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No.3 submits 
that the revision petition after objection of incompletion of the file by 
the Office was returned to the petitioners to re-file it within three days 
but  it  was  re-filed  after  sixty  days  without  any  plausible  reason, 
therefore,  it  was  badly  barred  by  time.  He  points  out  that  the  only 
objection  raised  by  the  Office  was  regarding  incompletion  of  the 
petition  and  no  objection  of  preparation  of  paper  books  is  reflected 
from the objection memo, therefore, it is nothing but an afterthought. 
He  has  relied  upon  the  law  laid  down  in  cases  Asif  Ali  Shah  v.  The 
Superintending  Engineer,  Quetta  Circle,  Quetta  and  another  (PLD 
1963 SC 263), Sultan Muhammad v. Muhammad Ashraf and 4 others 
(1991  CLC  269  Lahore),  Naheed  Ahmad  v.  Asif  Riaz  and  3  others 
(PLD 1996 Lahore 702), Muhammad Ahmad v. Muhammad Ali and 
another  (PLD  1996  Lahore  158),  Lahore  Development  Authority  v. 
Muhammad  Rashid  (1997  SCMR  1224),  Mst.  Sabiran  Bi  v.  Ahmad 
Khan and  another (2000  SCMR  847)  and  Safdar  Ali  and  5 others  v. 
Defence  Housing  Authority  through  Secretary  and  other  (2011  YLR 
1809 Lahore).  
5. 
I  have  heard  the  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  parties 
and perused the record. I have also gone through the case law cited by 
both sides.  
Civil Revision No.214918/2018 
3 
6. 
The crux of arguments of learned counsel for the petitioners is 
that since the revision petition was filed within time but returned with 
objection(s) by the Office, it cannot be treated as time barred even if it 
was  re-filed  after  the  prescribed  period  and  that  even  a  time  barred 
revision  petition  could  not  debar  the  High  Court  from  exercising  its 
revisional  jurisdiction  if  it  satisfies  conditions  for  exercise  of  its  suo 
motu jurisdiction.  
7. 
The  sole  ground  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  taken 
during the course of arguments and also noted in para 2 of C.M. No.3-
C/2018  filed  by  the  petitioners  for  condonation  of  delay  in  re-filing 
the  revision  petition  is  that  the  revision  petition  was  filed  within 
limitation but due to office objections, the same was returned and the 
office compelled the petitioners to prepare Paper Books which took a 
lot of time and as soon as the needful was done, the same was re-filed. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  has  argued  that  if  the  petitioners 
after receiving the file had not returned back, the Office was required 
to  issue  notice  to  them  under  Rule  9-A  of  the  Rules  and  Order  ibid. 
The  file  was  admittedly  returned  to  the  petitioners  on  the  day  it  was 
filed, i.e. 21.03.2018. When the file was lying with the petitioners and 
not with the Office, the Office was not supposed to issue notice to the 
petitioners  and  it  was  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  petitioners  to 
resubmit  the  file  within  the  prescribed  time.  Had  the  Office  retained 
the file with it, the situation would have been different and the Office 
would also have been responsible for issuing notice to the petitioners. 
Since  the  file  remained  with  the  petitioners  from  the  date  when  the 
objection  was  raised  till  the  date  it  was  refilled,  the  Office  was  not 
required  to  issue  notice  under  Rule  9-A  ibid.  In  this  perspective,  the 
contention  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  that  the  petitioners 
ought to have been issued notice by the Office for resubmission of the 
petition has no force which is accordingly discarded.  Admittedly, the 
civil revision was filed on 21.03.2018 on the 90th (last) day of its time 
Civil Revision No.214918/2018 
4 
limitation which was returned vide Diary No.187025 on the same day 
through the objection memo which reads as under: 
“26.  Incomplete file.  
……. 
To be re-submitted after removing of the objection within 
03 days.” 
Bare  reading  of  above  makes  at least  two things  crystal  clear:  (i) the 
only  objection  put  by  the  office  on  the  petition  was  that  it  was 
incomplete  and  (ii)  the  file  was  returned  to  the  petitioners  with 
direction  to  re-file  it  within  three  days  after  removing  the  office 
objection.  This  objection  was  raised  by  the  Deputy  Registrar  of  this 
Court  who  has  such  powers  under  Rule  9,  Chapter  1  of  Rules  and 
Orders of Lahore High Court (Volume V). There is no dispute that the 
Deputy Registrar could raise the said objection in light of the powers 
conferred upon him under Rule 9 ibid. The petitioners were obliged to 
comply with the direction given to them through the objection memo 
and  re-file  the  petition  within  three  days  after  having  removed  the 
objection(s) raised by the office but they took long time of sixty days 
to do the needful, as such, the revision petition was barred by time by 
sixty  days.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  dictums  laid  down  by  the 
Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  in  case  Lahore  Development  Authority  v. 
Muhammad Rashid (1997 SCMR 1224) wherein it has been held that:  
“The  circumstances  pointed  out  by  the  learned  Judge  quite 
clearly  show  that  the  petitioner‟s  officials  acted  with  gross 
negligence  in  re-filing  the  revision  petition.  They  took  almost 
one year in doing what they were required to do in seven days 
and  the  explanation  offered  by  them  for  this  inordinate  delay 
has not been  found  to  be convincing by  the  learned  Judge  and 
rightly  so,  in  our  view.  It  has  not  been  denied  that  the  High 
Court  Rules  and  Orders  empowered  the  Deputy  Registrar  to 
raise  the  objections  and  fix  the  time  for  removing  the  same. 
That being so, revision petition re-filed long after the expiry of 
the period specified by the office was rightly dismissed as time 
barred.” 
(Underline is mine) 
Civil Revision No.214918/2018 
5 
8. 
Apropos argument of learned counsel for the petitioners that the 
Office  compelled  the  petitioners  to  prepare  paper  books  of  the  file 
which  caused  delay  in  re-filing  the petition, therefore, the petitioners 
could  not  be  penalized  for  the  act  of  the  office.  As  noted  above,  the 
only  objection  raised  by  the  Office  through  the  objection  memo  was 
of  incompletion  of  the  petition.  The  objection  memo  nowhere  states 
that  the  paper  books  will  also  be  prepared  by  the  petitioners  before 
resubmission  of  the  petition.  Furthermore,  there  is  neither  any  such 
routine  nor  practice  of  the  Office,  particularly  for  cases  of  civil 
revisions,  to  ask  for  preparation  of  paper  books.  There  is  nothing  on 
record  even  to  suggest  that  the  office  had  asked  the  petitioners  to 
prepare paper books. Even otherwise, there is no provision under the 
High Court Rules and Orders to compel a revision petitioner to submit 
a  paper  book  of  a  „Revision  Petition‟.  In  the  circumstances,  I  am  of 
the view that no direction for preparation of paper books was given by 
the  Office  to  the  petitioners  and  the  said  plea  is  nothing  but  just  an 
afterthought  of  the  petitioners  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  delay  in 
re-filing the revision petition.   
9. 
Learned  counsel  for the petitioners  while relying upon the  law 
laid  down  in  cases  Hafeez  Ahmad  and  others  v. Civil  Judge, Lahore 
and others (PLD 2012 SC 400) and Farman Ali v. Muhammad Ishaq 
and  others  (PLD  2013  SC  392)  has  argued  that  even  a  time  barred 
revision  petition  could  not  debar  the  High  Court  from  exercising  its 
revisional  jurisdiction  if  it  satisfies  conditions  for  exercise  of  its  suo 
motu jurisdiction, therefore, it is entertainable. In a latest judgment in 
case Province of Punjab through District Officer Revenue, Rawalpindi 
and  others    v.  Muhammad  Sarwar  (2014  SCMR  1358),  the  Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan has held that:  
“14.  It  follows  from  the  above  discussion  that  there  are  two 
situations in which the Court can exercise its revisional powers; 
on  its  on  motion;  or  on  the  application  by  an  aggrieved  party. 
The  former  is  the  general  supervisory  power  and  discretionary 
in nature where the Court is empowers to examine the record of 
Civil Revision No.214918/2018 
6 
any  case  decided  by  a  Court  subordinate  to  it  to  rectify  any 
error or irregularity. Such power is exercisable where the Court 
itself finds any error of the nature provided in section 115, CPC 
without there being any right in favour of a party aggrieved of 
an  order  or  judgment  of  a  subordinate  Court.  However,  when 
the revisional jurisdiction is invoked by an aggrieved party, it is 
subject  to  the  statutory  provisions  now  incorporated  in  section 
115,  C.P.C.  The  second  proviso  thereto  in  unambiguous  terms 
lays down the period of limitation for applying to the Court by 
mentioning  that  “provided  that  such  application  shall  be  made 
within  ninety  days”.  Like  all  other  statutory  provisions 
prescribing  time  period  in  which  a  matter  is  to  be  brought 
before the Court the second proviso to section 115(1), C.P.C. to 
be  applied  with  the  same  vigour.  Thus,  where  an  aggrieved 
party seeks redressal against the Judgment or order through the 
revisional powers of the Court under Section 115, C.P.C. he has 
ninety  days  to  make  the  application,  failing  which  the 
application is liable to be dismissed.  
(Emphasis provided) 
It  is  evident  from  the  dictums  laid  down  by  the  apex  court  noted 
above that where the Court itself takes note of any error or irregularity 
in  the  decision  of  the  court  subordinate  to  it  to  rectify  it,  it  may 
exercise  its  discretionary  and  supervisory  powers  of  suo  motu  but 
where  a  party  aggrieved  from  order  or  judgment  of  a  court  invokes 
revisional  powers  of  the  court,  the  time  limitation  of  ninety  days 
provided  in  second  proviso  of  Section  115,  CPC  is  to  be  adhered  to 
strictly.  Since  the  petitioners  aggrieved  of  the  decisions  of  learned 
court  below  have  approached  this  Court  invoking  its  revisional 
jurisdiction,  there  is  no  occasion  of  exercising  suo  motu  powers  by 
this Court in light of the judgment of the august Supreme Court supra. 
The  contention  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  is  accordingly 
repelled. 
10.  Another contention of learned counsel for the petitioners is that 
the  revision  petition  suffering  from  some  defect,  i.e.  non-filing  of 
pleadings, could not be dismissed being barred by time and at the best, 
it  could  be  treated  as  being  not  maintainable.  In  this  regard,  he  has 
relied upon the law laid down by the apex court in case Mst. Sabiran 
Civil Revision No.214918/2018 
7 
Bi.  V.  Ahmad  Khan  and  another  (2000  SCMR  847).  In  the  same 
judgment, it has been held that:  
“Learned  counsel  also  relied  on  1992  CLC  296,  PLD  1996 
Lahore  158,  PLD  1996  SC  706  and  1997  SCMR  1224  but  in 
our  opinion  these  judgments  are  distinguishable  on  facts  from 
the  case in hand  because  in the  reported  judgment  the  memos. 
of petitioners/appeals were handed over by Deputy Registrar to 
the  Advocate  for  the  purposes  of  removing  office  objections 
within the time fixed for this purpose but they did not adhere to 
the time and refiled petitions etc. after considerable delay. Thus, 
the  Court  concluded  that  in  such  situation  the  petitioners  are 
time  barred;  whereas  in  the  instant  case  the  prominent 
distinction  is  that  memo.  of  petition  was never  handed over  to 
the counsel for petitioner for removing office objections.” 
(Emphasis provided) 
Perusal  of  above  reveals  that  in  the  case  relied  upon  by  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioners,  the  memo  of  petitions/appeals  were  not 
handed  over  to  the  Advocates/petitioners  of  those  petitions/appeals. 
The  above  observation  of  the  apex  court  suggests  that  its  decision 
might have been different from that it rendered in the judgment supra, 
had the petitions were handed over to the petitioners. In this case, the 
petition  was  admittedly  handed  over  to  the  petitioners  on  the  day  it 
was  filed,  therefore,  the  said  case  law  is  not  attracted  in  this  case. 
Therefore, the instant case is squarely distinguishable from that relied 
upon  by  learned counsel  for  the petitioners,  as such, it does not help 
the petitioners in any manner.  
11.  The  application,  C.M.  No.3-C/2018,  has  been  filed  by  the 
petitioners  for  condonation  of  delay  under  Section  151,  CPC  which 
provision  is  only  attracted  where  no  other  provision  is  provided  by 
law.  This  revision  petition  has  been  filed  under  Section  115,  CPC 
which  itself  provides  time  limitation  of  90  days  from  the  date  of 
passing  of  judgment  of  the  lower  court,  therefore,  this  application, 
having been filed under Section 151, CPC, is not maintainable. 
Civil Revision No.214918/2018 
8 
12. 
In  a  nutshell,  the  revision  petition  was  filed  by  the  petitioners 
firstly on 21.03.2018, i.e. 90th (last) day of limitation of time when it 
was returned to the petitioners with the direction to resubmit it within 
three  days  after  removing  objection  of  incompletion  of  the  petition. 
Thereafter,  it  was  filed  on  25.05.2018,  i.e.  after  sixty  days  of  its 
return,  therefore,  it  was  barred  by  time.  C.M.  No.3-C/2018  filed  by 
the  petitioners  under  Section  151,  CPC  is  not  maintainable  which  is 
accordingly dismissed. As a consequence, revision petition in hand is 
also dismissed as being barred by time.  
 
 
 
 (ATIR MAHMOOD) 
Judge 
Approved for reporting. 
Judge 
Akram* 
 
