Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
BAHAWALPUR BENCH BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
                    Case No: W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
Sana Ullah. 
 Versus 
Govt. of Punjab etc. 
 
JUDGMENT 
Dates of Hearing:  01.06.2018.      
Petitioner(s) by:  M/s  Ch.  Faraz  Munir,  Malik  Niaz 
Ahmad,  Mian  Nazir  Ahmad,  Rias 
Muhammad  Afzal,  Sajjad  Bashir 
Baloch,  Muhammad  Imran  Misson 
and  Ameer  Abdullah  Awan, 
Advocates.   
Respondent(s) 
by: 
M/s  Muhammad  Tahir  Saeed 
Ramay,  Assistant  Advocate  General 
Punjab 
Iqbal 
Khakwani,  Senior  Legal  Advisor, 
Cholistan  Development  Authority, 
Bahawalpur. 
Jamshed 
and 
 
Shahid  Jamil  Khan,  J:-  This  judgment  shall 
decide  the  captioned  and  connected  petitions  (Writ 
Petitions No. 5185, 5186, 5380, 5391, 5392, 5393, 5420, 
5421,  5431,  5436  &  5455  of  2018),  as  petitioners  are 
aggrieved of not entertaining appeals against rejection of 
their  applications  for  allotment  of  State  land  under 
Notification dated 05.03.2013.    
2. 
The  Notification  dated  05.03.2013  was  issued 
under  Section  10  of  the  Colonization  of  Government 
Lands  (Punjab)  Act,  1912  (“Act  of  1912”)  bringing 
amendment  in  an  earlier  Notification  dated  23.06.2010 
for allotment of State land for ‘Temporary Cultivation in 
Cholistan’.  Under  amended  ‘Statement  of  Conditions’, 
the  available  land  was  classified  into  A,  B  and  C 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
2 
Categories.    The  lands  falling  in  Category  A  were  to  be 
leased  out,  for  five  years,  through  restricted  auction  and 
the  lands  in  Categories  B  and  C  through  balloting. 
Eligibility  of  the  persons,  who  could  participate  in  the 
auction or balloting, was defined in following words:-  
“The following shall be eligible to participate in the restricted 
auction or balloting as the case may be. 
i) 
Bonafide  residents  of  Cholistan  shall  be 
determined  inter-alia  on  the  basis  of  CNIC  and 
existence  of  his  name  in  the  Voter  List  of  last 
Election. 
ii) 
The landless Cholistanis or petty farmers 
not  owning  more  than  6-acres  of  land  will 
produce  copy  of  Tirni  alongwith  family  history  of 
Tirni  Guzari  prior  to  1980  and  a  proof  of  his 
residence in the Cholistan Area. 
Explanation 
If any Cholistani has obtained his CNIC after the 
last  Election  and  is  married  and  independent  of 
his  elder,  his  eligibility  as  regards  to  Voter  List 
shall be  determined on the basis of existence  of 
his  Father’s  or  other  family  elder’s  name  in  the 
Voter List.”  
 
The 
petitioners  moved 
applications 
for 
[emphasis supplied]         
participation  in  auction  or  balloting  for  allotment  of  the 
State land in respective  categories, but their applications 
were rejected on the ground of eligibility. The petitioners 
approached respondent No. 4/Commissioner Bahawalpur 
and voiced their grievance of rejection of applications but 
their  appeals  were  not  entertained,  hence  this  and 
connected petitions. 
3. 
Ch.  Faraz  Munir,  Advocate,  representing  the 
petitioners’  side,  apprised  that  a  Grievance  Redressal 
Committee  was  constituted  vide  Notification  dated 
30.01.2017,  to  substitute  the  remedy  of  appeal,  for 
redressing petitioners and other applicant’s grievance. To 
argue  that  constitution  of  the  Grievance  Redressal 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
3 
Committee was illegal, he referred to minutes of meeting 
dated  25.02.2015  whereby  proposal  for  its  constitution 
was  declined  by  Board  of  Revenue,  Punjab  vide  letter 
dated  25.02.2015  in  a  meeting  under  Chairmanship  of 
Member  Colonies.  The  minutes  of  meeting,  as  referred, 
are reproduced hereunder:- 
5  Possibility  of 
formulating  a 
grievance 
redressal 
committee  to 
act 
as 
appellate 
forum. 
redressal 
committee 
The  proposal  of  constituting  a  separate 
grievance 
by 
involving  local  political  representatives/ 
parliamentarians  to  act  as  a  forum  for 
appeal  of  rejected  applications.  The 
matter  was  discussed  at  length  and  it 
was  brought 
the 
committee  that  as  per  practice  in  vogue 
the  Divisional  Commissioner, 
takes 
cognizance  and  redress  the  grievances 
of the Cholistanis against orders made by 
CDA. 
the  notice  of 
to 
Decision 
  The  possibility  of  constituting  a 
grievance/redressal 
committee 
within  the  legal  frame  of  CDA 
was  examined  and  committee 
concluded 
that  Commissioner 
Bahawalpur  Division  has  a 
precedential  powers  to  redress 
grievance  of  the  applicants  for 
land 
same 
to  continue  and 
arrangement 
separate 
of 
establishment 
complaint 
redressal  grievance 
cell is not tenable. 
allotment, 
the 
 
To build his argument that rejection of application 
on  the  ground  of  ineligibility  was  an  appealable  order, 
learned  counsel  read  various  provisions  of  the  Act  of 
1912  and  referred  to  Section  7  in  particular  which 
borrows,  amongst  other  laws,  the  provisions  of  Punjab 
Land Revenue Act, 1967 (“Act of 1967”) for proceedings 
under  this  Act.  Since  the  Act  of  1912  is  silent  about 
appeal,  therefore,  Section  161  of  the  Act  of  1967  is 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
4 
required  to be  read  in, which  provides  appeal  against  an 
order  of  Collector  before  Commissioner.  He  read 
definition  of  ‘Collector’  under  Section  3  to  submit  that 
respondent  No.2,  known  with  the  title  of  Managing 
Director, Cholistan Development Authority (“CDA”) (by 
virtue  of  Cholistan  Development  Authority  Act,  1976) 
(“Act  of  1976”)  is  the  Collector.  He  concluded  that  any 
act  done  by  Collector  under  the  Act  of  1912,  including 
rejection  of  application  for  allotment  of  State  land,  was 
appealable before Commissioner/respondent No.4. 
 
The  petitioners’ 
side  also  pleaded,  during 
arguments, 
that  bona 
fide  residents  of  Cholistan, 
fulfilling the terms of the Statement of Conditions, under 
different  Schemes,  are  being  denied  the  allotment  of 
State  land  by  refusing  their  applications  at  initial  stage 
and  also  by  allowing  sublease  to  non  Cholistanies  in 
reckless manner. 
4. 
Learned  AAG,  assisted  by 
Jamshed 
Iqbal 
Khakwani, 
Senior 
Legal  Advisor, 
Cholistan 
Development  Authority 
read  Clause  9 
from 
the 
Notification  dated  05.03.2013,  whereby  a  Scrutiny/ 
Allotment Committee was constituted, as Collector could 
not  apply  his  mind  on  each  and  every  application  to 
determine  eligibility  of  the  applicants,  therefore,  all  the 
applications  were  scrutinized  by  the  Scrutiny/Allotment 
Committee.  He  submitted 
that  applications  of 
the 
petitioners were rejected due to non-fulfillment of any of 
the condition stipulated in Clause 1 of the Notification.  
Instead  of  controverting 
the  arguments  by 
petitioners’ side regarding availability of appeal, learned 
AAG  submitted  that  to  address  the  grievance,  voiced 
through  these  petitions,  Grievance  Redressal  Cells  were 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
5 
constituted  vide  Notification  dated  30.01.2017,  which 
was  an  efficacious  alternate 
remedy  against 
the 
administrative 
decision 
of 
rejecting 
petitioners’ 
applications by Scrutiny/Allotment Committee. 
Responding 
to 
the  plea,  during  arguments, 
regarding  sublease  to  non-Cholistanies,  learned  AAG 
submitted that sublease is sanctioned under Section 19 of 
the  Act  of  1912  with  consent  of  the  original  allottee/ 
lessee.  
5. 
6. 
Heard, record perused. 
The  legal  proposition;  regarding  availability  of 
appeal under Section 161 and revision under Section 164 
of  the  Act  of  1967  against  an  order  under  the  Act  of 
1912,  has  already  been  dealt  with  and  answered  in 
affirmative by superior courts. 
Learned  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  in  Karam 
Din v. Member Board of Revenue West Pakistan, Lahore, 
etc. (PLD 1968 Lahore 321), examined this proposition 
and held:- 
“4.  …. 
The  provision  contained  in  section  10(3)  clearly 
indicates that the Collector has the discretion to allot 
land to any person in accordance with the statements 
of  conditions  but  this  discretion  is  subject  to  the 
control of the Financial Commissioner, now Member, 
Board  of  Revenue.  Again, 
the  provision 
contained  in  section  7  of  the  Act  making  applicable 
the relevant provisions of the Punjab Land Revenue 
Act and Chapter VII of the Punjab  Tenancy Act and 
the  rules  made  thereunder  to  all  proceedings  under 
the Colonization of Government Lands Act right of an 
aggrieved person to file an appeal, revision or review 
can be clearly spelt out. Section 7 reads as follows:- 
 
from 
"7.  Applicability  of  the  Punjab  Land 
Revenue  Act  and  Punjab  Tenancy 
Act. - Subject to the provisions of this 
Act,  the  Punjab  Land  Revenue  Act, 
and  Chapter  VII  of 
the  Punjab 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
6 
Tenancy  Act  and  the  rules  made 
thereunder shall, in so far as they are 
applicable,  apply  to  all  proceedings 
under  this  Act.  But  nothing  in  the 
Punjab  Land  Revenue  Act  or  the 
Punjab  Tenancy  Act,  1887,  shall  be 
so  construed  as  to  vary  or  invalidate 
any 
in  any 
statement of conditions." 
condition  entered 
 
It is thus obvious that there was no bar to the 
respondent  filing  an  appeal  or  revision  against  the 
order  of  the  Collector  or  Commissioner  made  under 
the  Act.  Section  7  creates  an  exception  only  in 
respect of the statement of conditions which in a way 
becomes sacrosanct so that no conditions are varied 
or  invalidated  by  the  revenue  authority  functioning 
under  the  Punjab  Land  Revenue  or  the  Punjab 
Tenancy Act. The two provisions contained in section 
7 and 10(3) of the Act read together leave no manner 
of  doubt  that  the  order  of  the  Collector  would  be 
subject  to  appeal  or  revision.  Even  if  the  former 
provision  regarding  the  amenability  to  appeal  or 
revision  of  the  Collector's  order  were  not  there,  the 
latter  provision  per  se  vests  the  Member,  Board  of 
Revenue,  with  adequate  power  of  interference  in 
proper cases, where in the latter's view the discretion 
vesting  in  the  Collector  has  not  been  judiciously 
exercised.  It  would  thus  be  incorrect  to  say  that  the 
appeal  and  revision  were  not  competent  in  the 
instant case…” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
Availability  of  appeal  and  revision  was  endorsed   
by learned Single Benches in their judgments reported as 
Muhammad Azam etc. v. Bashir-Ud-Din etc. (NLR 1988 
Revenue  113),  Province  of  Punjab  through  District 
Collector, Vehari v. Rana (1989 MLD 1009) and  Nazir 
Hussain and others v. A.C. and others (2002 YLR 3484). 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan,  in  Muhammad  Ali  v. 
Province of Punjab and others (2005 SCMR 1302) while 
dealing with a petition against dismissal of suit in view of 
bar  contained  in  Section  36  of  the  Act  of  1912,  refused 
leave to appeal with following observations:- 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
7 
the  orders  passed  by 
“4. 
We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner at length. We find that the petitioner did not 
avail  the  statutory  remedies  of  appeal  and  revision 
before the Commissioner and the Board of Revenue 
respectively  against 
the 
Collector.  The  learned  counsel  failed  to  satisfy  us 
that such remedies, even if availed, would have been 
an exercise in futility. The averments in the plaint do 
not  spell  out  that  the  orders  of  the  Collector  were 
illegal  or  beyond  the  scope  of  the  powers  of  the 
Collector  and  in  any  other  way  suffered  from  any 
jurisdictional  defect  so  as  to  be  amenable  to  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Civil  Court  in  view  of  the  dicta  of 
this  Court 
in  Abdul  Rab  and  others  v.  Wali 
Muhammad and others 1980 SCMR 139 and Bashir 
Ahmad  and  others  v.  Manzoor  Ahmad  and  others 
1987  SCMR  1620.  The  High  Court  has  taken  a 
correct  view  that  the  plaint  was  liable to be  rejected 
on account of bar  of jurisdiction of Civil Court under 
section 36 of the Act. The High Court has also given 
valid  reasons  for  not  remanding  the  case  on  the 
question  of  rejection  of  plaint  independently  of  the 
stay matter in the peculiar facts and circumstances of 
this  case.  Therefore,  we  need  not  express  any 
opinion  on  this  aspect  of  the  case.  The  impugned 
judgment  does  not  call  for  any  interference  by  this 
Court.  This  is  not  a  fit  case  for  grant  of  leave  to 
appeal.” 
 
7.  
The law laid down, ibid, leaves no room for further 
deliberation  on  the  issue.  It  can  be  summarised  that 
appeal under Section 161 and revision under Section 164 
of  the  Act  of  1967  are  available  against  an  order  by 
Collector, as defined in Section 3 of the Act of 1912.  
8.  What needs to be examined is whether rejection of 
application,  declaring  the  applicant  as  ineligible,  is  an 
order by Collector?  
 
The  Notification  dated  05.03.2013  was  under 
subsection (2) of Section 10 of the Act of 1912, whereby 
Statement  of  Conditions,  issued  through  an  earlier 
Notification dated 23.06.2010, were amended for grant of 
lease of available State land, outside prohibited zone, for 
Temporary  Cultivation  in  Cholistan.  Under  Clause  9  of 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
8 
the subsequent/amending Notification, auction was to be 
conducted  by 
respective  Colonization  Officers  of 
Cholistan  Development  Authority,  however,  for  the 
purpose  of  balloting,  a  Scrutiny/Allotment  Committee 
was  constituted.  Receipt  of  the  applications  was  to  be 
acknowledged  by  the  Colonization  Officer  and  the 
applications  were  to  be  scrutinized  by  the  Committee, 
whereas  outcome  of  the  scrutiny  was  required  to  be 
announced  by  the  Chairman  CDA  in  Ijlas-e-Aam.  It  is 
important  to  note  here  that  the  Chairman  CDA  is, 
admittedly,  also  a  Collector  under  the  Section  3  of  the 
Act of 1912, as appointed by the Board of Revenue under 
the Act of 1967. The Clause 9 further envisages that the 
Chairman  shall  satisfy  himself  about  genuineness  of  the 
proceedings and will give decision regarding approval or 
otherwise  of 
the  balloting  proceedings.  Collective 
reading  leads  to  an  inescapable  conclusion  that  all  the 
powers under Clause 9 vest in the office of the Chairman 
(Collector  under  the  Section  3)  and  the  functions 
performed  by  other  officials, 
including  Scrutiny/ 
Allotment  Committee,  are  on  his  behalf.  Necessary 
corollary is that filing and rejection of applications by the 
Committee,  being  part  of  balloting  proceedings,  is  an 
order by the Chairman, who is a Collector in terms of the 
Section 3, hence is an appealable order. 
9. 
Provisions  of  the  Section  10  are  also  examined, 
which is reproduced for facility:- 
Issue  of  statements  of  conditions  of 
“10. 
tenancies.- (1) The Board of Revenue subject to the 
general approval  of the  Government may grant land 
in  a  colony  to  any  person  on  such  conditions  as  it 
thinks fit. 
 
 
 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
9 
(2) 
The  Provincial  Government  may  issue  a 
statement or statements of the conditions on which it 
is willing to grant land in a colony to tenants.  
(3)  Where  such  statements  of  conditions  have 
been  issued,  the  Collector  may,  subject  to  the 
control of the Board of Revenue, allot land to any 
person,  to  be  held  subject  to  such  statement  or 
conditions  issued  under  sub-section  (2)  of  this 
section, as the Collector may by written order declare 
to be applicable to the case.  
No person shall be deemed to be a tenant or 
(4) 
to  have  any  right  or  title  in  the  land  allotted  to  him 
until  such  a  written  order  has  been  passed  and  he 
has taken possession of the land with the permission 
of the Collector. After possession has been so taken, 
the  grant  shall  be  held  subject  to  the  conditions 
declared applicable thereto.” 
  
[emphasis supplied] 
Its  subsection  (1)  gives  power  to  Board  of 
Revenue,  subject  to  general  approval  by  Government  of 
Punjab,  for  grant  of  land  in  a  colony  to  any  person  on 
such conditions as it thinks fit. However under subsection 
(2), the Provincial Government may issue a Statement or 
Statement  of  Conditions  on  which  it  is  willing  to  grant 
land  in  a  colony  to  tenants.  If  such  Statement  of 
Conditions  is  issued,  the  Collector  is  bound  to  see,  in 
every case, whether the conditions applicable are fulfilled 
and pass the order of allotment in writing. The powers of 
the  Collector,  under  Section  10(3)  are  subject  to  control 
by Board of Revenue. The legislature, in its wisdom, has 
used the word “control” instead of “supervision” which is 
of  much  significance  with  regard  to  grievance  of  the 
petitioner or any other person arrived of the proceedings 
of allotment, its subsistence, or transfer under Section 19. 
The  procedure  for  allotment  given  in  the  Notification 
dated  05.03.1013,  or  any  other  Notification,  may  have 
administrative validity but shall lose its binding force if it 
conflicts or contradicts with the provisions of Section 10 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
10 
in  particular  and  other  provisions  of  the  Act  of  1912  in 
general.   
10.  The 
‘Grievance  Redressal  Cell’  constituted 
through Notification dated 30.01.2017 cannot be taken as 
substitute  of  appeal  or  revision  available  under  the 
Statute.  This  Notification  is  silent  about  the  statutory  or 
legal authority in exercise of which it is issued. At best it 
can be regarded as an administrative forum to redress the 
complaints, coming to the executives, regarding exercise 
of 
administrative 
powers/proceedings 
under 
the 
Notification dated 30.01.2017. This forum cannot abridge 
the  control  of  Board  of  Revenue  over  the  allotment 
procedure and the issues arising as a consequence. Board 
of Revenue, Punjab, vide its letter dated 25.02.2015, had 
rightly  rejected  the  proposal  of  formulating  a  Grievance 
Redressal  Committee  to  act  as  appellate  forum.  The 
argument  of  learned  AAG  of  addressing  petitioner’s 
grievance through Grievance Redressal Cell as substitute 
of appeal has no force. 
11.  The  plea,  taken  during  arguments,  of  reckless 
transfer  of  allotted  lands  through  sublease  is  also 
examined.  
Caption  of  Section  19  of  the  Act  of  1912  is, 
“Transfer of rights to be void”, which denotes that a clog 
on  transfer  of  rights  in  land  is  a  general  rule.  However 
provisions  of  Sections  17  and  19  are  providing  narrow 
exceptions  and  those  too  subject  to  fulfillment  of  the 
conditions mentioned therein. The eligibility clause under 
the  Notification  dated  05.03.2013  stipulates  that  the 
allotment  for  temporary  cultivation  is  for  “Bonafide 
residents  of  Cholistan”.  To  determine  the  bonafide,  a 
procedure of verifying CNIC and voters list is provided. 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
11 
Where  Statement  of  Conditions  has  imposed  ‘obligation 
of  residence’,  it  has  been  guarded  by  various  provisions 
of the Act of 1912. Section 12 provides for exception of 
temporary absence of tenant if his permanent residence is 
in Cholistan, which means on change of residence out of 
Cholistan/estate the grant of land becomes void. Proviso 
to  the  Section  19  stipulates  that  “right  of  sub-letting 
conferred  by  this  section  shall  not  release  any  tenant 
from a condition requiring him to reside in the  estate in 
which  his  tenancy  is  situated”.  Section  10(4)  tells,  “the 
grant  shall  be  held  subject  to  the  conditions  declared 
applicable 
thereto”.  Section  16  envisages 
false 
information  as  breach  of  the  conditions  of  tenancy  and 
Section  17  allows  exchange  on  the  same  conditions  and 
subject to the same obligations. 
If  a  grant  is  meant  for  “Bonafide  residents  of 
Cholistan” being ‘landless’ or ‘petty farmers’, whether it 
could  be  transferred,  under  Section  19,  to  a  non 
Cholistani, is serious question to be looked into by Board 
of  Revenue,  being  in  control  of  such  tenancies  under 
Section  10  of  the  Act  of  1912  read  with  powers  under 
Section  164  of  the  Act  of  1967.  Jurisdiction  of  revision 
under  the  Section  164  can  be  exercised,  at  any  time,  by 
the  Board  on  its  own  motion  or  on  an  application. 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  gave  similar  directions  for 
probe  to  the  Board  of  Revenue  in  Khuda  Bakhsh  and 
others  v.  Cholistan  Development  Authority  through 
Managing  Director,  Bahawalpur  and  others  (1998 
SCMR 2231), relevant part is reproduced. 
In support of the above petitions, it has been 
“4. 
vehemently  contended  by  the  learned  counsel  that 
the  above  findings  recorded  by  the  High  Court  are 
contrary to factual as well as legal position inasmuch 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
12 
as  Shahi  Muzara  Scheme  was  notified  as  stated 
above.  Similarly,  other  schemes  were  also  notified. 
The  learned  Advocate-General,  Punjab,  Mr.  Ashtar 
Ausaf  Ali  has  candidly  conceded  that  the  finding  of 
the  High  Court  that  the  Colonization  of  Government 
Lands Act, 1912 is not applicable, is not correct. He 
has  also  submitted  that 
is 
applicable,  it  must  follow  that  the  Board  of 
Revenue and the other hierarchy provided under 
the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967 would 
also  have  jurisdiction.  The  above  concession 
seems to be in consonance with law. 
if  the  said  Act 
5. 
In our view, the basic question in issue is as 
to who are the allottees of the suit land and who are 
occupying  it  unauthorisedly.  This  is  a  question  of 
fact,  which  is  to  be  determined  on  the  basis  of 
allotment  orders/title  documents  to  be  produced  by 
the  alleged  allottees  before  the  competent  forum. 
The occupants who have no title have no legal right 
to remain in occupation and, therefore, they are liable 
to be ejected. In our view, it will be just and proper 
to  remand  the  cases  to  the  Board  of  Revenue 
Punjab with the direction to ask the occupants to 
produce  their  allotment/title  documents,  if  any, 
and  in  case  some  of  the  occupants  succeed  in 
producing the allotment/title documents and also 
show that they have complied with the conditions 
of  the  allotment  and  the  breach,  if  any,  is 
condonable under the law, they will be allowed to 
continue to remain in possession. The occupants 
who will fail to satisfy the Board of Revenue as to 
their  entitlement  to  be  in  possession,  shall  be 
ejected.  The  Board  of  Revenue  may  issue  public 
notices before adjudicating upon the question of title 
so  that  nobody  may  have  a  grievance  that  he  was 
not  heard.  We  may  also  observe  that  the  cases, 
which  were  remanded  by  the  Board  of  Revenue  to 
the  Commissioner  should be  recalled  and  the  same 
should also be decided by the Board of Revenue. 
The  above  petitions  are  converted 
into 
appeal and they are disposed of in the above terms.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
In  another  case  Muhammad  Aslam  and  others  v. 
Shabbir Ahmad and others  (PLD  2003  Supreme  Court 
588),  while  holding  that  transactions  under  the  Act  of 
1912  are  not  pre-emptible.  The  Apex  Court  has  ruled in 
favour  of  ‘dominant  discretion’  of  the  Government  to 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
13 
select  a  person  as  transferee  of  colony  land.  Relevant 
excerpt is reproduced:- 
“10. 
A  close  perusal  of  Act  V  of  1912  would 
indicate that a right to acquire property is a grant by 
the  Government.  At  the  time  of  such  grant  in  the 
initial  stage  referable  to  section  10  thereof,  the 
Government  has  all  the  authority  to  allot  or  refuse 
allotment of a property but to a specific person.  This 
dominant discretion of the Government to select the 
person  as  transferee  of  colony  land  is  so  important 
that  even  the  original  allottee  cannot  transfer  or  sell 
the  land  in  his  occupation  to  a  third  person  unless 
permitted  by  the  Collector  under  section  19  of  the 
Act,  Meaning thereby that  so  long as  the ownership 
vests  in  the  Government,  there  can  be  no  transfer, 
alienation  or  sale  of  rights  unless  permitted  by  the 
Government.  Which  person  is  eligible  or  entitled  to 
acquire  the  land,  is  a  matter  to  be  appreciated  and 
approved  by  the  Government  in  the  light  of  all  the 
attesting  circumstances  prevailing  with  reference  to 
Sections 10 and 19 of the Act. 
11.  What  we  intend  to  bring  home  is  that  every 
acquisition  of  land  under  Act  V  of  1912  is  specific 
and not automatic in routine. No one can occupy the 
land  either  as  original  transferee  or  subsequent 
vendee  unless  permitted  by  the  Collector.  Such 
permission is personal and specific in nature and not 
general.  The  same  argument,  if  put  in  other  words, 
would mean that right to occupy land can neither be 
acquired  by  automatic  sale  nor  by  substitution 
because  in  case  of  substitution,  which  essentially  is 
the right of pre-emption, the provisions of section 19 
are violated. When a vendee cannot purchase a right 
without  permission,  no  one  can  step  into  his  shoes 
without  such  permission,  provided  the  land  still 
belongs to the Government. In nutshell, we hold that 
a right to acquire or purchase property in colony area 
is  a  right  specifically  permitted  by  the  Government 
and 
the 
provisions of section 19 of the Act. If not susceptible 
to substitution, the obvious conclusion would be that 
any such transaction is not pre-emptible.”  
it  cannot  be  substituted  by 
ignoring 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
12.  For  the  reasons  stated  above,  this  and  connected 
petitions are allowed with following directions:- 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
14 
(a)  Appeals  of 
the  petitioners 
shall  be 
entertained by the Commissioner/respondent 
No.4. 
(b)  Respondent  No.4 
(Commissioner) 
is 
directed  to  consider  the  applications  for 
condonation  of  delay 
sympathetically, 
keeping  in  view  the  anomaly  regarding 
availability  of  appeal,  which  is  resolved  in 
this judgment. 
(c) 
Powers  under  Section  164  of  the  Act  of 
1967  may  also  be  exercised,  in  appropriate 
cases,  to  ensure  that  allottees  under  the 
Notification dated 05.03.2013,  are Bonafide 
residents of Cholistan being landless or petty 
farmers.  
(d)  Member  (Colonies),  Board  of  Revenue  is 
directed  to  ensure  control  of  the  Board  of 
Revenue,  as  envisaged  under  Section  10  of 
the  Act  of  1912,  and  call  for  record  of 
allotments  which  are  transferred  under  the 
Section  19  to  non  Cholistanies.  If  the 
transfer  is  in  violation  of  the  Statement  of 
Conditions read with the Sections 10 and 19 
of  the  Act  of  1912,  he  shall  proceed  in 
accordance with law. 
 
 
He  shall  also  ensure  that  the  state  land  is 
allotted  to  maximum  landless  Cholistanies 
as first priority and then to petty farmers. 
A  compliance  report  shall  be  submitted  to 
Deputy  Registrar  (Judl.)  of  this  Court  after 
W. P. No. 5385 of 2018. 
15 
every  three  months  till  the  directions  are 
complied with.    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         Judge 
 (Shahid Jamil Khan) 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
 
Judge  
*A.W.*  
 
