                                                                                      Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
           IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
   MULTAN BENCH MULTAN 
                          JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
C.R.No.784-D-2006 
                  Mehboob-ud-Din,etc. Vs. Mst. Zubaida,etc. 
      JUDGMENT۔ 
Date of hearing 
20.12.2018 
Petitioners by 
Syed Tajammul Hussain Bukhari, Advocate. 
Respondents by 
M/s.Rana  Muhammad  Aslam,  Advocate 
for 
respondents  in  C.R.No.784-D-2006  and  Muhammad 
Saleem,  respondent  No.2(b)  in  person  in  C.R.No.785-
D-2006  on  behalf  of  legal  heirs  of  Mst.  Rashida 
Begum. 
 
 
 
                Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir ,J: Inessential detail 
apart, the precise history of the case was that subject house had 
been  transferred  to  Mst.  Zubaida  Begum  and  Mst.  Rashida 
Begum,  respondents  No.1  and  2  along  with  their  mother  Mst. 
Zainab  by  the  Settlement  Department  vide  Permanent  Transfer 
Order,  which  was  subsequently  alienated  through  impugned 
registered  Gift  Deed  dated  05.08.1984  (Exh.D2)  to  present 
petitioners, who were nephews as well as maternal grandsons of 
the  purported  donors.  In  1998,  respondents  No.1  and  2  at  their 
end  instituted  two  independent  suits  for  the  cancellation  of 
afore-noted instrument contending therein that neither they had 
offered  the  gift  nor  executed  instrument  to  such  effect,  which 
was  managed  by  their  brother  Fakhar-ud-Din  in  favour  of  his 
sons to deprive his mother and sisters from their property and it 
being  forged,  fictitious  and  having  been  obtained  through 
misrepresentation  was  illegal  as  well  as  ineffective  upon  their 
rights.  Both  the  suits  were  contested  with  the  defence  that 
respondents No.1 and 2 along with their mother had voluntarily 
transferred 
the  house 
through 
the 
instrument  genuinely 
constructed  on  their  behalf.  It  was  also  pleaded  in  the  written 
C.R.Nos.784-D and 785-D-2006. 
2 
statements  that  Mst.  Rashida  Begum  respondent  No.2  was 
compensated  with  some  other  property,  whereas  in  favour  of 
Mst.  Zubaida,  respondent  No.1,  the  rooms  of  House  No.706 
were  transferred vide  registered instruments  No.1543  and  1544 
executed/attested on the day when impugned deed was attested. 
As  both  the  suits  pertained  to  the  same  subject  matter  and 
parties,  the  learned  Trial  Court  was  perfect  to  consolidate  it 
through formulation of joint issues and after examination as well 
as appreciation of evidence brought on record by the respective 
parties,  learned  Trial  Court  dismissed  both  the  suits  vide 
common  judgment  and  decrees  dated  25.06.2005,  which  could 
not  hold  the  field  for  any  considerable  period  when  two 
independent  Appeals  of  the  respondents  were  allowed  and 
through consolidated impugned judgment dated 19.07.2006, not 
only the verdict of the subordinate Court was set aside, but the 
suits  were  also  decreed  cancelling  the  Gift  Deed,  hence  Civil 
Revision  in  hand  and  connected  one  bearing  No.785-D-2006. 
As  did  the  Courts  below,  this  Court  is  also  inclined  to  decide 
both these jointly through this single judgment. 
2. 
Syed  Tajjamal  Hussain  Bokhari,  Advocate  for 
the 
petitioners/donees  emphasized  with  great  vehemence 
that 
property  had  been  transferred  through  registered  instrument, 
which under the law attained strong presumption of correctness 
and  learned  Trial  Court  was  perfect  to  honour  its  authenticity, 
whereas learned lower Appellate Court without considering that 
on the same day, some other property had also been alienated in 
favour of respondent No.1/donor through registered instruments, 
but  those  were  never  challenged  at  any  forum  erred  in  law  to 
undo one of the transactions and other two attested in her favour 
were  kept  solemn.  Added  that  suit  was  badly  time  barred,  but 
this aspect of the case was not considered in its true perspective. 
It was next argued that despite the fact that plaintiffs had denied 
their thumb impressions over the questioned document, but they 
C.R.Nos.784-D and 785-D-2006. 
3 
did  not  tender  a  request  to  refer  the  specimens  of  their  thumb 
impressions for comparison to the Finger Print Bureau and their 
silence  in  this  regard  was  sufficient  proof  to  hold  that  their 
imprints  over  the  questioned  document  were  identical.  It  was 
finally  pleaded  that  impugned  judgment  being  classic  example 
of misreading and non-reading of evidence was liable to be set 
aside  and  prayed  for  acceptance  of  Civil  Revisions  and 
restoration of judgment and decrees of learned Trial Court. 
In  contra,  M/s.  Rana  Muhammad  Aslam,  Advocate  for 
respondent  No.1  and  Muhammad  Saleem,  respondent  No.2  (b) 
on  behalf  of  remaining  respondents  submitted  that  Stamp 
Vendor, Deed Writer, Registry Moharrar, Sub-Registrar and the 
Attesting  Witnesses  despite  their  availability  were  deliberately 
withheld, as such learned  lower Appellate Court was perfect to 
draw  a  hostile  inference  against  the  beneficiaries.  It  was  next 
added that the petitioners did not refer the essential details with 
regard to time, date, month, year, venue and names of witnesses 
in  their  written  statement  to  disclose  that  when,  where  and 
before whom the original transaction was settled. It was further 
pleaded on their behalf that evidence of the petitioners was also 
lacking to confirm the basic three ingredients of the transaction 
of  gift.  They  also  argued  that  impugned  document  was 
surreptitiously  engineered  through  fraud  and  misrepresentation 
by  Fakhar-ud-Din  father  of  the  petitioners  for  his  greed,  which 
could not be perpetuated on the score of limitation or for some 
other legal infirmity. It too was their stance that the judgment of 
the learned lower Appellate Court has to be preferred over that 
of  its  subordinate  Court  and  lastly  prayed  for  the  dismissal  of 
Petitions in hand. 
3.  Arguments heard and record perused. 
4. 
First  of  all,  this  Court  deems  it  apposite  to  attend  to 
inaugural  as  well  as  sweeping  and  wide  argument  of  Mr. 
Bukhari  that  impugned  instrument  being  registered  by  an 
C.R.Nos.784-D and 785-D-2006. 
4 
Authority  while  performing 
its  official  functions  attains 
presumption of truth might have substance, but only in the cases 
where  authenticity and  genuineness  thereof  is not  challenged.  I 
must  endorse  that  public  documents  are  the  acts  of  public 
functionaries in Executive, Legislative and Judicial Departments 
of  the  Government  including  those  under  the  general  head  the 
transactions,  which  official  persons  are  required  to  enter  in 
Books  and  Registers  in  the  course  of  their  public  duties  and 
which  occur  within  the  circle  of  their own  personal knowledge 
and observations, however, as per sub clause (e) of Article 85 of 
the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  whenever  the  execution  or 
contents of any such document are disputed, the presumption so 
attached to it loses its significance and it becomes sine qua non 
for  the  beneficiary  thereof  to  have  it  proved  through  mode 
requires  to  prove  a  private  document.  Article  78  of  the  Order 
ibid  prescribes  that  if  any  document  is  alleged  to  be  signed/ 
thumb  marked  or  to  have  been  written  by  any  person,  the 
signatures/imprints  or  writing  must  be  proved  in  that  person’s 
handwriting.  Although  this  provision  does  not  lay  down  any 
particular  manner  for  proving  it,  but  any  mode  of  proof 
recognized  by  this  statute  can  be  availed  by  the  party  upon 
which  onus  probandi  is  rested.  The  pivotal  aspect  of  provision 
ibid is that, it addresses to prove the identity of its scribe as well 
as  other  signatories,  but  mere  proof  of  handwriting,  signatures 
and imprints will not be sufficient to prove transaction couched 
therein.  Reliance  can  be  placed  upon  judgments  reported  as 
Muhammad  Sher  and  2  others  versus  Muhammad  Azim  and 
another  (PLD  1977  Lahore  729),  Abdul  Majeed  and  others 
versus  Muhammad  Subhan  and  2  others  (1999  SCMR  1245), 
Abdul  Ghafoor  and  others  versus  Mukhtar  Ahmad  Khan  and 
others  (2006  SCMR  1144),  Mrs.  Khalida  Azhar  versus  Viqar 
Rustam  Bakhshi  and  others  (2018  SCMR  30)  and  Fareed  and 
others versus Muhammad Tufail and another (2018 SCMR 139). 
C.R.Nos.784-D and 785-D-2006. 
5 
The conclusion drawn by the apex Court in Abdul Majeed’s case 
(supra)  in  this  regard  being  directly  applicable  in  the  situation 
discussed herein above is reflected below:- 
  
“It  is  axiomatic  principle  of  law  that  a  registered  deed  by  itself, 
without  proof  of  the  execution  and  the  genuineness  of  the 
transaction covered by it, would not confer any right. Similarly, a 
mutation although acted upon in Revenue Record,  would  not  by 
its  own  force  be  sufficient  to  prove  the  genuineness  of  the 
transaction  to  which  it  purports  unless  the  genuineness  of  the 
transaction is proved. There is no cavil with the proposition that 
these  documents  being  part  of  public  record  are  admissible  in 
evidence  but  they  by  their  own  force  would  not  prove  the 
genuineness and execution of that to which they relate unless the 
transaction  covered  by  them  is  substantiated  from  independent 
and  reliable  source.  Admissibility  is  to  be  distinguished  from 
proof  required  by  law  for  determining  the  execution  and 
genuineness of document.” 
 
In this view of the matter, when not only through various paras 
of  the  plaint  as  well  as  deposition  of  the  plaintiff  (PW-1)  the 
construction  of  impugned  Gift  Deed  as  well  as  transaction 
referred  therein  was  attacked  with  serious  allegations,  the  onus 
was  shifted  on  the  petitioners  to  prove  those  facts,  but 
surprisingly  from  the  day  first,  the  petitioners  failed  to  assert 
and  prove  the  ingredients  of  their  purported  transaction  to  the 
effect  that    when,  where  and  before  whom  declaration  of  gift 
was offered by the donors, which was accepted by them and the 
possession  changed  hands  in  lieu  thereof.  Moreover,  minute 
appraisal  of  copy  of  impugned  Gift  Deed  divulged  that  its 
Stamp Paper was not purchased by any of the purported donors, 
rather it was issued to Fakhar-ud-Din, the father of the donees, 
who admittedly had no authority on their behalf. Important that 
Gift Deed was scribed on that very day when Stamp Paper was 
issued and if the donors were present  at the time of its writing, 
then  what  was  the  fun  that  its  paper  was  not  personally 
purchased by any of them. The purchase of Stamp Paper  by an 
unauthorized  person  despite  availability  of  the  ladies  on  whose 
behalf  it  was  written,  made  its  dubious  from  the  day  of  its 
inception.  Over  and  above,  the  petitioners  did  not  succeed  to 
C.R.Nos.784-D and 785-D-2006. 
6 
establish  the  authenticity  and  veracity  of  impugned  document 
because  none  among  the  Stamp  Vendor,  Petition  Writer, 
Registry  Moharrir,  Sub-Registrar  and  Attesting  Witnesses  was 
examined.  Only  Muhammad  Nazir,  Lumberdar  (DW-2),  the 
alleged  identifier  was  produced,  but  his  sole  deposition  was 
insufficient  to  fulfil  the  requirement  for  proof  of  document, 
especially keeping in mind his answers uttered during the test of 
cross-examination, which being relevant are referred as under:- 
 ہبیدز  ۔ہے  نہ
  
ناجا  ناآ بھی گھر کے  ہغیرو ینبز  ،ہشیدر،ہبیدز
 
  امیر کہ ہے سترد  یہ
 ہد  پر ینبز  روا  ہشیدر  ،ہبیدز کہ ہے  نہ
 
علم مجھے  ۔ہے  نہ  ناجا  ناآ گھر ےمیر بھی  کا  ہغیرو
 یں ں ت ہ مقع زور را کہ ہے نہ دد  مجھے ۔ہے ا ہ  گ  ہصہ  عکا ہ کونک 
 کہ ہیں تیکرنہیں
 ہی  راجسٹرر سب  وقعور  نے  ں ت  ۔تھا  ا ہ  نہ  رپا  کے  یسنو  ثیقہو  ں ت  ۔۔
۔۔نہیں  د 
 تیںرعو ہیو ہم کہ تھا کہا نے ںنہوا تو تھا چھاپو  دخو سے ںتورعو نے ں ت تھی کی ختشنا
 مجھے  ہی  نہ  روا تھے یکھےد  ڈرکا ختیشنا کے ینبز  روا  ہبیدز  ۔  ہشیدر نے ں ت  ہی  نہ  ۔ہیں
 
۔تھا پتہ کا ڈرکا ختیشنا
 
It left no iota in mind that the ladies allegedly identified by him 
were  not  personally  known  to  him,  as  such,  his  identification 
lost its significance.  
5. 
The  emphasis  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  that 
both  the  marginal  witnesses  of  the  Gift  Deed  were  sons  of  the 
plaintiffs/donors  and  there  was  a  risk  that  had  they  been 
summoned for examination in the witness-box, they might have 
supported  their  mothers  is  fallacious.  In  recent  era,  the  apex 
Court  in  a  case  reported  as  Hafiz  Tassaduq  Hussain  Vs. 
Muhammad Din through Legal Heirs and others (PLD 2011 SC 
241)  has  already  dealt  with  this  situation  while  concluding 
therein  that  irrespective  of  fear  and  risk  the  beneficiary  of  a 
document has to produce its signatories even if related with his 
adversary  and  the  moment  he/they  depose(s)  inimical  to  its 
examiner,  the  latter  may  extend  a  request  for  declaring 
him/them  hostile.  The  relevant  Para-12  of  this  esteemed 
judgment is given below:- 
“12.  For  the  argument  that  as  the  second  attesting 
witness of the agreement was the son of the respondent, 
C.R.Nos.784-D and 785-D-2006. 
7 
therefore,  the  appellant  cold  not  take  the  risk  of 
examining  him,  it  may  be  held  that  as  ordained  above 
the mandatory provisions of law had to be complied and 
fulfilled  and  only  for  the  reason  or  the  perception  that 
such attesting witness if examined may turn hostile does 
not absolve the concerned party of its duty to follow the 
law  and  allow  the  provisions  of  the  Order,  1984, 
relating  to  hostile  witness  take  its  own  course.  Before 
parting it may be mentioned that the judgment reported 
as  Abdul  Wali  v.  Muhammad  Saleh  (1998 SCMR  760) 
which  find  mention  in  the  leave  granting  order  is  not 
relevant  for  the  proposition  in  hand  as  it  relates  to  a 
document  before  the  enforcement  of  the  Order,  1984 
when Article 17 was not there.” 
 
Although  Feroze-ud-Din,  one  of  the  donees  (DW-3),  Abdul 
Rasheed  (DW-4),  Muhammad  Tayyab  (DW-5)  and  Fakhar-ud-
Din  (DW-6)  father  of  the  petitioners  were  examined  on  behalf 
of  the  latters,  but  none  of  them  was  signatory  of  Exh.D2,  as 
such, their testimony was of no importance.  
6. 
The  emphasis  of  Mr.  Bukhari  that  on  the  crucial  day,  on 
one  side,  Exh.D2  was  attested,  whereas  on  the  other  side,  two 
rooms  of  the  other  house  were  transferred  to  respondent  No.1 
through  documents  of  similar  nature,  but  the  latters  were  not 
challenged, as such, respondent No.1 was estopped to challenge 
Exh.D2  was  without  merit.  The  plaintiff  (PW-1)  in  her  cross-
examination  unequivocally  denied  that  any  document  was 
executed  in  her  favour  with  regard  to  said  rooms.  In  such 
situation to counter PW-1, the petitioners were required to have 
examined their mother, the alleged transferor/executant of those 
instruments  or  these  were  confronted  to  PW-1,  but none  of  the 
modes  was  followed,  hence  the  Court  was  perfect  to  draw  an 
adverse inference. Moreover, Feroze-ud-Din (DW-3), one of the 
petitioners in his cross-examination stated as below:- 
 کی را سے زور را ہیں ئی گ یجسٹرر
 
1544
-
1543
ینمبر تایزوستاد سے ند جس
 تایزوستاد  کہ  ہے  سترد  یہ  ۔ہیں  رپا  ےرہما  تایزوستاد  صلا
 
۔تھے یےد نہ کو ہبیدز ۃمسما بھی کبھی نے ہم
 
1544،1543
ینمبر
Had  in  lieu  of  subject  property,  the  two  rooms  been  actually 
transferred  to  respondent  No.1,  there  was  no  fun  to  retain  its 
original  deeds  despite  losing  their  title  by  the  executant.  The 
C.R.Nos.784-D and 785-D-2006. 
8 
purported  documents  registered  in  favour  of  respondent  No.1 
might  have  been  executed  for  the  days  to  come  to  guard  the 
impugned document (Exh.D2).  
7. 
The  next  argument  on  behalf  of  petitioners  that  to  prove 
that questioned document was not thumb marked by the ladies, 
it  was  obligatory  for  them  to  have  requested  for  referring  the 
specimen  of  their  imprints  for  comparison  to  the  Finger  Print 
Bureau is not tenable. The onus as discussed earlier was shifted 
upon  the  petitioners  and  in  such  eventuality,  they  being 
beneficiaries  especially  when  no  direct  evidence  to  prove  the 
questioned document was examined, could avail this alternative 
mode while making a prayer for the matching test, but no such 
effort  at  their  end  was  made  and  by  not  resorting  to  this 
exercise, they  themselves incurred a presumption against them. 
See  Muhammad  Qayyum  and  2  others  Vs.  Muhammad  Azeem 
Through Legal Heirs and another (PLD 1995 SC 381). 
8. 
The  emphasis  of  Advocate  for  the  petitioners  that  Gift 
Deed was executed in 1984 and the suit was subsequently filed 
with  the  delay  of  14  years  in  1998,  which  was  badly  time 
barred, is misconceived. In the case in hand, it was specifically 
pleaded  by  the  plaintiffs  that  alleged  transfer  of  property  had 
been  kept  secret  from  them  and  for  the  first  time,  it  came  into 
their  knowledge  one  and  half  month  prior  to  institution  of  the 
suit  that  through  disputed  instrument  they  had  been  defrauded. 
There can be no right to sue until an accrual of right is asserted 
in the plaint and its infringement or clear unequivocal threat to 
injure  that  right  by  the  defendant  against  whom  the  suit  is 
instituted is also pleaded and in clear terms, it was in the plaint 
by the plaintiffs, who also prayed for declaring the Gift Deed in 
dispute as illegal besides that it was fictitious, forged as well as 
fabricated  and  on  having  been  proved  as  such,  the  same  could 
not  be  perpetuated,  but  could  be  assailed  at  any  point  of  time. 
Reliance in this respect can be placed on the case law reported 
C.R.Nos.784-D and 785-D-2006. 
9 
as  Abdul  Rahim  and  another  Vs.  Mrs.  Jannatay  Bibi  and  13 
others  (2000  SCMR  346)  and  Khair  Din  Vs.  Mst.  Salaman  and 
others (PLD 2002 SC 677). 
9. 
The  additional  setback  of  the  controversy  would  be  that 
the alleged donors had their siblings as well, but no reason was 
ever  furnished  in  the  memo  of  gift  or  pleadings  that  for  what 
evil  deeds  they  were  deprived  of  the  said  benefit.  See  Sadar 
Abbas  Vs.  Province  of  Punjab  and  others  (2015  CLC  822), 
Barkat  Ali  through  Legal  Heirs  and  others  Vs.  Muhammad 
Ismail through Legal Heirs and others (2002 SCMR 1938), Mst. 
Manzoor  Begum  (deceased)  through  L.  Rs.  versus  Mst.  Fateh 
Bibi,  etc.  (2016  SCMR  1596),  and  Allah  Ditta  and  others  Vs. 
Manak alias Muhammad Siddique and others (2017 SCMR 402).   
10.  All  it  germanes  that  while  dismissing  the  suit,  learned 
Trial Court failed to appreciate the evidence available on record 
as well as law on the subject, but his Appellate Court perfectly 
accumulated and thrashed it in its true perspective to decree the 
suit,  whose  judgment  being  based  on  reasoning  has  to  be 
preferred  especially  when  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners 
was not able to persuade that any wrong was committed and this 
Court  being  sanguine  feels  no  hesitation  to  confirm  the 
impugned  judgment  and  decrees,  hence,  these  Civil  Revisions 
having  no  merit    are  bound  to  fail,  which  are  dismissed 
accordingly with no order as to cost. 
 
                                         (Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 Judge 
     Approved for reporting. 
 
        Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Syed Zameer 
 
 
