
Further argued that concurrent findings cannot be set aside in 
revisional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court;  gift  mutations  were  proved  by 
producing  its  attesting  witnesses;  the  Lumbardar,  Naib  Tehsildar, 
Qanungo  and  Patwari  have  also  appeared  as  witnesses  to  prove  the 
transfer  of  the  property  in  dispute  and  have  supported  the  claim  of  the 
respondent; there is no misreading and non-reading of the relevant record; 
the petitioner had gifted the disputed property to her father on account of 
natural love and affection and the ingredients of gift were completed; the 
petitioner has challenged the gift mutations after the period of more than 
14 years and as such the suit has been filed only to harass the respondent; 
the petitioner has not denied her thumb impression on the gift mutation; 
the  petitioner  never  raised  allegation  of  fraud  against  her  father  Barkat 
Ali; the respondent is in possession of the property without interruption; 
entries in ‘Roznamcha Waqiyati’ support the claim of the respondent. The question 
of maintainability of a suit is to be determined by the court on the basis of 
facts of the case and law on the subject. offer, acceptance and transfer 
of  possession  have  not  been  proved;  the  respondent has  failed  to  prove 
that  petitioner  personally  got  executed  the  gift  mutation;  the  learned 
appellate court has not given issue-wise findings; the entries of Mutations 
No.1307  and  1308  on  the  same  date  are  raising  doubt  about  its 
genuineness; the petitioner has been deprived of her inheritance without 
her  consent. The  upshot  of  the  above  reasoning  is  that  the  Civil  Revision  is 
allowed,  both  the  Judgments  and  decrees  passed  by  the  learned 
Additional District Judge, Mailsi dated 13.12.2004 in appeal and learned 
Civil Judge Mailsi dated 13.11.2003 are set aside and the suit filed by the 
petitioner  is  decreed  with  the  result  that  both  the  mutations  bearing 
numbers  1307  and  1308  dated  29.6.1987  are  declared  to  be  illegal  and 
void  and  the  property  measuring  8-kanals  belonging  to  petitioner  is 
restored to her name and the remaining 8-kanals is restored to the name of 
Barkat Ali, father of the parties, to be inherited by his legal heirs. In  view  of  this  legal  position  and  after 
denial  of  transfer  of  property  by  petitioner,  the  onus  shifted  to  the 
respondent/defendant  to  prove  the  genuineness  of  the  gift  mutations 
No.1307 and 1308. By 
stating in the plaint that the petitioner neither transferred her share to her 
father nor she appeared before the revenue authorities for transfer of the 
same  and  the  mutations  were  based  on  fraud,  misrepresentation  and 
collusion,  it  means  that  petitioner  was  asserting  certain  facts  which 
opened  the  door  for  her  to  seek  legal  remedy  for  redressal  of  her 
grievance; hence she would have cause of action to approach the court. The respondent has not stated that who identified the petitioner at 
the time of alleged transfer of property by petitioner to her father Barkat 
Ali. None of the witnesses produced by 
the respondent has stated that in their presence petitioner had offered to 
gift  her  property  to  her  father  and  he  had  accepted  the  same  and 
possession had been transferred by petitioner. The  respondent  claimed  that  petitioner  through  gift  mutation 
No.1307 had herself transferred the property to Barkat Ali, father of the 
parties,  on  account  of  natural  love  and  affection. Hence, the nature of transaction 
to be a gift has not been supported by both the attesting witnesses and as 
such  the  respondent  has  failed  to  prove  the  transaction  to  be  a  gift. The learned counsel argued that 
petitioner  being  an  illiterate  ‘Parda  Nasheen’  lady  has  denied  the 
execution of gift mutations and the onus to prove the genuineness of gift 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. The 
respondent  claimed  that  transfer  of  land  through  gift  mutation  was 
genuine, petitioner does not have cause of action and the suit filed by her 
is not maintainable. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:7:-
stated that the property was gifted by petitioner to her father and transfer 
of consideration in the form of money had not taken place. The  petitioner  stated  that  she  had 
neither gifted the suit property to her father nor she ever appeared before 
the  revenue  authorities  for  entry  of  mutation  No.1307  and  the  said 
mutation was based on fraud, misrepresentation and collusion and prayed 
that the same be set aside. As  the  private  witnesses 
have not been able to prove the gift transactions, the evidence of official 
witnesses  would  be  of  no  use  because  the  identity  of  the  woman  who 
appeared  before  them  has  not  been  established  and  they  could  not 
themselves  properly  identify  the  petitioner  without  the  identification  of 
private witnesses who have not deposed about identity of the petitioner. Reliance  is  placed  on  Mst.Shafqat  Parveen  v. 
Muhammad Iftikhar Amjad and others (2012 SCMR 1602) wherein the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan has explained the ingredients of valid 
gift and burden of proof is on the beneficiary in the following terms: 
“In Muhammadan Law, offer, acceptance and delivery of possession are 
the  three  essential  ingredients  of  a  valid  gift  and  the  onus  was  on  the 
petitioner to prove these components.” 
16. In view of the aforementioned findings, it is held that the learned 
trial  court  had  wrongly  held  the  suit  of  the  petitioner  not  to  be 
maintainable. On inquiry from the revenue officers, it 
transpired that the petitioner’s property had been transferred firstly to her 
father through mutation No.1307 and then to respondent through mutation 
No.1308,  both  mutations  were  executed  on  the  same  date  i.e. The learned counsel for respondent has  argued  that petitioner has 
not  denied  her  thumb  impression  on  the  mutation  and  entries  in 
‘Roznamcha  Waqiyati’  fully  corroborate  the  validity  of  the  gift. The learned courts below have dismissed the suit on the ground that 
petitioner does not have cause of action and the suit is not maintainable. Moreover, 
in view of my finding mentioned above that respondent has not been able 
to prove that the petitioner got the gift mutation sanctioned and the entries 
in  ‘Roznamcha  Waqiyati’  have  lost  significance  and  cannot  be  used  to 
corroborate the gift that has not been proved otherwise. Both  the  witnesses  DW2  Naseeruddin  and  DW3  Nazir 
Ahmad have not supported the claim of the respondent that this was a gift 
mutation rather they stated it to be sale.