JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE.  
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
 
R.S.A.No.143 of 2016.  
 
Nawab and another  
 Vs.          
Pehlwan Khan (deceased) through L.Rs and others  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
DATE OF HEARING:  
 
APPELLANTS BY:   
 
 
RESPONDENTS BY:   
 
09.11.2018.  
Syed  Ali 
Advocate.  
Raza  Gillani, 
M/s  M.  Baleegh-uz-Zaman 
Chaudhry 
Imran  Arif 
Ranjha, Advocates.  
and 
 
 
 
AMIN-UD-DIN KHAN, J.     Through 
this 
second 
appeal  the  appellants  have  challenged  the  judgment  &  decree 
dated  19.03.2016  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District 
Judge, Jhang whereby the first appeal filed by the appellants was 
dismissed  and  the  judgment  &  decree  dated  24.06.2014  passed 
by  the  learned  Civil Judge  1st  Class, Jhang  whereby  the suit  for 
declaration in the alternate for specific performance filed by the 
appellants/plaintiffs was dismissed.  
2. 
 
 I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  at 
full length and also gone through the record minutely with their 
able assistance.  
R.S.A.No.143 of 2016.  
2 
3. 
 
The  suit  was  filed  by  the  appellants  on  27.04.2001 
on the basis of an agreement to sell dated 17.04.1993 pleading as 
a  sale  deed,  therefore,  suit  for  declaration  was  filed  and  in  the 
alternate  a  prayer 
for  specific  performance  was  made. 
Subsequently plaint was amended and mutations No.993 attested 
on  19.04.2001  and  1904  attested  on  31.03.2001  were  also 
challenged.  
 
The  written  statement  was  filed  and  suit  was  contested. 
Learned  trial  court  framed  the  issues  and  invited  the  parties  to 
produce their respective evidence. Both the parties adduced oral 
as  well  as  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  their  versions. 
After  the  completion  of  trial  suit  was  dismissed  by  the  learned 
trial  court  vide  judgment  &  decree  dated  24.06.2014.  Feeling 
aggrieved  thereby,  an  appeal  was  preferred  before  the  learned 
first  appellate  court,  which  also  met  with  the  same  fate  vide 
judgment & decree dated 19.03.2016. Hence, this second appeal 
before this Court.  
4. 
 
The  alleged  agreement  is  by  Mohabbat  Khan  the 
attorney of original owner Pehlwan Khan. The view taken by the 
learned  courts  below  is  that  plaintiffs  failed  to  prove  that  the 
consideration  amount  was  reached  to  the  owner  Pehlwan  Khan 
as  Mohabbat  Khan  (general  attorney)  is  near  relative  of  the 
plaintiffs and a connivance with the plaintiffs has been observed 
by the learned courts below in the transaction.  It is on the record 
that possession was already with the plaintiffs being tenants upon 
R.S.A.No.143 of 2016.  
3 
the suit property and in part performance it was not delivered to 
the  plaintiffs.  It  is  also  on  the  record  that  original  owner  after 
coming  back  from  performance  of  Hajj  got  revoked  the  general 
power of attorney on 13.07.1993, which clearly shows a refusal 
for  performance  of  agreement,  if  any,  in  favour  of  plaintiffs  by 
the original owner. The suit was filed on 27.04.2001, which also 
shows that it was beyond the period of limitation for filing a suit 
for  specific  performance.  Though  the  courts  below  have  not 
considered  this  aspect  of  the  case  and  decided  issue  No.10 
against the defendants but this fact is important one. I am further 
of  the  view  that  when  a  transaction  was  claimed  through 
attorney, it was the duty of plaintiffs to prove that original owner 
was  not  available  at  the  place  where  the  parties  were  entering 
into agreement to sell and the attorney was having full powers to 
enter  into  agreement  to  sell  the  suit  property.  I  have  minutely 
scrutinized  the  power  of  attorney  Exh.D-11,  with  regard  to 
transfer of land relevant paragraph is as under:- 
 لقتنم نہر، میسقت ، ہلدابت
 ،کیلمت ،ہبہ
 
 
 ، عیب
 
 ہعیرذب
 
 وک 
 ہروکذم یضارا
 دیرخ لشی ڈوجنان ماٹشا ہمانعیب
 
 ضرغب ۔ےرک لوصو نہر رز
 
 عیب رز ۔ےرک
۔ےرک 
At  this  juncture  it  will  be  appropriate  to  consider  legal 
implications of sale and agreement to sell.  For ready reference I 
would  like  to  reproduce  Section  54  of  the  Transfer  of  Property 
Act, 1882 as under:- 
R.S.A.No.143 of 2016.  
4 
“54.  “Sale  Defined.”  “Sale”  is  a  transfer  of  ownership  in 
exchange for a price paid or promised or part paid and part 
promised.  
Sale  how  made.  Such  transfer,  in  the  case  of 
tangible  immovable  property  of  the  value  of  one hundred 
rupees and upwards, or in the case of a reversion or other, 
intangible  thing,  can  be  made  only  by  a  registered 
instrument.  
 
In  the  case  of  tangible  immovable  property,  of  a 
value  less  than  one  hundred  rupees, such  transfer  may  be 
made  either  by  a  registered  instrument  or  by  delivery  of 
the property.  
 
Delivery  of  tangible  immovable  property  takes 
place  when  the  seller  places  the  buyer,  or  such  person  as 
he directs in possession of the property.  
 
Contract  for  sale.  A  contract  for  the  sale  of 
immovable  property  is  a  contract  that  a  sale  of  such 
property  shall  take  place  on  terms  settled  between  the 
parties.” 
 
The  definition  of  “Contract”  under  the  Contract  Act,  1872  as 
provided under section 2 (h) is that an agreement enforceable by 
law is a contract.   
5. 
 
In  my  view  the  powers  to  sell  the  property  do  not 
give  power  to  enter  into  an  agreement  to  sell  because  in  the 
powers of sale the consideration amount is received and property 
is sold out, whereas the agreement to sell binds both the parties 
in accordance with the terms of agreement to perform their part 
in  future. If  in  the  power  of  attorney  specific  power  of  entering 
into  agreement  to  sell  of  suit  property  is  not  provided,  an 
attorney cannot enter into agreement to sell of the property of the 
principal/owner. In case of sale a transaction is completed, rights 
and liabilities of the parties are determined through an instrument 
R.S.A.No.143 of 2016.  
5 
of  sale  and  with  the  registration  and  completion  of  same  no 
further liability of parties remains against each other but in case 
of  agreement  to  sell  both  the  parties  are  bound  to  perform  the 
terms  of  agreement  in  future,  therefore,  unless  an  attorney  is 
given  specific  powers  to  bind  the  principal  for  performance  of 
terms  of  the  agreement  in  future,  the  attorney  cannot  bind  the 
principal  and  enter  into  agreement  to  sell  of  property  owned by 
the  principal,  therefore,  this  agreement  is  bad  on  the  basis  of 
having  no  powers  with  the  attorney  to  enter  into  agreement  to 
sell of suit property.  
6. 
 
I  am  fortified  by  the  judgment  of  august  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  in  taking  the  view  expressed  supra,  reliance 
whereof  is  placed  upon  “MALIK  RIAZ  AHMED  and  others 
versus  MIAN  INAYAT  ULLAH  and  others”  (1992  S  C  M  R 
1488) as well as the judgment reported as “FIDA MUHAMMAD 
versus  Pir  MUHAMMAD  KHAN  (DECEASED)  THROUGH 
LEGAL  HEIRS  AND  OTHERS”  (PLD  1985  Supreme  Court 
341).  The  relevant  portion  of  which  has  been  rendered  in  the 
judgment  of  Malik  Riaz  Ahmad’s  case  (supra).  I  also  quote  the 
same as under:- 
“It  is  wrong  to  assume  that  every  ‘general’  power  of 
attorney  on  account  of  the  said  description  means  and 
includes  the  power  to  alienate/dispose  of  property  of  the 
principal. In order to achieve that object it must contain a 
clear  separate  clause  devoted  to  the  said  object.  The 
draftsman must pay particular attention to such a clause if 
intended  to  be  included  in  the  power  of  attorney  with  a 
view  to  avoid  any  uncertainty  or  vagueness.  Implied 
authority  to  alienate  property,  would  not  be  readily 
R.S.A.No.143 of 2016.  
6 
deducible  from  words  spoken  or  written  which  do  not 
clearly  convey  the  principal’s  knowledge,  intention  and 
consent  about  the  same.  The  Courts  have  to  be  vigilant 
particularly when the allegation by the principal is of fraud 
and or misrepresentation.” 
 
Further  reliance  is  placed  upon  the  judgment  of  this  Court 
reported  as  “DOST  MUHAMMAD  versus  MEMBER,  BOARD 
OF REVENUE and others” (2001 MLD 2019) and the judgment 
of  Peshawar  High  Court  reported  as  “YAR  BAZ  KHAN  versus 
LAL  NAWAZ”  (PLD  1996  Peshawar  86).  The  relevant 
paragraph is as under:- 
“Before  parting  with  the  case,  I  would  like  to  emphasize 
that  an  attorney  derives  authority  from  the  principal  with 
regard  to  his  property  either  for  its  management  or 
alienation  for  a  specific  purpose.  The  agent  has  to  act 
within  the  framework  of  the  deed  which  is  depository  of 
the  intention,  rights,  liability  and  authority  of  parties  and 
cannot travel beyond its scope and purview of its recitals. 
By re-passing confidence in agent, he is expected in law to 
act  for  the  benefit  of  his  principal.  His  conduct  and 
performance  of  duty  enjoined  upon  him  is  subject  to 
certain  commotions  and  limitations.  For  instance,  where 
an  agent  is  appointed  to  sell  Hussain  principal’s  goods, 
and he buys the same for himself on his own account  but 
the  principal  ratifies  it,  the  transaction  is  not  void.  But 
where  there  is  conflict  between  the  duty  and  interest,  the 
agent  must  disclose  the  undertaking,  which  results  in 
wrongful gain to him and wrongful loss to his principal, so 
as to enable the latter to rescind the deal with third party. 
Understood in this sense, a holder of power of attorney to 
manage immovable property, though invested with power 
to  alienate  property,  is  required  to  act  for  the  benefit  and 
not to the detriment of the principal. If he intends to derive 
benefit  for  his  own  self  or  his  next  of  kin,  he  should 
inform his principal prior to entering into such transaction. 
Any  clandestine  deal  without  disclosure  to  principal  will 
not  bind  the  latter  nor  will  be  enforced  in  law.  In  the 
present  case, it  will  have  been  seen that both  the  gift  and 
sale  transactions  affected  by  holder  of  power  of  attorney 
were  tainted  with  deception  and  fraud  and  their  validity 
cannot  be  upheld  on  any  weapon  of  reasons.  Both  the 
Courts below have overlooked and ignored the prominent 
R.S.A.No.143 of 2016.  
7 
facts highlighted above and have thus acted with material 
irregularity 
the 
transactions in question. The principal or his successor-in-
interest cannot be bound with such illegal deals.”  
legal  effects  on 
in  assessing 
their 
 
It is the case of the respondents that the attorney has transferred 
the property in favour of his near relative, which was also a bar 
without special consent of the principal. In this context, reliance 
is  placed  upon  “HAJI  FAQIR  MUHAMMAD  and  others  versus 
PIR MUHAMMAD and another” (1997 S C M R 1811).  
7. 
 
Even otherwise there are concurrent findings of fact 
recorded by two courts below and the courts below while passing 
the impugned judgments & decrees took a count of every bit of 
evidence available on the file and nothing is shown to have been 
over  looked  any  part  of  the  record  from  their  judicious 
consideration. The findings of learned courts below on question 
of fact and law are based upon proper appreciation of oral as well 
as documentary evidence, which are not liable to be reviewed or 
substituted  by  this  Court  while  exercising  jurisdiction  under 
section 100 of the CPC. Therefore, I am unable to disagree with 
the  concurrent  findings  recorded  by  both  the  learned  courts 
below.    Resultantly,  this  second  appeal  having  no  scope  stands 
dismissed with costs throughout.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             (Amin-ud-Din Khan) 
 
               Judge 
Qurban* 
 
 
 
 
Approved for Reporting  
 
 
          Judge   
