Stereo. HCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Writ Petition No.173-R of 2011 
 
The Punjab Cooperatives Board for Liquidation  
Versus 
Dr. Nazir Saeed etc. 
==================================================== 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of Hearing:-  
Petitioners by:- 
Respondents by:- 
19.11.2018. 
Syed Aal-e-Ahmad, Advocate. 
Mian Subah Sadiq Wattoo, AAG. 
 
CH. MUHAMMAD IQBAL, J:-  
Through 
this  writ  petition,  the  petitioner  has  challenged  the 
validity  of  order  dated  31.01.2011  passed  by  the 
Member  (Judicial-V)/Chief  Settlement  Commissioner, 
Board  of  Revenue,  Punjab  whereby  alleged  allotment 
against  Khata  RL-II  No.7 
in  Shivpura  Kalan 
measuring  345-Kanals  15-marlas  was  declared  bogus 
and resumed in favour of the state.  
2. 
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  one  Syed  Nisar 
Ahmad etc., filed application/complaint on 27.08.2004 
alleging therein that their father Muhammad Islam was 
displaced person who got temporary allotment of land 
measuring  50-Kanals  3-Marlas  in  village  Shivpura 
Kalan, Tehsil Cantt., Lahore.Mst.Ummatul Hameed an 
alleged  evacuee  claimant  also  got  allotted  evacuee 
land  measuring  345-Kanals  15-Marlas  including  land 
measuring  50-Kanals  3-Marlas  already  temporarily 
allotted to predecessor of said Syed Nisar Ahmad, the 
alleged  subsequent  allottee  got 
incorporated  her 
allotment  order  in  revenue  record  on  the  basis  of 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
2 
robkar  dated  23.10.1984  and  mutation  No.123,  dated 
30.10.1984 was sanctioned in the revenue record in her 
favour. She transferred said land in favour of National 
Industrial  Finance  Corporation  Limited  vide  mutation 
No.124,  which  was  further  transferred  in  the  name  of 
Muhammad Ashiq vide mutation No.125. The District 
Collector,  Lahore  reviewed  all  the  aforementioned 
mutations 
but 
the  Additional  Commissioner 
(Revenue),  Lahore  vide  order  dated  02.04.1988 
restored the said mutations. Muhammad Ashiq further 
alienated  land  measuring  345-Kanals  15-Marlas  to 
Park View Cooperative Housing Society vide mutation 
No.258  dated  14.12.1990.  Respondents  No.2 
to 
7/applicants/complainant  filed  application  claiming 
therein  that  they  are  still  in  possession  of  land 
measuring  50-Kanals  3-Marlas  temporarily  allotted  to 
their  predecessor  and  Mst.  Umat-ul-Hameed  etc., 
fraudulently  got  allotted  the  said  land  through  fake, 
fictitious  and  non-existent  order  of  the  settlement 
office whereas her claim was never received in Lahore 
from  Karachi  for  any  allotment.    After  hearing  the 
concerned 
parties,  Member 
(Judicial-V)/Chief 
Settlement  Commissioner,  Board  of  Revenue,  Punjab 
resumed  land  measuring  345-Kanals  15-marlas  in 
favour  of  the  state  and  also  rejected  application  of 
Syed  Nisar  Ahmad  etc.,  vide  order  dated  31.01.2011. 
Hence,  this  writ  petition  on  the  ground  that  the 
petitioner  is  bonafide  purchaser  and  Chief  Settlement 
Commissioner  has  no  jurisdiction  to  pass  such  order, 
as  such,  order  is  erroneous  which  is  liable  to  be 
reversed.   
3. 
Heard. Record perused. 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
3 
4. 
Admittedly, suit land measuring 345-Kanals 15-
Marlas  situated  in  village  Shivpura  Kalan,  Tehsil 
Cantt.,  Lahore  is  an  evacuee  property.  From  the 
perusal  of  inquiry  conducted  by  the  Chief  Settlement 
Commissioner 
in  Khata  RL-II  No.7  shows  that 
Mst.Umat  ul  Hameed  etc.  the  alleged  allottees  were 
the  resident  of  Karachi.  There  is  no  any  order  placed 
on  record  which  shows  that  their  claim  was  ever 
transferred from Karachi to Lahore by the order of any 
competent  authority.  Neither  any  order  dated 
28.09.1972  allegedly  passed  by 
the  Additional 
Settlement  Commissioner  Lands  Lahore  is  appended 
with  this  petition  nor  produced  before  the  Chief 
Settlement  Commissioner.  The  alleged  order  dated 
28.09.1972  on  which  basis  all 
the  allotments, 
mutations  and  alienations  are  structured  has  never 
been  passed  by  any  Additional  Commissioner  Lands 
Lahore  nor  the  same  is  brought  on  record  by  the 
petitioner, as such, all the superstructure so built on the 
said  foundation  stood  automatically  collapsed  as  a 
clear  fraud  was  committed  by  Umat-ul-Hameed  etc., 
with  the  evacuee  property.  It  is  well  settled  law  that 
fraud  vitiates  the  most  solemn  proceedings  and  any 
edifice  so  raised  on  the  basis  of  such  fraudulent 
transaction stood automatically dismantled and any ill-
gotten  gain  achieved  by  committing  fraud  cannot  be 
validated  under  any  laws.  Reliance  is  placed  on  the 
cases  of  Nawab  Syed  Raunaq  Ali  etc.  Vs.  Chief 
Settlement  Commissioner  &  Others  (PLD  1973  SC 
236), The Chief Settlement Commissioner, Lahore Vs. 
Raja  Muhammad  Fazil  Khan  and  others  (PLD  1975 
SC  331),  Muhammad  Younus  Khan  &  12  Others  Vs. 
Government  of  N.W.F.P.  through  Secretary,  Forest 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
4 
and  Agriculture,  Peshawar  &  Others  (1993  SCMR 
618),  Lal  Din  &  Another  Vs.  Muhammad  Ibrahim 
(1993  SCMR  710),  Khair  Din  Vs.  Mst.  Salaman  & 
Others  (PLD  2002  SC  677),  Talib  Hussain  &  Others 
Vs.  Member,  Board  of  Revenue  &  Others  (2003 
SCMR  549),  Khadim  Hussain  Vs.  Abid  Hussain  & 
Others  (PLD  2009  SC  419),  Lahore  Development 
Authority Vs. Firdous Steel Mills (Pvt.) Limited (2010 
SCMR  1097).  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  in  a  recent  judgment  reported  as  Messrs 
Beach  Luxury  Hotels,  Karachi  Vs.  Messrs  Anas 
Muneer  Ltd  and  others  (2016  SCMR  222)  observed 
that  when  a  matter  was  re-opened  the  Additional 
Settlement  Commissioner  was/is  empowered  to  re-
examine  all  the  facts  pertaining  to  the  title  of  the 
parties  from  the  very  inception  and  to  decide  the 
matter  according  to  available  record  as  per  law  and 
similarly  in  the  instant  case  the  matter  was  referred 
back  to  the  Notified  Officer  by  this  Court  to  afford 
hearing to the parties and decide the same on merits, as 
such, he was fully competent to investigate the whole 
case as an adjudicating forum. Reliance in this regard 
is  placed  on  the  following  judgments  of  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan as well as of this Court:-  
i) In Custodian of Evacuee Property, Lahore Vs. 
Syed  Saifuddin  Shah  (represented  by  his  heirs) 
(PLD 1981 SC 565).  
ii)  In  Shamrooz  Khan  Vs.  Muhabbat  Khan  and 
another (1989 SCMR 819).  
iii)  In  another  judgment  reported  as  Syed 
Wajihul  Hassan  Zaidi  Vs.  Government  of  the 
Punjab and others (PLD 2004 SC 801).  
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
5 
iv)  A  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  in  a  case 
reported  as  Muhammad  Baqir  Vs.  Haji  Shokat 
Ali and 3 others (2005 CLC 1106). 
The  main  trunt  of  the  allottee’s  claimant  is  that  she 
was  allotted  land  on  the  basis  of  order  passed  in 
Appeal  No.66/1973  by  the  Settlement  Commissioner 
on  04.06.1973,  whereas  from  the  perusal  of  record  it 
evinces 
that  neither  appeal  No.66/73  was  ever 
entertained,  nor  mentioned  in  any  official  register 
maintained    by  any  competent  authority.  Repeatedly 
the orders were passed for the production of the order 
of allotment before respondent No.1 but  allottee or the 
petitioner  despite  being  subsequent  purchaser  and 
beneficiary has neither produced said order before the 
Chief  Settlement  Commissioner  nor  even  before  this 
Court which default itself speak about non-existent of 
the  allotment  order  as  well  as  postulate  the  existence 
of fraud in the preparation of such a fake order and it 
can conveniently said that a fraud was committed with 
the  evacuee  property  on  the  basis  of  alleged  bogus 
order dated 28.09.1972 which was never passed by any 
competent  authority.  Further  the  proposal  as  well  as 
recommendation  for  allotment  of  the  land  were 
prepared  by  an  Advocate  who  has  no  power  or 
authority  in  this  regard  whereas  under  Para  63-68  of 
Rehabilitation  Settlement  Scheme,  only  Patwari, 
Qanoongo  and  Revenue  Officer  are  authorized  to 
make  such  recommendation  after  consultation  of  the 
official  record  whereas  order  dated  06.04.1973  is  a 
fake  order  which  is  passed  in  violation  of  Para  63-68 
of Settlement Scheme. Such disposal of land can only 
be confirmed by Deputy Rehabilitation Commissioner 
after  fifteen days  fixed  for  filing  the  objections  but  in 
this case the proposal was confirmed by the settlement 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
6 
authorities  on  the  same  date  in  violation  of  the 
instructions contained in para 68 of settlement scheme, 
as  such,  order  dated  06.04.1973  passed  by  Settlement 
Commissioner  Lands  Lahore  is  without  authority 
against  the  law  which  can  be  ignored.  Even  Chief 
Settlement  Commissioner  entertained  complaint  of 
Syed  Nisar  Ahmad  on  27.08.2004  and  passed 
restraining order for alienation of the evacuee land but 
despite  presence  of 
stay  order 
the  Registrar 
Cooperative  Societies  Punjab  passed  the  order  dated 
14.10.2004  regarding  the  merger  of  the suit land  with 
DHA  beyond  his  vested  jurisdiction  as  he  was  not 
competent to pass such order.  
5. 
As  regards  the  claim  of  the  petitioner  to  be  the 
bonafide  purchaser  and  has  protection  of  law  under 
Section 41 of T.P.A., suffice it to say that it is settled 
law  that  a  purchaser  is  saddled  with  extraordinary 
responsibility  of  taking  care  and  caution  and  to  a 
deeply  scrutinize  the  genuiness  or  originality  or 
legality of the title of the vendor before purchasing the 
land  under  the  principle  of  caveat  emptor  subject  to 
incidence of Sections 10 & 11 of Transfer of Property 
Act  and  any  infirmity  or  deficiency  in  the  title  found 
later shall always travel with the land and purchaser is 
precluded  to  subsequently  raise  plea  of  protection 
available under Section 41 of the Transfer of Property 
Act  rather  they  have  to  face  the  rigors  of  their  own 
committed  negligence  for  non-conducting  a  bonafide 
and  reasonable  investigation  into  title  of  the  vendor 
under the principle of Caveat Emptor. Reliance can be 
placed on the case reported as Muhammad Yamin and 
others  Vs.  Settlement  Commissioner  and  others  1976 
SCMR 489). Since the alleged allotment of Mst. Umat 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
7 
ul Hameed was declared as bogus by Chief Settlement 
Commissioner whereafter vendee has no right, title or 
interest  in  the  demised  premises  as  it  has  to  soar  and 
sink  with  the  allottee,  as  such,  it  is  clear  that  no 
protection  is  available  to  the  petitioner  under  Section 
41  of  the  Transfer  of  Property  Act  as  settled  by 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in a reported case 
titled  Bashir  Ahmad  and  Others    Vs.  Additional 
Commissioner 
with 
powers 
of 
Settlement 
Commissioner (L) and others (1983 SCMR 1199) held 
as under:- 
“…Since,  an  allotment  of  land  is  subject  to  the 
provision  of  sections  10  and  11,  every  purchaser 
from a allottee is to be saddled with the knowledge 
that  the  transaction  of  purchase  is  subject  to  the 
incidence  of  those  sections  and  as  such  he  cannot 
raise  the  plea  of  protection  on  the  principle  of 
section  41  of  the  Transfer  of  Property  Act.  His 
remedy  is  not  against  the  Department  but  against 
the vendor. We are, therefore, inclined to hold  that 
the  view  taken  in  the  earlier  two  cited  cases  will 
govern the contention raised before us.” 
In  another  case  titled  Talib  Hussain  &  Others  Vs 
Member,  Board  of  Revenue  &  Others  (2003  SCMR 
549), the Hon’ble Apex Court held as under:- 
is 
important 
to  emphasis 
“It 
that  petitioner’s 
entitlement  is  based  upon  the  entitlement  of  Syed 
Nizamuddin,  therefore,  petitioner  either  to  have 
survive  or  sink  depending  upon  determination  of 
legal status of the property which was transferred to 
him and as now he has failed to keep his entitlement 
alive,  therefore,  petitioner’s  claim  is  bound  to  be 
rejected.” 
In  a  case  titled  Abdul  Hamid  Vs.  M.B.R.  and  others 
(1994 CLC 1160), this Court held as under:- 
“4.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  has 
contended  that  all  the  petitioners  are  bona  fide 
purchasers for value of the land from the transferee 
and  they  are  entitled  to  retain  the  same.  It  is  not 
disputed that transfer in favour of Noor Muhammad 
was  found  to  be  fraudulent.  Not  only  that  it  was 
further  found  by  the  Notified  Officer  that  Noor 
Muhammad, the real claimant, A was not traceable 
and  some  other  person  had  obtained  allotment  by 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
8 
impersonating him. As the vendor of the petitioners 
had no right in the land, he could not pass any title 
to  the  petitioners  and  they  have  no  consequently 
legal  right  to  retain  the  land  (See  Gul  Muhammad 
and  others 
v.  The  Additional  Settlement 
Commissioner  and  others  (1985  SCMR  491)  and 
Manzoor Hussain v: Fazal Hussain and others (1984 
SCMR 1027).”   
This  Court  in  a  reported  case  Mst.  Aziz  Bibi  &  22 
Others  Vs  Additional  Commissioner  (Revenue)  with 
the  Powers  of  Settlement  Commissioner  (Lands), 
Lahore  Division  &  Another  (2002  YLR  3268)  has 
observed that “since an allotment of land is subject to 
the  provision  or  sections  10  and  11,  every  purchaser 
from  an  allottee  is  to  be  saddled  with  the  knowledge 
that  the  transaction  of  purchase  is  subject  to  the 
incidence of those sections and as such he cannot raise 
the  plea  of  protection  on  the  principle  of  bonafide 
purchaser as envisaged in section 41 of the Transfer of 
Property  Act.  His 
remedy 
is  not  against 
the 
Department but against the vendor. 
In  another  case  titled  as  Rasheed  Ahmad  &  2  Others 
Vs  Additional  Commissioner  (Rev.)  Notified  Officer 
Gujranwala  Division,  Gujranwala  &  Others  (2007 
CLC  1801)  the  learned  Division  Bench  of  this  Court 
held as under:- 
“8.  Abdul  Baqi  is  the  original  allottee.  His  claim 
was found bogus. Sale in favour of respondents will 
not  confer  better  title  to  them.  They  will  sink  or 
swim  with  him  and  thus,  are  not  protected  under 
section  41  of  the  Transfer  of  Property  Act.  We 
respectfully follow the above view.     
6. 
Further, the petitioner stated that Bilqees Barkat 
alienated land measuring 18-Kanals 1-Marla in favour 
of  National  Industrial  Finance  Corporation  Limited 
vide  mutation  No.454  sanctioned  in  favour  of  PCBL 
on  18.01.2003  and  the  petitioner  is  bonafide  alienee  
/transferee of the said land and its right in the property 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
9 
are  duly  protected  suffice  it  to  say  that  the  petitioner 
has  already  sold  out  the  said  land  to  one  Muhammad 
Ayub  son  of  Haji  M.  Saddique  against  full  paid 
consideration  through  a  registered  sale  deed  dated 
12.06.2003 whereafter petitioner has least concern any 
further  with  the  suit  property.  Moreover  the  alleged 
allotment  order  was  passed  in  1972,  whereas  the 
allottee  after  about  a  period  of  more  than  12  years 
sought  for  the  implementatment  of  allotment  order 
without advancing a reason for being dormant for such 
a  long  time  which  also  make  very  allotment  as  non 
existent  as  such  entire  proceedings  of  allotment  are 
fictitious  and  fake  in  nature.  Moreover,  learned 
Member  (Judicial-V),  Board  of  Revenue  /  Chief 
Settlement  Commissioner  /  Administrator  (Residual 
Properties)  /  Notified  Officer,  Punjab  declared  entire 
the  allotment  in  favour  of  Mst.  Bilqees  Barkat  as 
forged  and  bogus  vide  Order  dated  24.4.17  which 
order was assailed further in writ petition No.79106-R 
of  2017  and  this  Court  vide  order  dated  28.09.2017 
upheld  the  above  maintaining  that  she  is  not  holding 
any  legal  valid  allotment  in  her  favour.  Learned  law 
officer also produced the original file of the settlement 
department before this Court and from perusal of said 
record  it  reveals  that  there  is  no  any  allotment  order 
was ever passed by any competent authority in favour 
of Mst. Bilqees Barkat against RL-II No.7. The alleged 
order  dated  28.09.1972  is  not  available  in  the  judicial 
file  of  the  Chief  Settlement  Commissioner  even  the 
record  of  appeal  No.66/73  also  not  available  whereas 
land  measuring  345  Kanals  15-Marlas  was  allotted  in 
the  name  of  Umat-ul-Hameed  etc.,  on  the  basis  of 
alleged 
order 
dated 
06.04.1973  which  was 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
10 
incorporated  in  the  revenue  record  in  the  year  1984 
whereas no such order of allotment was ever passed by 
the  Chief  Settlement  Commissioner 
regarding 
allotment  in  favour  of  Umat-ul-Hameed  or  Bilqees 
Bibi  etc. Further, the  wording of alleged  robkar  dated 
23.10.1984, is as under:- 
  رورذک 
  
قبہر منتقلی
ئےابر سے لتاعد  سے ںستخطود ےرھما کہ جو
 
23.10.84
 خہرمو ربکاور
  رپوشیخو ضعمو لابا جہرمند
 
RL-II7
 نمبر تہکھا نکہکیو ہے تیجا کی خمنسو تھی ئیہو یرجا لابا
14.9.06
 ہے جعلی روا ضیفر نیوچھا رہولا تحصیل
 
   
 
From  perusal  of  copy  of  alleged  RL-II  No.7  it  is 
written as under:- 
 
6.4.73
۔ہے تاجا کیا
 مکنفر ا 
 
۔رہولا
) لینڈ( 
کمشنر سسٹنٹا
ذھ تہکھا
 
زومرا ییزنگرا حکم لہابحو
 
It  is  asserted  that  the  Assistant  Land  Commissioner 
confirmed  the  allotment  on  the  basis  of  order  dated 
06.04.1973 but the  above order  is not  available in  the 
record  of  settlement  department  and  petitieoner  was 
time and again required to produce the said order but it 
could  not  produce  the  same  before  any  forum  even 
before 
this  Court.  Moreover  Chief  Settlement 
Commissioner  vide  notification  No.1624/78/855/RL 
dated 19th June, 1978 decided that any allotment which 
has  not  yet  been  incorporated  in  the  revenue  record 
before  coming  into  force  of  the  Evacuee  Property  & 
Displaced  Persons  (Repeal)  Act,  1975  or  within  one 
year  after  passing  of  allotment  order,  whichever  is 
later,  may  be  deemed 
to  have  been  obtained 
fraudulently  by  anti-dating  the  entries  in  the  register 
R.L.II  and  should  be  considered  as  cancelled 
forthwith,  after  hearing  objections,  if  any,  of  the  so-
 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
11 
called  allottee.  For  ready  reference,  notification 
whereof is reproduced as under:- 
 
 
 
 
                 No.1624/78/855/RL 
      Office of the Member Board of Revenue  
 
(Settlement & Rehabilitation Wing) 
Punjab. 
Dated Lahore the 19.6.1978. 
Mian Waheed-ud-Din Rathoro, 
Secretary (Rural) 
(Settlement & Rehab. Wing) 
Board of Revenue Punjab. 
 
 
 
 
From 
 
 
 
 
To 
1.  All  the  wholetime  Settlement  Commissioners 
(L)  &  Addl:  Settlement  Commissioners  (L) 
Punjab. 
2.  All  the  Deputy  Commissioners  and  Assistant 
Commissioners (ASC) (L) in the Punjab. 
Subject:  Allotment of resumed land to informers etc. Mr. 
A.K.Khalid,  C.S.C./Member  Board  of  Revenue 
(S&R) Punjab. 
Memorandum:  
The  Chief  Settlement  Commissioner 
/ 
Member, Board of Revenue(S&R) Punjab, has been 
pleased  to  decide  that  any  allotment  that  has  not 
been  incorporated  in  the  revenue  record  before 
coming  into  force  of  the  Evacuee  Property  & 
Displaced Persons (Repeal) Act, 1975 or within one 
year of the passing of allotment order, whichever is 
later,  may  be  deemed  to  have  been  obtained 
fraudulently by anti-dating the entries in the register 
R.L.II  and  should  be  cancelled  forthwith,  after 
hearing objections, if any, of the so-called allottee 
 
2.  The  Chief  Settlement  Commissioner/Member 
Board  of  Revenue(S&R)  Punjab,  has  further  been 
pleased  to  order  that  all  cases  where  land  has  been 
resumed  on 
'Mukhbari'  applications filed  by 
attorneys of the original claimants should invariably 
be submitted to the Chief Settlement Commissioner 
for  necessary  orders  as  he  thinks  necessary  with 
regard  to  the  proposal/allotment  of  the  land  so 
resumed,  under  Section  14  (1A)  of  the  Displaced 
Persons  (Land  Settlement  Act,  1958,  read  with 
section  3  of  the  Evacuee  Property  &  Displaced 
Persons Laws (Repeal) Act, 1975.  
 
3.  You  are, 
to 
ensure strict  compliance  of  orders  of  Chief 
requested  kindly 
therefore, 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
Settlement  Commissioner/  Member  Board  of 
Revenue accordingly, without further delay. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sd/-SECRETARY RURAL) 
(SETT: & REHAB. WING) 
 
 
   BOARD OF REVENUE PUNJAB. 
No.1624/78/855/RL dated 19th June, 1978. 
A  copy  is  forwarded  to  all  the  Commissioners/Addl. 
 
Commissioners  (Settlement  Commissioners  (Land)  Punjab  for 
information and necessary action.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sd/-SECRETARY RURAL) 
(SETT: & REHAB. WING) 
 
 
   BOARD OF REVENUE PUNJAB. 
 
Despite the above unambiguous instructive or the restrictive 
order  of  the  competent  authority  the  subordinate  revenue 
officials  keep  on  incorporating  the  allotment  order  in  the 
revenue  record  which  necessitated 
the  reiteration  and 
recirculation  of  above  notification.  The  successor  Chief 
Settlement  Commissioner  vide  notification  dated  7th 
December  2000  again  directed  the  subordinate  revenue 
authorities  to  stop  the  further  implementation  of  bogus 
allotments in revenue record in terms of notification dated 5th 
September, 1979. For ready reference, notification whereof is 
reproduced as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From 
 
 
 
  
No.2127-2000/3321/PA/Secy (S&R), 
Board of Revenue, Punjab, 
Farid Kot House, Lahore, 
Dated the 7th Dec:2000 
 
The Board of Revenue, Punjab. 
To 
1.  All Commissioners in the Province. 
2.  All Deputy Commissioners in the Province.    
Subject: 
ORDER  OF  SENIOR  MEMBER,  BOARD  OF 
REVENUE/MEMBER JUDICIAL-I, IN ROR NO.2469 
/  95,  SHAUKAT  ALI  ETC  VERSUS  PROVINCE  OF 
PUNJAB DATED 18-07-2000. 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
13 
It  is  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  that  various  persons 
from all walks of life, either sitting behind the scene or in the open 
are out to grab valuable evacuee property through fraud, forgery or 
manipulation.  
Two cases were recently detected in which allotment orders 
were  fabricated  and  bogus  verification  was  made.  The Deputy 
Commissioner,  Gujranwala  has  been  directed  to  get the  criminal 
cases registered against the culprits. 
The case mentioned at subject noted above was decided by 
the  Senior  Member/Member-Judl.1,  dated  18-7-2000  copy  of 
which  is  enclosed.  The  revenue  authorities  implemented  bogus 
allotment  in  Register  RL-II  dated  1971  in  revenue  record  in  year 
1995.  Whereas 
instructions 
issued  by 
the  Settlement  & 
Rehabilitation 
Wing 
of 
Board 
of 
Revenue,  
Punjab,  Notification  No.  1624/78/854,  dated19-06-1978  are  as 
under:- 
that 
decide 
“The  Chief  Settlement  Commissioner/Member, 
Board  of  Revenue(S&R)  Punjab,  has  been  pleased 
to 
any  
allotment  that  has  not  been  incorporated  in  the 
revenue  record  before  coming  into  force  of  the 
Evacuee  Property  &  Displaced  Persons  (Repeal) 
Act,  1975  or  within  one  year  of  the  passing  of 
allotment order, whichever is later, may be deemed 
to  have  been  obtained  fraudulently  by  anti-dating 
the  entries  in  the  register  R.L.II  and  should  be 
cancelled forthwith, after hearing objections, if any, 
of the so-called allottee”. 
In view of the situation explained above, the Chief Settlement 
Commissioner,  Punjab/Member,  Board  of  Revenue,  has  been 
pleased to direct as follows:- 
1.  No mutation transferring proprietary rights of the land allotted 
by any order should be sanctioned without prior approval of the 
Chief Settlement  Commissioner, Punjab verbally  as well as  in 
writing by  an officer not less than a Deputy Commissioner of 
the District personally to avoid further fraud.  
2.  A fraud is always a fraud and it is well settled law that no body 
can  be  allowed  to  reap  the  Fruit  of  fraud  and  retain  ill-gotten 
gains.  In  order  to  achieve  this  objective  all  allotments  made 
after  repeal  of  Settlements  Laws  in  year  1975  will  have  to  be 
reviewed  and  as  a  start  the  Deputy  Commissioners  are 
requested to send all allotment orders received in their districts 
after 1990 to the Board of Revenue, Punjab for re-verification.  
lays  down that 
allotments obtained on the basis of forged or fabricated orders 
are  total  nullity  in  the  eyes  of  law and,  therefore,  should  be 
3.  Notification  dated  5th  September,  1979 
Writ Petition No.173-R/2011 
 
 
 
14 
ignored  as  non-existent and  the  land  treated  as  still  available 
for  disposal.  The  Deputy  Commissioner  are  directed  to  trace 
out  such  allotments  and  take  necessary  action  in  the  light  of 
these instructions. 
 
MEMBER, BOARD OF REVENUE/ 
CHIEF SETTLEMNT COMMISSIONER, 
PUNJAB, LAHORE 
 
 
 
 
NO. & DATE EVEN 
 
A copy is forwarded for information to:- 
1.  The Chief Secretary, Government of the Punjab, Lahore 
2.  The Senior Member, Board of Revenue, Punjab. 
 
MEMBER, BOARD OF REVENUE/ 
CHIEF SETTLEMNT COMMISSIONER, 
PUNJAB, LAHORE 
Perusal  of  record  further  shows  that  the  alleged  robkar  was 
issued and incorporated in the revenue record, much after the 
promulgation  of  notifications  dated  19.06.1978  whereby  a 
clear  ban  was  imposed  on  incorporation  of  any  entry 
regarding the ancient allotment orders in the revenue record. 
But in the case in hand the alleged impugned allotment order 
was  passed  in  1972  whereas  same  is  belatedly  incorporated 
in  the  revenue  record  in  1984  which  is  clear  violation  of 
aforementioned notifications, as such the notified officer has 
rightly  passed  the  impugned  order  and  has  committed  no 
illegality calling for interference in the impugned orders.  
7. 
As  discussed  above,  the  instant  writ  petition  is 
misconceived,  as  such,  the  same  is  hereby  dismissed  being 
devoid of any merit.  
     
              
 
         (Ch. Muhammad Iqbal) 
             Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
Shahzad Mahmood 
 
Approved for reporting.  
 
JUDGE 
 
 
