 
 
 
 
             Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
    
   IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
 
 
      
 
          Fozia Khalid  
 
              WP No.235025/2018     
   Election Appellate Tribunal, etc 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
Vs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
Petitioner By: 
Respondents By: 
 
 
    J U D G M E N T  
14.09.2018 
Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Shaukd, Mr. Tahir Munir 
Malik, Mr. Taha Asif and Rana Imran, Advocates. 
Mian  Sultan  Tanvir  Ahmad  and  Hafiz  Mubshar 
Ullah, Advocates for Respondent No.3. 
Mr.  Nasar  Ahmad  and  Mr.  M.  Javaid  Kasuri, 
DAGs. 
 
 
Ayesha  A.  Malik  J:  Through  this  petition,  the  Petitioner  has 
challenged  order  dated  12.9.2018  passed  in  Election  Appeal  No.354-A  of 
2018. It may be noted that the instant petition  is fixed as urgent, for today. 
Counsel for Respondent No.3, Mian Sulan Tanvir Ahmad  is present before 
the Court as are Mr. Nasar Ahmad and Mr. M. Javaid Kasuri, DAGs. Since 
the parties present before the  Court have no objection  to  the  request  of  the 
Petitioner  to  the  case  to  be  heard  in  its  entirety,  given  the  urgency  in  the 
matter, we proceed to decide the issues raised in this Petition.  
2. 
The  basic  facts  are  that  the  Petitioner  is  the  sitting  Chairperson  of 
District Council, Toba Tek Singh. While holding the office of Chairperson, 
she filed nomination papers for the Bye-Election of the Provincial Assembly 
in  PP-118,  Toba  Tek  Singh-I.  Objections  were  filed  by  Respondent  No.3 
against the nomination papers on the ground that she is barred under Section 
28 (1) of the Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 (“PLGA”) to contest the 
Bye-Election  as  she  has  not  tendered  her  resignation  from  the  post  of 
Chairperson,  District  Council,  Toba  Tek  Singh.  The  Returning  Officer 
rejected  the  objections  vide  order  dated  3.9.2018  on  the  ground  that  the 
matter  has  been  decided  in  Election  Appeal  No.6  of  2018  titled  “Al-Haaj 
Azhar Iqbal Satti v. Returning Officers and others” and since scrutiny has to 
be  conducted  in  terms  of  Articles  62  and  63  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 
WP No.235025/2018 
2 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (“Constitutions”)  and  Section  231  of  the 
Elections  Act,  2017  (“Elections  Act”),  the  Petitioner  is  qualified  and 
allowed  to  contest  the  Bye-Election.  Against  this  order,  Respondent  No.3 
filed  an  Election  Appeal  before  the  Election  Tribunal  which  was  allowed 
and  the  order  of  3.9.2018  was  set  aside.  Consequently,  the  nomination 
papers  filed  by  the  Petitioner  were  rejected.  Being  aggrieved  by  the  order 
dated  12.9.2018,  the  Petitioner  is  now  before  this  Court  essentially  on  the 
ground  that  Section  28  of  the  PLGA  is  not  a  precondition  to  the  filing  of 
nomination  papers  and  that  the  Petitioner  is  not  required  to  tender  her 
resignation until the last date for withdrawal of candidature and publication 
of revised list of contesting candidates. As per the schedule provided for the 
Bye-Election, the last date of withdrawal of candidature is 15.9.2018, hence 
the urgency in the matter. 
3.  Mr.  Muhammad  Shahzad  Shaukat,  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  argued 
that  the  impugned  order  has  treated  Section  28  (1)  of  the  PLGA  as  a 
precondition to the filing of the nomination papers. Learned counsel argued 
that in terms of Section 2 of the Elections Act a candidate is a person whose 
name  is  proposed  and  seconded  for  election  to the  Assembly  or  the  Senate 
and  a  validly  nominated  candidate  is  a  candidate  whose  nomination  papers 
have been accepted. A contesting candidate is a validly nominated candidate 
who  has  not  withdrawn  his  candidature.  Learned  counsel  argued  that  in 
terms of these definitions, the Petitioner was a validly nominated candidate 
as her nomination papers were accepted and since she was not a contesting 
candidate,  she  had  the  right  to  withdraw  her  candidature  on  15.9.2018  or 
tender  her  resignation  as  the  case  may  be.  Learned  counsel  argued  that 
Section  28  (1)  of  the  PLGA,  allows  a  Mayor,  Deputy  Mayor,  Chairman  or 
Vice  Chairman  to  contest  the  election  for  any  political  office  after 
resignation from the aforesaid office. The option of  may contest means that 
the  Petitioner  has  the  right  to  contest  elections  once  she  becomes  a 
contesting candidate. Therefore, in terms of Section 28 (1) of the PLGA she 
must tender her resignation before becoming a contesting candidate. It is the 
case of the Petitioner that she had the option to tender her resignation by or 
WP No.235025/2018 
3 
before 15.9.2018 being the last date for withdrawal of candidature meaning 
thereby that the order of the Returning Officer was in accordance with law 
and  the  Appellate  Tribunal  failed  to  appreciate  this  point.  Learned  counsel 
placed reliance on the judgment dated 25.6.2018 passed in Election Appeal 
No.6/2018  titled  “Al-Haaj  Azhar  Iqbal  Satti  v.  Returning  Officer  and 
another”,  judgment  dated  12.9.2018  passed  in  WP  No.231135/2018  titled 
“Muhammad  Riaz  v.  Appellate  Authority”  and  “Rana  Salman  Mahmood 
Khan v. Returning Officer and another” (2008 CLC 316).  
4. 
On  behalf  of  Respondent  No.3,  it  is  argued  that  the  bar  contained  in 
Section  28  (1)  of  the  PLGA  is  applicable  at  the  time  of  filing  nomination 
papers  as  the  purpose  of  the  bar  is  to  prevent  a  person  holding  office  of 
Chairman or Vice Chairman, Mayor or Deputy Mayor from participating in 
the  election  and  influencing  the  election  on  the  basis  of  their  being  office 
holders of the local government. Learned counsel further argued that in such 
cases the office holder as mentioned in Section 28 (1) of the PLGA can exert 
influence  over  the  electoral  process,  which  will  defeat  the  entire  election 
process.  He  also  argued  that  in  this  case,  the  Petitioner  is  travelling  on 
official duty and the instant Petition has been filed by her husband  and that 
she has not tendered her resignation to date whilst she seeks the opportunity 
to  tender  her  resignation  by  15.9.2018  without  being  present  in  person. 
Learned  counsel  argued  that  once  the  scrutiny  process  is  over  and  the 
Petitioner  being  the  Chairperson  of  District  Council,  Toba  Tek  Singh  is 
declared fit to contest the election, there is no further mechanism under the 
Elections Act on the basis of which it can be determined whether or not the 
Petitioner tendered her resignation before publication of the list of contesting 
candidates.  Consequently  if  the  relief  claimed  by  the  Petitioner  is  allowed 
those who are barred under Section 28 of the PLGA may very easily contest 
the  elections  rendering  the  purpose  of  Section  28  (1)  of  the  PLGA  as 
redundant.  
5. 
In  rebuttal,  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  explained  that  the 
Petitioner  is  out  of  the  country  on  official  duty  and  has  issued  a  special 
power  of  attorney  in  favour  of  her  husband  to  file  the  instant  petition.  The 
WP No.235025/2018 
4 
original  special  power  of  attorney  was  produced  before  the  Court.  He  also 
showed a copy of the resignation prepared by the Petitioner, which he stated 
is being presented to the Court to show the bona fides of the Petitioner that 
in  the  event  she  is  allowed  to  contest  the  election  she  will  tender  her 
resignation immediately. Learned counsel stated that he can also provide an 
undertaking before this Court that the Petitioner will tender her resignation, 
if the Court allows the instant petition.  
6.  Mr.  Nasar  Ahmad,  DAG  supports  the  contentions  raised  by  the 
learned counsel  for the Petitioner. He argued that the right to participate in 
elections  is  a  fundamental  right  and  the  PLGA  cannot  curtail  this  right  by 
reading  the  bar  in  Section  28  (1)  of  the  PLGA  as  a  precondition  for  filing 
nomination papers. 
7.  We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length. The basic 
issue before the Court is the time frame within which a resignation should be 
tendered  by  the  Mayor,  Deputy  Mayor,  Chairman  and  Vice  Chairman  in 
order  to  contest  elections  for  any  other  political  office,  in  terms  of  the  bar 
contained in Section 28 (1) of the PLGA. For ease of reference Section 28 of 
the PLGA is reproduced below:- 
28.  Bar  against  dual  membership.  (1)  A  Mayor,  a  Deputy  Mayor,  a 
Chairman or a Vice Chairman may contest election for any other political 
office  after  resigning  from  the  office  of  the  Mayor,  Deputy  Mayor, 
Chairman or Vice Chairman.  
(2) A member of a local government, other than the Chairman of a Union 
Council,  may  contest  election  for  any  other  political  office  without 
resigning  from  the  membership  of  the  local  government  but  any  such 
member shall not simultaneously hold more than one office. 
(3)  If  a  member  of  a  local  government  is  elected  to  any  other  political 
office,  on  the  notification  of  election  of  that  political  office,  his  seat  as 
member of the local government shall become vacant. 
(4) If a Chairman of a Union Council is elected as the Mayor or a Deputy 
Mayor, or as the Chairman or a Vice Chairman of the District Council, he 
shall  cease  to  be  the  Chairman  of  the  Union  Council  and  the  seat  of  the 
Chairman of the Union Council shall stand vacated. 
(5)  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  apply  to  bar  a  member  of  a  local 
government to contest the election of Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Chairman or 
Vice Chairman of a local government or a member of an Authority. 
 
The  Section  calls  for  resignation  by  the  names  of  the  office  in  the  local 
government scheme in the event that the holder of such office opts to contest 
elections of any other political office. The spirit behind the bar imposed on 
WP No.235025/2018 
5 
dual  membership  is  that  the  holders  of  specific  positions  being  Mayor, 
Deputy  Mayor,  Chairman  and  Vice  Chairman  should  not  be  allowed  to 
contest for any other political office due to the nature of their post.  They sit 
at the highest level in the local government  and are in a position to use the 
resources from the mentioned offices, including  their staff for campaigning 
purposes and can influence the election process. The mandate of Section 28 
(1)  of  the  PLGA  is  to  prevent  a  single  person  from  holding  office  whilst 
contesting  for  another  political  office  as  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  an 
office holder should dedicate his or her time to their official duties and not 
towards  personal  advancement.  The  bar  ensures  that  office  holders  do  not 
unfairly leverage their present position against other candidates or that they 
maintain public offices as a fall back.   
8. 
In  terms  of  the  judgments  relied  upon by  the learned  counsel for  the 
Petitioner, two of the judgments are by the Election Tribunal in which it is 
stated that the use of the expression „may contest election’ does not include 
the  stage  of  filing  of  nomination  papers  and  a  person  is  considered  to  be 
contesting the  election  once  they  become  a  contesting  candidate  as defined 
under the law. In another case in WP No.231135/2018, the Court considered 
the bar contained in Section 28 of the PLGA and while relying on 2008 CLC 
316  (supra)  the  Court  finds  that  mere  filing  of  nomination  paper  is  not 
sufficient for the purpose of being qualified to contest the election and it  is 
only  after  the  nomination  papers  are  accepted  that  a  validly  nominated 
candidate,  who  has  not  withdrawn  his  candidature,  is  ready  to  contest  the 
election. There is no cavil to the fact that every person has a right to contest 
elections  and  that  this  being  a  fundamental  right  can  only  be  reasonably 
curtailed.  The  legislature  was  mindful  of  the  fact  that  the  named  office 
holders  in  Section  28  of  the  PLGA  exert  power  and  influence  at  the  local 
government  level  and  have  a  large  amount  of  resources  available  to  them. 
Therefore,  in  order  to  prevent  any  influence  over  the  electoral  process  it  is 
required  that  they  resign  from  their  office  prior  to  contesting  the  election. 
We find that the word contest is not a defined term in the PLGA and should 
therefore  be  given  its  plain  meaning,  which  is  to  compete  and  engage  in 
WP No.235025/2018 
6 
competition.  In  this  case,  the  competition  is  the  election  process  and  to 
contest the election means to participate in the election process. The election 
schedule  for  the  Bye-Election  dated  17.8.2018  reveals  that  the  election 
process  started  when  public  notice  was  issued  by  the  Returning  Officer  on 
27.8.2018 and ends on the polling day being 14.10.2018. The entire process 
as  per  the  schedule  is  a  step  by  step  procedure  towards  the  holding  of  the 
Bye-Election.  For  the  purposes  of  a  candidate  the  schedule  reflects  the 
stages at which the candidate will participate in order to contest the election. 
The august Supreme Court of Pakistan in “Muhammad Khan v. Obaidullah 
Jan  Babat  and  others”  (PLD  2016  SC  492)  has  already  declared  that 
elections  stand  for  a  step  by  step  process  towards  a  certain  result  and  is  a 
continued  process  consisting  of  a  series  of  steps  which  are  to  be  taken  at 
different stages as per the schedule contained in the notification published in 
the  official  gazette.  Hence  as  per  the  plain  meaning  a  candidate  who  „may 
contest’ in the elections means that a candidate take part in the step by step 
process leading upto the polling date. 
9. 
The Petitioner before the Court seeks interpretation of the word „may 
contest‟ to be read in conjunction with the defined term contesting candidate 
under Section 2 (xiii) of the Elections Act. The meaning given to contesting 
candidate  in  the  Elections  Act  is  specifically  for  the  purposes  of  giving 
meaning to the provisions of the Elections Act contained in Sections 64, 65, 
66, 67 and 68 which set out the process where a validly nominated candidate 
can withdraw its candidature prior to his or her name being published in the 
list  of  contesting  candidates.  A  contesting  candidate  for  the  purpose  of 
Elections Act is one who has not withdrawn his or her candidature, who is 
allotted  an  election  symbol  under  Section  67  of  the  Elections  Act  and  is 
named in the list of contesting candidates.  Therefore, the fact that a validly 
nominated  candidate  can  withdraw  its  candidature  under  Section  65  of  the 
Elections Act does not create a right in favour of the Petitioner to contest the 
election  whilst  holding  office  of  Chairperson,  District  Council,  Toba  Tek 
Singh  simply  because  she  has  the  right  to  withdraw  her  candidature  under 
Section  65  of  the  Elections  Act.  The  Petitioner  is  required  to  file  her 
WP No.235025/2018 
7 
nomination  papers  with  all  necessary  declarations  which  will  include  her 
decision to resign from Chairperson, District Council, Toba Tek Singh. The 
Returning Officer at the stage of scrutiny must consider the bar contained in 
Section  28  of  the  PLGA  because  a  Mayor,  Deputy  Mayor,  Chairman  and 
Vice Chairman cannot participate in the election process while retaining the 
named  office.  The  entire  process  of  participating  and  contesting  election  is 
for  the  benefit  of  the  voter  and  the  intent  of  Section  28  of  the  PLGA  is  to 
create a level playing field to all candidates who participate in the election. 
In this regard, we are fortified by the view given in “Syed Sarfraz Hussain 
Shah  v.  Additional  District  and  Sessions  Judge/Returning  Officer  and  16 
others” (PLD 2008 Karachi 64). 
10.  We are of the opinion that the bar contained in Section 28  (1) of the 
PLGA  becomes  applicable  when  a  Mayor,  Deputy  Mayor,  Chairman  and 
Vice  Chairman  decides  to  contest  a  political  office,  in  this  case  being  the 
Bye-Election,  at  the  stage  of  filing  the  nomination  papers.  In  terms  of 
Section 60 of the Elections Act, a candidate shall file its nomination papers 
with  a  declaration  that  he  fulfills  the  qualifications  specified  in  Article  62 
and is not disqualified under Article 63 of the Constitution for being elected 
as a member. Every nomination paper is delivered to the Returning Officer 
who shall make the nomination along with annexures open to inspection by 
the  public.  In  terms  of  Section  62  of  the  Elections  Act  any  voter  of  the 
constituency  may  file  objections  to  the  candidature  at  the  time  of  scrutiny. 
The Returning Officer shall decide upon the objections raised and may either 
of his own  motion or  upon  any  such objection  conduct  a summary  enquiry 
and  reject  the  nomination  papers  if  he  is  satisfied  that  a  candidate  is  not 
qualified to be elected as a member. The purpose of the scrutiny process and 
the right of filing an objection is to give the voter the chance to participate 
and  ensure  that  all  candidates  who  participate  in  the  election  are  qualified 
and  have  made  full  disclosure  under  the  law.  It  ensures  that  the  voter  is 
informed at the time when the vote is cast and that all relevant information is 
available  to  help  the  voter  make  an  informed  decision.  After  the  scrutiny 
process if a candidate‟s nominations papers are accepted, there is no further 
WP No.235025/2018 
8 
scrutiny  of  the  candidates  as  the  name  of  the  candidate  is  published  in  the 
list of contesting candidates, provided that the candidate has not withdrawn 
his or her nomination papers. Thereafter a candidate will be able to contest 
the election as the process is completed by allocation of election symbol and 
polling takes place on the polling date. If a candidate holding dual office is 
not required to resign at the time of filing nomination papers and it is left to 
choice that he or she may tender resignation once they become a contesting 
candidate,  there  is  a  very  strong  risk  that  such  a  candidate  may  contest  the 
election without resigning. In such a scenario the candidate who happens to 
be  Mayor,  Deputy  Mayor,  Chairman  or  Vice  Chairman  will  effectively 
contest  the  election  whilst  holding  office,  which  goes  against  the  spirit  of 
Section 28 of the PLGA. It also means that the factum of dual membership is 
left  unchecked  since  a  candidate  will  of  its  own  vocation  either  tender 
resignation  or  not.  The  outcome  is  that  not  only  does  this  complicate  the 
election  process  and  subject  it  to  disputes  and  challenge  but  it  also  means 
that  the  purpose  of  the  bar  contained  in  Section  28  of  the  PLGA  is  totally 
defeated.  
11.  We  also  find  that  if  the  issue  of  dual  membership  is  left  unchecked 
prior to the elections and it is questioned after the elections it will render the 
candidate  disqualified  under  the  Elections  Act.  When  confronted  with  this 
question, learned counsel for the Petitioner informed the Court that if, at all, 
such a situation arises then the objection can be taken post-election and the 
matter  can  be  looked  into  at  that  point.  However, we  are  not satisfied  with 
this  response  as  it  means  that  a  person,  who  could  not  have  contested  the 
election  in  the  first  case,  contested  the  election  without  fulfilling  the 
requirements of Section 28 of the PLGA. It also means that if any objection 
is made post-election on this issue, the candidate stands to be disqualified for 
holding  dual  membership.  If  dual  membership  is  a  disqualification  in  the 
post-election  scenario  it  stands  to  reason  that  it  is  a  disqualification  in  the 
pre-election scenario.   
12.  Another  aspect  of  this  issue  is  the  burden  placed  on  the  election 
process and the voter, simply because the holder of the offices mentioned in 
WP No.235025/2018 
9 
Section  28  of  the  PLGA  has  to  make  a  choice  and  where  the  decision 
involves  the  risk  of  loosing  the  present  office.  If  the  holders  of  the  barred 
offices  do  not  resign  before  filing  nomination  papers, they  can  be  declared 
successful in the elections for the other political office.  This means that the 
candidate is able to exercise his or her choice after going through the entire 
election process.  If the candidate  is successful they  resign  from  the  present 
office  and  if  unsuccessful  they  go  back  to  their  present  office.  In  all 
situations the issue is one of personal choice and the risk attached with such 
choices.  A  candidate  cannot  use  the  offices  named  in  Section  28(1)  of  the 
PLGA as a fall back position in the event that he or she is not successful in 
the  run  for  some  other  public  office,  in  this  case  the  Provincial  Assembly. 
We  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  Petitioner  has  the  right  to  choose  between 
either offices and cannot require the entire process to bear the burden of her 
„risk‟. Time and again we have been informed  by her counsel  that she will 
resign  if  she  can  contest  the  Bye-Elections.  In  this  regard,  we  are  of  the 
opinion that a wrong precedent cannot be set to comply with the wishes of 
one candidate.  
13.  The „resign to run‟ principal is premised on encouragement to run for 
public office and to make the process of election more competitive. It creates 
a level playing field and ensures that a person holding public office does not 
divert  its  resources  for  personal  advancement.  It  is  also  a  check  on  those 
holding public office and ensures that they do their jobs and can account for 
the time spent in office. Public resources and functions are safeguarded and 
the sanctity of the election process is maintained.     
14. 
In view of the aforesaid, we find no illegality in the impugned order. 
Petition stands dismissed in limine. 
 
(MASUD ABID NAQVI) 
 
 
    JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
            (AYESHA A.MALIK) 
                      JUDGE 
 
 
 
Anwaar* 
    JUDGE 
 
 
                      JUDGE 
