FORM No.HCJD/C-121 
 
ORDER SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No. 214647 of 2018 
 
Shabbir Hussain 
 
Additional District Judge, Kasur etc.  
Versus 
 
 
                                  
S.No.of 
order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of 
order/ 
Proceeding 
 
 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of Parties of 
counsel, where necessary.    
25.05.2018      Mr. Basharat Ali Janjua, Advocate for the petitioner. 
 
 
 
 
 
Through 
this  writ  petition  following 
prayer has been made:- 
the 
that 
“Under  the  circumstances,  it  is  very 
humbly  prayed 
impugned 
judgments and decrees dated 2.6.2015 & 
13.3.2018 passed by the learned trial and 
appellate  court  respectively  may  please 
be  set  aside;  rather  the  decrees  be 
reversed i.e. in favour of the petitioner.” 
 
2. 
 
I  have  heard  preliminary  arguments 
advanced  by  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  at 
length and gone through the record.  
3. 
 
According  to  brief  facts  of  the  case 
plaintiff-petitioner  on  27.6.2011  filed  a  suit  for 
permanent  and  mandatory 
injunction  whereas 
private  respondents  Muhammad  Ibrahim  etc.  on 
3.8.2011  filed  a  suit  for  possession  under  section  9 
of the Specific Relief Act, 1877. Respective written 
Writ Petition No. 214647-2018 
2 
statements  were  filed  and  suits  were  contested.  As 
per learned counsel consolidated issues were framed 
on  8.2.2013.  Petitioner  was  recorded  as  plaintiff  as 
his  suit  was  prior  in  time.  His  oral  evidence  was 
recorded as PW and witnesses of the other side were 
recorded  as  DWs.  Same 
is 
the  position  of 
documentary evidence as Exh.P and Exh.D. Learned 
trial  court  dismissed  the  suit  filed  by  the  petitioner 
and  decreed  that  of  the  respondents  through  a 
consolidated  judgment  dated  2.6.2015.  As  per 
learned  counsel  revision  petition  was  filed  against 
the consolidated judgment challenging both parts of 
the  judgment  whereby  suit  of  the  respondents  was 
decreed  and  that  of  the  petitioner  was  dismissed. 
Revision  petition  was  dismissed  vide  judgment  and 
decree dated 13.03.2018. 
4. 
 
I have noticed that decree sheet of the suit 
of  the  petitioner  along  with  consolidated  judgment 
of  the  learned  trial  court  has  been  appended  with 
this writ petition. The decree sheet of the other case 
has  not  been  appended.  When  confronted  with  the 
learned  counsel  that  against  the  decree  of  the  suit 
filed  by  the  respondents  under  section  9  of  the 
Specific Relief Act, 1877  a revision was competent 
by  the  petitioner/judgment-debtor  but  against  the 
Writ Petition No. 214647-2018 
3 
dismissal of the suit filed by the petitioner an appeal 
was  required  to  be  filed,  admittedly  which  has  not 
been filed and his suit stood dismissed, how he can 
challenge  the  judgments  through  this  writ  petition 
passed  in  favour  of  respondents  whereby  their  suit 
was decreed and revision filed by the petitioner was 
dismissed, 
learned  counsel  states 
that  as 
the 
judgment  was  consolidated,  therefore,  the  revision 
petition  was  filed.  Argues  that  even  if  the  revision 
was  not  competent  and  appeal  was  competent,  the 
court was competent to convert the revision petition 
into an appeal. I am afraid the principle stated by the 
learned  counsel  for  conversion  of  revision  into 
appeal  and  appeal  into  revision  is  question  of  law 
but that principle is not applicable to the facts of this 
case as against the judgment and decree passed in a 
suit  filed  by  the  respondents  under  section  9  of  the 
Specific Relief Act, 1877 a revision was competent 
and  no  appeal  was  competent  which  was  rightly 
filed  by  the  petitioner  but  against  the  dismissal  of 
his suit an appeal was required to be filed which was 
not  filed,  therefore,  no  question  of  conversion  of 
revision  into  appeal  is  applicable  in  this  case.  In 
these  circumstances,  when  petitioner  has  not 
challenged the judgment and decree of dismissal of 
Writ Petition No. 214647-2018 
4 
his  suit  before  the  appellate  forum  which  attained 
finality  and  only  challenging  the  judgment  and 
decree passed in favour of respondents whereby suit 
filed  under  section  9  of  the  Act,  ibid,  was  decreed 
and revision was dismissed the petitioner is required 
to  show  some  jurisdictional  defect  but  the  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioner  could  not  show  any  such 
defect 
in 
the  orders 
impugned 
through 
this 
constitutional  petition  nor  I  have  seen  any  defect 
therein,  therefore,  indulgence  of  this  Court  while 
exercising  powers  under  Article  199  of 
the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973 is 
not  warranted  through  the  constitutional  petition  in 
hand.  In  this  view  of  the  matter,  when  the  orders 
have  been  passed  in  accordance  with  law,  same 
cannot be declared to be without jurisdiction, hence, 
this  writ  petition  having  no  force  stands  dismissed 
in limine.   
(AMIN-UD-DIN KHAN)                                           
JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
Mazhar* 
  
 
 
 
 
 
