Stereo. HCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.232496 of 2018 
 
Nawaz Sharif Social Security Hospital 
Versus 
Additional District Judge, Lahore etc. 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of Hearing:  
Petitioner by: 
Respondents No.3 to 5 by: 
 
22.11.2018. 
Mr. Saqib Mubarik Bhatti, Advocate 
Pir Masood Ahmad Chishti, Advocate 
CH. MUHAMMAD IQBAL, J:-   Through  this  writ  petition, 
the  petitioner  has  challenged  the  validity  of  order  dated 
24.05.2018  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Judge,  Lahore  whereby 
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC filed by the petitioner 
was  dismissed  and  also  assailed  the  order  dated  18.08.2018 
passed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore  who 
dismissed the civil revision of the petitioner.  
2.  Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner and respondents 
entered into license agreement regarding affiliation of University 
College  of  Medicine  &  Dentistry  with  petitioner  Nawaz  Sharif 
Social Security Hospital Multan Road, Lahore on 08.11.2005 for 
a  period  of  10  years.  The  University  was  allowed  to  avail  the 
medical  facility  of  said  hospital  for  teaching  purposes  to  its 
students.  The  petitioner  issued  first  notice  dated  22.01.2011  to 
respondents  No.3  to  5  to  vacate  the  hospital  premises  after  the 
expiry  of  the  stipulated  period  of  the  agreement.  A  subsequent 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
2 
notice  dated  14.10.2017  was  also  issued  for  vacation  of  the 
premises.  Respondents  No.3  to  5  filed  suit  for  declaration 
alongwith  permanent  injunction.  The  petitioner  filed  application 
under  Order  VII  Rule  11  CPC  for  rejection  of  the  plaint  which 
was  contested  by  the  respondents  and  the  learned  Civil  Judge, 
Lahore  dismissed 
the  said  application  vide  order  dated 
24.05.2018.  The  revision  petition  of  the  petitioner  was  also 
dismissed  by  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore  vide 
order dated 18.08.2018. Hence, this writ petition. 
3.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submits  that  period  of 
agreement  has  been  expired  and  respondents  No.3  to  5  did  not 
fulfill the terms and conditions of the said agreement; that suit for 
declaration  is  not  maintainable  under  Section  42  of  the  Specific 
Relief  Act but  the learned courts  below  illegally  and  unlawfully 
dismissed the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC as well 
as Revision Petition of the petitioner;. 
4.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents  No.3 to 
5 submits that concurrent findings are established in favour of the 
respondents  which  gains  sanctity  in  the  eyes  of  law;  that  the 
respondents fulfilled all the terms and condition of the agreement 
and no illegality has been committed.  
5.  Admittedly,  an  agreement  dated  8th  November  2005  for 
affiliation 
of  University  College 
of  Medicine  & 
Dentistry/respondent  No.3  with  the  petitioner‟s  Hospital  was 
executed  between  the  parties  after  settlement  of  terms  and 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
3 
condition inter-alia the  most  relevant stipulation  (clause, 14, 15, 
20, 22 & 24) whereof are as under:- 
AGREEMENT  FOR  AFFILIATION  OF  UNIVERSITY 
COLLEGE  OF  MEDICINE  &  DENTISTRY WITH  SOCIAL 
SECURITY HOSPITAL, MULTAN ROAD, LAHORE 
xiv.  University  College  of  Medicine  &  Dentistry,  the  party  of 
the second part shall pay an amount of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five 
hundred thousand only) in advance to the party of the first part as 
affiliation fee. 
xv. 
University  College  of  Medicine  &  Dentistry,  the  party  of 
the  second  part  shall  pay  a  sum  of  Rs.6,00,000/-  (Rupees  six 
hundred  thousand  only)  to  the  Chief  Executive  of  Social  Security 
Hospital  Multan  Road  Lahore  per  month  for  payment  to  the 
employees of hospital other than those receiving honorarium.  
xx. 
The  Agreement  shall  be  for  10  years  extendable  with 
mutual consent of both the parties after expiry of this period. While 
for termination of this agreement, the same shall be done with a 05 
years prior notice which shall not be served in first 05 years of the 
agreement  meaning 
this  agreement  shall  be 
irrevocable for first 10 years. 
thereby 
that 
xxii.  Neither  party  of  the  first  part  nor  party  of  the  second  will 
engage each other into litigation.  
If any additional facility is required by the hospital, party of 
xxiii. 
the second part shall provide the same with mutual consent. 
xxiv.  In  case  any  issue  arises,  it  will  be  sorted  out  between  the 
chief  Executive  and  the  Dean,  Faculty  of  Heath  Sciences. 
However,  if  the  same  is  not  resolved  at  local  level,  it  will  be 
referred  to  the  Commissioner,  PESSI,  whose  decision  shall  be 
final. 
The  above  agreement  was  terminable  under  clause  xx  whereof 
after  expiry  of  period  of  five  years  from  execution  of  the 
agreement  by  giving  5  years  notice  in  advance  from  terminus 
date.  During  existence  of  the  above  arrangement,  the  petitioner 
served  notice  on  22.01.2011  for  termination  as  well  as  the  non-
extension of  agreement as per clause  XX of  the agreement. The 
said notice dated 22.01.2011 is reproduced as under:- 
“The undersigned wants to bring into your kind notice that PESSI 
intends  to  establish  its  own  Medical  College  for  which  the 
Institution  requires Nawaz  Sharif  Social  Security  Hospital  Lahore 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
4 
to  be  attached  with  the  proposed  Medical  College  as  per 
requirement of PMDC. 
  
Clause XX of the agreement between PESSI and UCMD reads as: 
 
"The  Agreement  shall  be  for  10  years  extendable  with  mutual 
consent  of  both  the  parties  after  expiry  of  this  period.  While  for 
termination  of  this  agreement,  the  same  5„th  be  done  with  a  05 
years prior notice which shall not be served in first 05 years of the 
agreement  meaning 
this  agreement  shall  be  
irrevocable in first 10 years”. 
  
the  Nawaz  Sharif  Social 
It 
Security Hospital  Lahore may  kindly be vacated within five  years 
of issuance of this notice.”  
therefore, 
requested 
thereby 
that 
that 
is, 
 
As per the agreed stipulation of the agreement the full tenure of 
the  agreement  was  completed  on  08.11.2016  and  respondents 
were  under  obligation 
to  vacate 
the  demised  premises. 
Respondents  filed  application  to  the  Commissioner  Punjab 
Employees  Social  Security  Institution  (PESSI)  for  extension  of 
agreement  of  affiliation  with  the  petitioner‟s  Hospital  on  22nd 
March, 2017. For ready reference, letter whereof is reproduced as 
under:- 
and 
Dental 
Council 
(PMDC) 
It has been an honor and privilege for us to enter in the ‟Agreement 
for  Affiliation  of  University  College  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry 
(UCMD)  with  Nawaz  Sharif  Social  Security  Hospital  (NSSSH), 
Multan  Road, Lahore‟  vide  a  formal  document  dated  8th 
November,  2005  (Annex-l).  This  Agreement  is  for  ten  (10)  years 
period  w.e.f  from  the  day  of  recognition  of  UCMD  by  Pakistan 
Medical 
(Annex 
II).  On  6th  June,  2007  vide  a  Notification  in  the  Official  Gazette 
the recognition was done (Annex-lll). In view of the foregoing, the 
Agreement will be maturing on 5th June, 2017.  
 
2.  It  gives  great  pleasure  to  mention  that  during  the  aforesaid 
period of almost 12 years, our relationship with NSSH and PESSI, 
has  been  exemplary  and  marked  with  mutual  understanding, 
peaceful  cooperation  and  harmony.  We  have  lived  up  to  our 
commitments  and  will  continue  to  do  so  in  future.  Since  the 
coming in force of the Agreement till to date, we have incurred an 
expenditure  of  about  Rs.691.213  million  on  NSSH,  Lahore 
(Annex-lV).  In  return  we  earned  excellent  goodwill  and  harmony 
without asking for any financial gains. 
 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
5 
3. 
Regarding renewal of the present Agreement, I invite your 
kind  attention  to  Clause  (xx)  of  the  Agreement  that  mentions  as 
under:-  
“The  Agreement  shall  be  for  10  years  extendable  with 
mutual  consent  of  both  the  parties  after  expiry  of  this 
period.  While  for  termination  of  this  agreement,  the  same 
shall  be  done  with  a  05  years  prior  notice  which  shall  not 
be  served  in  first  05  years  of  the  agreement  meaning 
thereby that this agreement shall be irrevocable for first 10 
years” (Annex-I).  
4. The underlying principle being that a student who joins UCMD 
should not be deprived of his / her clinical training at NSSHL for 
the duration of his studies i.e. for five (05)  years from his date of 
admission.  The  same  goes  for  students  who  have  attained 
admission in November, 2016. 
5. The University of Lahore will like to renew the Agreement with 
mutual  consent  of  NSSH  for  a  further  period  of  ten  years  i.e.  till 
06th June, 2027 as per aforesaid Clause (xx). Meanwhile, we look 
forward to  your  continued  cooperation  and  benevolence  in  the 
matter.  
 
With profound regards. 
But despite the above request no extension was granted in favour 
of  the  respondents-UCMD.  On  14th  October,  2017,  petitioner 
served  another  notice  upon  the  respondents  to  vacate  hospital 
premises and a reminder dated 21st October, 2017 was also issued 
regarding  the  payment  of  outstanding  due  against  respondent. 
The details of outstanding liabilities mentioned in the letter dated 
21.10.2017 are reproduced as under:-  
letter  No.SS.MP.(MA-
to  PESSI  Head  Office 
“Reference 
Afft)/17/4362 dated 19.10.2017 on the subject cited above. 
I have been directed vide letter referred above to advise you to pay 
the  outstanding  liabilities  /  dues  towards  Nawaz  Sharif  Social 
Security Hospital Multan Road Lahore as follows:- 
 
Sr. No. 
Outstanding Liability with Period 
Serial Number of Affiliation 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Agreement 
XVII (welfare fund)  
@ Rs.1,00,000/- per year 
XXV (Utility Bills) 
 @ Rs.15,000/- per month 
XV (Honorarium to staff)  
@ Rs.8,52,500/- per month 
XVII 
specialists and admin staff) 
@ Rs.3,15,020/- per month 
(Honorarium 
to 
Rs.7,00,000/-  
(from 2010-11 to 2016-17) 
Rs.2,85,000/-  
(from April, 2016 to October, 2017 
Rs.25,57,500/-  
(from August, 2017 to October, 2017) 
Rs.9,45,060/-  
(from August, 2017 to October, 2017)  
Rs.44,87,560/- 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
6 
You  are  further  advised  to  fulfill  contractual  obligation  regarding 
the establishment of state-of-art Biomedical Workshop (Agreement 
Clause No.IX) and Medical Library (Agreement Clause No.XVI).” 
Again on 28th February, 2018 the petitioner also served notice for 
non-compliance  of  the  terms  of  agreement  settled  between  the 
parties, such as non-supply of biomedical equipment, making no 
arrangement  for  the  up  gradation  of  qualification  of  the  doctor, 
non-establishment  of  comprehensive  library  establishment  of 
welfare fund of worker and employees of the Hospital.  The text 
of said notice is reproduced as under:-  
to 
the 
refer 
cited 
subject 
 
“Kindly 
above.  
It  is  for  your  kind  notice  that  since  the  establishment  of  an 
agreement between Nawaz Sharif Social Security Hospital Multan 
Road  Lahore  and  University  College  of  Medicine  &  Dentistry 
(UCMD), compliance for the following clauses is still pending on 
your part:- 
 
Clause  No.  Vlll.  University  College  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry 
(UCMD) Lahore (party of the second part) shall provide deficient 
biomedical equipment to SSH with mutual consent and equipment 
thus  provided  will  ultimately  be  property  of  Social  Security 
Hospital, Multan Road Lahore. 
the 
and 
capacity  building  of 
 
Clause  No.  Xlll  University  College  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry 
(UCMD) Lahore party of the second part shall offer courses to the 
doctors  of  the  party  of  the  first  part  for  the  up-gradation  of  their 
qualifications 
institution.  
 
Clause  No.  XVl  University  College  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry 
(UCMD)  Lahore  party  of  the  second  part  shall  establish  a 
comprehensive  medical  library  as  per  standards  of  the  Pakistan 
Medical and Dental Council which will be the property of the party 
of the first pert ultimately. 
  
Clause  No.  XVlll  University  College  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry 
(UCMD)  Lahore  the  party  of  the  second  part  shall  establish  a 
welfare fund  for the secured workers and deserving employees of 
the  hospital.  The  initial  capital  will  be  Rs.5.00.000/-  and  
subsequently  Rs.1,00,000/-  shall  be  donated  in  this  fund  by  the 
party of the second part every year.  
Clause No. XXI  A computerized setup  with  complete networking 
of  different  sections  of  Social  Security  Hospital,  Multan  Road 
Lahore  shall  be  established  by  party  of  the  second  part  in  due 
course of time.  
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
7 
Clause  No.  XXIII  If  any  additional  facility  is  required  by  the 
hospital,  party  of  the  second  part,  shall  provide  the  same  with 
mutual consent.  
You  are  therefore  requested  to  ensure  compliance  of  above 
referred  clauses  of  the  agreement  in  true  letter  and  spirit  at  the 
earliest, please.” 
Despite  all  above  notices  and  correspondence  respondents 
contumaciously  remained  unresponsive  to  the  said  notices  and 
also  defaulted  in  payment  of  Hospital  dues  but  it  keep  on 
utilizing  the  Hospital  premises  without  any  legal  right  or 
permission of the petitioner.  
At the complete disregard to the settled terms and conditions 
of  the  agreement  as  well  as  all  above  factums  respondents 
marched  ahead  and  filed  a  suit  for  declaration  alongwith 
permanent injunction against the petitioner. In Para-3 & 4 of the 
plaint respondents took a summersaulting stance of obtaining the 
Medical  Hospital  Premises  on  rent  @  Rs.6,00,000/-  per  month 
and  paid  Rs.5,00,000/-  as  advance  on  the  basis  of  agreement 
dated 8th November, 2005. For ready reference, Para-3 & 4 of the 
plaint is reproduced as under:- 
“3.  That  the  defendants  entered  into  an  agreement  with  the 
plaintiffs  providing  hospital  premises  to  the  plaintiffs  for  medical 
education against the monthly rent of Rs.6,00,000/- per month and 
also  paid  an  amount  of  Rs.5,00,000/-  as  advance  amount,  vide 
agreement dated 8th November, 2005 for initial period of 10 years, 
which is extendable with mutual consent of the parties.  
4. That it is important to be added here that hospital premises was 
taken  on  rent  by  the  plaintiff  for  teaching  medical  student  and  as 
the period of one batch for MBBS student is 5 years, therefore, the 
Clause 20 was specifically agreed between the parties whenever if 
the defendants require eviction of the hospital, they would gave 5 
years notice4, so that the education of MBBs students may not be 
disturbed.”   
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
8 
Respondents  admitted  the  agreement  dated  8th  November  2005 
which  was  initially  for  a  period  of  10  years  extendable  with 
consent  of  the  petitioner.  As  per  Clause  XIV  of  the  said 
agreement, University College of Medicine & Dentistry (UCMD) 
was  under  obligation  to  pay  Rs.5,00,000/-  in  advance  as 
affiliation fee and under Clause XV of the agreement it was the 
obligation  of  respondents  to  pay  Rs.6,00,000/-  per  month  to  the 
petitioner  Hospital  for  payment  to  the  employees  of  hospital 
other than those who are receiving honorarium. Respondents paid 
Rs.5,00,000/-  as  affiliation  fee  as  Rs.60000/-  per  month  as  the 
monthly  salaries  of  employees  of  the  hospital.  From  applying 
microscopic  scanning  of  the  above  admitted  document  of  the 
agreement  and  its  entire  stipulation  it  can  legal  inferred  that 
agreement  was  a  license  and  unilaterally  presumption  of  the 
respondent  that  the  agreement  as  a  rent  deed  is  not  believable. 
Moreover  the  respondents  on  one  side  asserts  that  they  are 
tenants whereas on the other hand admits the agreement which is 
mere  a  license  agreement  and  both  stances  of  respondent  are 
altogether stand it different legal parlances, as such, principle of 
approbate  and  reprobate  is  fully  applicable  upon  this  case. 
Reliance  is  placed  on  the  case  of  A.R.  Khan  Vs.  P.N.  Boga 
through  Legal  Heir  (PLD  1987  SC  107).  For  ready  reference, 
relevant portion is reproduced as under:- 
“It is a well-accepted principle that a party cannot both approbate 
and  reprobate.  He  cannot  to  use  the  words  of  Honeyman,  J.,  in 
Smith v. Baker (S C 350) at the same time blow hot and cold. He 
cannot  say  at  one  time  that  the  transaction  is  valid  and  thereby 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
9 
obtain some advantage to which he could only be entitled on the 
footing  that  it  is  valid,  and  at  another  say  it  is  void  for  the 
purpose  of  securing  some  further  advantage.  See  also  per  Lord 
Kenyon, C.J., in Smith V. Hodson (2 Sm. L C 140).” 
Reliance  is  also  placed  on  the  case  reported  as  Federation  of 
Pakistan Vs. Amir Hamza  (2001  SCMR  1959), relevant portion 
whereof is reproduced as under:- 
The very factum of his invoking jurisdiction of the Tribunal  and 
preferring  proceedings  before  this  Court,  negates  legal  and 
constitutional  objections  raised  by  him.  It  may  be  observed  that 
„the appellant‟ cannot be permitted to approbate and reprobate in 
the  same  breath  i.e.  to  challenge  the  constitutionality  and 
jurisdiction  of  forum  which  he  has  himself  invoked  for  seeking 
relief under the law.  
In  another  case  titled  as  Overseas  Pakistanis  Foundation  & 
Others  Vs.  Spn.  Ldr.  (Retd.)  Syed  Mukhtar  Ali  Shah  &  Another 
(2007 SCMR 569), the August Court of the country observed as 
under:- 
It  is  also  a  settled  law  that  nobody  is  allowed  to  approbate  and 
reprobate    as  law  laid  down  by  this  Court  in  Ghulam  Rasool‟s 
case PLD 1971 SC 376. 
6. 
 
Furthermore,  suit  was 
filed  on 
the  basis  of 
misrepresentation  of the record as the  stance taken in  the  suit is 
not  in  line  with  the  agreement  executed  between  the  parties 
which  is  an  admitted  document.  As  per  the  stipulation  of  the 
agreement  it  was  kind  of  license  whereby  a  permission  was 
granted  to  the  respondents  to  avail  the  service  of  teaching 
Medical Doctor and other staff by fixing a specific period of ten 
years  and the  said period of  affiliation has  already  been  expired 
which  factum  is  admitted  by  the  respondents  as  per  their  letter 
dated  22nd  March  2017.  Admittedly,  agreement  between  the 
parties  has  expired  in  the  year  2016  and  no  renewal  has  been 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
10 
accorded  by  the  competent  authority,  as  such,  the  respondents 
have no right to retain the possession of the hospital on the basis 
of restraining order passed by the learned civil Court.  
Even  otherwise  under  Section  10  of  the  Central  Government 
Lands  and  Buildings  (Recovery  of  Possession)  Ordinance,  1965 
(Ordinance No.LIV of 1965) and the Punjab Government Lands 
and  Buildings  (Recovery  of  Possession)  Ordinance,  1966  (W.P. 
Ordinance  IX  of  1966),  the  jurisdiction  of  the  civil  Court  is 
barred to issue any restraining order. For ready reference, Section 
10 whereof is reproduced as under:- 
“10.Jurisdiction of Civil Courts barred.–  No Civil Court shall 
pass  an  order  in  any  suit  or  proceeding  granting  a  temporary  or 
interim  injunction  restraining  Government,  or  any  authority  or 
officer  authorised  by  it,  from  taking  possession  of  any  land  or 
building under this Ordinance.”   
The  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  a  case  reported  as 
M.A.  Naser  Vs  Chairman,  Pakistan  Eastern  Railways  &  Others 
(PLD 1965 SC 83) resolved this controversy and declared that in 
such like cases where licensee is entitled to a reasonable notice in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  section  63  of  the  Easements 
Act, no injunctive order can be passed held as under:- 
“From the above provisions' it is clear that this agreement merely 
conferred  a  right  to  carry  on  business  of  catering  in  the 
Refreshment Rooms and on the Buffet Cars. They were not given 
any  general  right  of  occupation  but  only  a  right  to  use  the 
Refreshment Rooms allotted to them for the exclusive purpose of 
catering refreshments. Such a right does not amount to easement 
as defined in section 4 of the Easements Act or an interest in the 
property.  Nor  can  it  be  regarded  as  a  licence  „coupled  with  a 
transfer  of  property‟  within  the  meaning  of  section  60  of  the 
Easements  Act.  Nor  can  it  be  suggested  that  the  Contractor  was 
required  „to  execute  any  work  of  permanent  character‟  in 
connection with the business. No doubt his business may involve 
complex arrangements for continued supply of refreshments both 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
11 
solid  and  liquid  but  this  cannot  be  regarded  as  “execution  of  a 
work of permanent character”. 
  
Mr. Pal faintly suggested that provision regarding assignment of 
the benefits of the agreement indicates that it was intended to be 
an  irrevocable  licence.  This  suggestion,  however,  overlooks  the 
fact  that such assignment  was only  permissible  with  the consent 
of the Administration. After fully examining the provision of the 
agreement we have come to the unhesitating conclusion that this 
licence does not  fall either within clause (a) or (b) of section 60 
of  the  Easements  Act  and  therefore,  it  was  revocable  at  the  will 
of  the  grantor.  We  may,  however,  point  out  that  there  may  be 
cases  where  parties  by  special  contract  may  make  the  licence 
which  is  prima  facie  revocable  under  section  60  an  irrevocable 
one,  but  these  clauses  of  this  agreement  envisage  no  such 
intention.  
 
Thus this being a revocable licence, the revocation thereof cannot 
be  prevented  by  injunction.  In  a  case  like  this  the  licensee  is 
entitled to  a reasonable notice in  accordance with the provisions 
of  section  63  of  the  Easements  Act.  If  however,  the  licence  is 
revoked  without  reasonable  notice  the  remedy  of  the  licensee  is 
by  way  of  damages  and  not  by  way  of  an  injunction.  
 
It  may  also  be  pointed  out  that  as  this  contract  cannot  be 
specifically  enforced,  clause  (f  )  of  section  56  of  the.  Specific 
Relief Act will operate as a bar to the grant 0f Injunction. Section 
21 of the Specific Relief Act provides that 
  
“The  following  contracts  cannot  be  specifically  enforced: 
 (a) a contract for the non-performance of Which compensation in 
money is an adequate relief; 
  
(b). . . . . . . . .  
(c). . . ..  
(d) 
 
Then section 56 says  
 
“An injunction cannot be granted 
 
(a) 
 
(b) . . .  
(c) . . . . . . .  
(d) 
. 
(e) . . . . , . . . .  
contract  which 
revocable.”  
its  nature 
in 
is 
.  
.  
a 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
(f ) to prevent the breach of a contract the performance of which 
would not be specifically enforced.”  
 
From  the  above  provisions  it  is  clear  that  as  this  is  a  revocable 
licence  and  as  adequate  relief  may  be  obtained  by  way  of 
damages this contract cannot be specifically enforced and as such 
no perpetual injunction can be granted in this case.  
 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
12 
7. 
 
From 
the  perusal  of  agreement, 
it  reveals  that 
admittedly, agreement has been expired on 07.11.2016 the suit is 
barred under Section 42 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 as in the 
absence of any agreement respondents have no right which could 
be inforced through process  of  any  law  as the petitioner  refused 
to  extend  further  period  of  agreement  and  the  information 
regarding  the  non-further  extension  of  the  period  was  disclosed 
upon the respondents through notice dated 22.01.2011 as well as 
through subsequent correspondence and after expiry of stipulated 
period no enforceable rights are attached with the said agreement 
whereas  the  respondents  by  dint  of  its  muscle  and  illegally  are 
occupying  the  premises  of  the  Hospital  and  unilaterally  enlarge 
the period whereas the life of a license agreement is restricted or 
limited  only  till  existence  of  the  permission  of  the  licensor. 
Reliance is placed in a case reported as M.A. Naser Vs Chairman, 
Pakistan Eastern Railways & Others (PLD 1965 SC 83) wherein 
Hon‟ble Apex Court held as under:- 
Some  arguments  were  advanced  to  show  that  initial  notice  of 
termination  of  the  contract  was  waived  by  the  telegram  dated 
19th March 1962 and that the period of contract was extended by 
another six months. It was therefore, contended that there was an 
obligation on the Railways to give further notice of 6 months. It 
seems  that  by  reason  of  the  request  of  the  Contractor  the 
Railways  granted  him  6  months  more  to  leave  the  Railway 
premises and to remove his goods therefrom. The Contractor then 
submitted  application  for  a  fresh  catering  contract  in  respect  of 
those  very  Stations  of  which  he  was  the  then  contractor  and  his 
application  was  granted  in  respect  of  some  of  those  Stations.  In 
view of our finding that the present suit is not maintainable it is 
not  necessary  for  us  to  express  any  opinion  on  the  questions: 
Whether it was an agreed variation or novation of a Contract or a 
mere  extension  of  time  to  enable  the  Contractor  to  fulfill  his 
obligations  under  the  contract,  and  whether  his  subsequent 
conduct  would  amount  to  estoppel,  waiver  and  acquiescence. 
These questions may be agitated in a properly framed suit. It will 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
13 
then also be for consideration whether the plaintiff who managed 
to continue as a catering contractor for about two years even after 
termination of the contract  can legitimately  complain  of want  of 
reasonable notice.  
 
In the suit there was also a prayer for a declaration under section 
42 of the Specific Relief Act that the contract in question was still 
subsisting. The learned counsel has not pressed this point before 
us. Under the provisions of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act a 
person  entitled  “to  any  legal  character”  or  to  “any  right  to 
property”  can  institute  for  a  declaratory  relief  in  respect  of  his 
title to such legal character or right to property. It will therefore, 
suffice to say that section 42 does not contemplate a suit like the 
present one.”  
This  Court  resolved  this  question  in  a  reported  case  titled 
Muhammad  Hayat  Khan  Vs  Province  of  Punjab  through 
Secretary Communication and Works & Others (2007 YLR 719) 
wherein it is held as under:-  
“9. A perusal of the aforesaid provisions of the contract when read 
together  leave  little  room  for  doubt  that  period  of  the  contract 
could be extended for a further period of two years subject to only 
two conditions firstly, with the consent of the parties, and secondly 
with the approval of the competent authority. It is not even the case 
of the petitioner that the petitioner alone had a unilateral right  for 
the extension of the contract nor are the provisions of the contract 
reproduced  above  couched  in  such  language  which  would  imply 
such a right. There is nothing in the terms reproduced above which 
can  be  read  to  matter  that  either  party  can  force  the  other  to 
continue  with  the  contract  for  an  extended  period  without  its 
consent. A perusal of the plaint and the evidence produced by the 
parties  make  it  clear  and  obvious  that  the  respondents  nor  any 
officer  competent  or  otherwise  thereof  ever  communicated  the 
consent of the respondents for the extension of the contract. At best 
it is the case of the petitioner that he made an offer for extending 
the  contract  which  was  admittedly  never  accepted.  Some  officers 
of 
internal  correspondence  only 
recommended the extension vide letter dated 6.6.2005 Exh.P.8 the 
petitioner  was  informed  that  the  contract  cannot  be  enhanced  and 
his offer has been declined. Thus, in the absence of the consent of 
the  respondents  to  the  extension  of  the  contract  no  right  was 
conferred  upon  the  petitioner  which  came  within  the  purview  of 
section  42  of  the  Specific  Relief  Act,  hence  the  first  appellate 
Court has rightly held that the suit was not maintainable and liable 
to be dismissed.”         
the  department 
their 
in 
In another case titled Messrs Recto International through Partner 
Vs  Messrs  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Company  Ltd.  through 
Director  Telegraph  &  Another  (2008  CLC  562)  wherein  it  has 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
14 
been  held  that  the  time  for  carrying  on  the  contract  has  already 
expired.  The  declaration  sought  to  be  obtained  is  misconceived 
being  hit  by  the  provisions  of  section  42  of  the  Specific  Relief 
Act.  Even  otherwise,  after  expiry  of  the  period,  no  restraining 
order  is  called  for  as  the  licence  agreement  stood  expired  with 
afflux  of  time.  In  another  case  titled  Syed  Ali  Asghar  Shah  Vs 
Pakistan  International  Airline  Corporation  through  Managing 
Director & Others (2016 CLC 189) it is held as under:- 
the  agreement/contract,  beyond 
“6. It would not be out of place to mention, and without prejudice 
to  the  fact,  that  whether  any  vested  right  accrues  on  the  basis  of 
Letter of Intent or not, even otherwise if an agreement has been in 
field,  the  plaintiff  could  not  have  sought  specific  performance  or 
enforcement  of 
the  period 
stipulated in the Letter of intent/contract. Therefore, if enforcement 
of the said agreement cannot be sought, the necessary corollary is 
that no injunctive relief can be asked for. At the most the plaintiff 
may  have  a  case  of  damages,  owing 
the  alleged 
cancellation/modification of Letter of intent. However, the plaintiff 
cannot  be  allowed  to  continue  and  keep  working  on  the  basis  of 
interim  orders,  even  beyond  the  period  stipulated  in  the  Letter  of 
Intent/contract.” 
to 
Reliance is placed on the case reported as Saeed Ahmad Malik Vs 
Naval Estate Officer (1989 CLC 1204)  (D.B), in which this Court 
held as under:- 
“The plain reading of clause (b) of the above section would clearly 
show  that  such  licence  as  in  the  present  case  does  not  become 
irrevocable and can always be revoked at the option of the licensor. 
The remedy of the licensee, therefore, would not lie in his suit for 
declaration but he would be entitled to damages, if any, as held in 
the  case  of  M.A.  Naser  v.  Chairman,  Pakistan  Eastern  Railways 
and others PLD 1965 SC 83 and in the case of Muhammad Hashim 
v.  Zulfiqar  Ali  Khan  and  others  PLD  1963  Lah.  418.  We, 
therefore,  are  clear  in  our  mind  that  in  the  instant  case  the 
appellant's  suit  for  declaration  was  not  maintainable  under  the 
provisions of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act. We also agree 
with  the  learned  single  Judge  that  the  relief  of  injunction  was 
barred  under  the  provisions  of  section  10  of  the  Central 
Government  Lands  and  Buildings  (Recovery  of  Possession) 
Ordinance, 
1965.  
 
6.  Even  otherwise,  the  appellant  has  been  dispossessed  from  the 
plot  in  dispute,  as  asserted  in  the  counter-affidavit  filed  by  the 
respondents, which fact has not been controverted by the appellant. 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
15 
He  has  not  filed  any  affidavit-in-rejoinder  to  this  effect.  We, 
therefore,  find  no  substance  in  the  present  appeal,  which  is 
dismissed in limine with no order as to costs.” 
Reliance  can  also  be  placed  on  the  cases  reported  as  Dr.  Munir 
Ahmed,  M.  B.  B.S.  Medical  Officer  Vs  Chairman,  House 
Allotment  Committee,  Government  of  Baluchistan,  Quetta  & 
Another  (1983  CLC  1783)  &  Imtiaz  Hussain  Vs  Govt.  of 
Pakistan 
through  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Works,  Estate, 
Islamabad & 2 Others (1992 CLC 1122).  
8. 
 
Further, respondents No.3 to 5/plaintiffs in their plaint 
took stance that the petitioner/defendants Hospital entered into an 
agreement  with  the  plaintiffs  University  for  providing  hospital 
premises on rent. So far as the arguments of the learned counsel 
for the respondents that in reply to Para-4 of the plaint petitioner 
admitted that respondents university is tenant over the premises, 
suffice  it  to  say  that  any  admission  made  against  the  record  or 
against  admitted  document  does  not  create  any  right  to  declare 
the respondents as tenants of the petitioner whereas agreement is 
only  for  the  affiliation  of  University  College  with  the  petitioner 
Hospital and if any perverse admission is made in the pleadings 
same  may  be  withdrawn  with  the  permission  of  the  Court.  The 
Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  a  case  reported  titled  as 
Muhammad Zahoor & Anothers Vs. Lal Muhammad & 2 Others 
(1988 SCMR 322), held as under:-  
“The  Honourable  Supreme  Court  was  pleased  to  hold  that 
admissions  are  not  conclusive  proof  of  matters  admitted-
Admission  made  by  mistake  could  be  permitted  by  Court  to  be 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
16 
withdrawn  by  amendment,  even  if  such  admission  was  made  in 
pleadings.” 
In the case of Ahmad Khan Vs. Malik Fazal Dad (Represented by 
Legal  Heirs)  (1983  CLC  74  (Lahore),  this  Court  has  held  as 
under:- 
 
“Court  may, 
its  discretion,  under  S.58  Evidence  
Act,  require  any  fact,  admitted,  to  be  proved  otherwise  than  by 
such admission.” 
in 
In another case titled Pakistan Development Corporation Ltd. Vs. 
The Bank of Bahawalpur Ltd (PLD 1960 (W.P.) Karachi 885). 
 
“Admission  according  to  section  31,  Evidence  Act,  are  not 
conclusive  proof  of  the  matters  admitted.  It  is  always  open  to  a 
person  who  has  made  an  admission  to  show  that  he  had  done  so 
under  some  mistake,  misapprehension  or  miscalculation.  An 
admission  unless  coupled  with  other  facts  which  might  constitute 
an  estoppel,  cannot  form  the  foundation  of  a  right.  An  admission 
simpliciter  is  merely  a  piece  of  evidence  and  can  certainly  be 
controverted and demolished”  
 
9. 
 
Admittedly  the  license  agreement  stood  expired  on 
08.11.2016  which  has  never  been  renewed  or  extended  any 
further  whereas  the  notice  for  termination  of  agreement  was 
issued  on  22.01.2011  and  many  reminders  whereof  were  also 
served subsequently for vacation of the premises which has never 
been  challenged  before  the  mutually  settled  adjudicating  forum 
as  envisages  under  Clause  XIV  of  the  agreement  during  the 
existence of the license agreement. The instant suit has been filed 
after  two  years  of  the  expiry  of  the  lease  agreement  which  in 
itself vitiate the cause of action of the  respondents who have no 
right  left  enforceable  under  any  law.  Further  for  the  sake  of 
argument if it is presumed the agreement was a kind of rent deed 
Writ Petition No.232496/2018 
 
 
17 
even  then  the  jurisdiction  of  civil  Court  is  barred.  Moreover  as 
discussed above Civil Court of general jurisdiction are precluded 
under  Section  10  of  Building  Act,  1965  as  well  as  the  same 
section of the (Punjab) Govt. lands and Building Act Recovery of 
Possession  Ordinance,  1966  ibid  to  issue  any  injunctive  order 
against  the  authority  who  is  intending  to  retrieve  the  possession 
of  the  official  buildings,  as  such,  it  can  conveniently  observed 
that  the  suit  is  barred  by  law  as  well  as  suffer  from  the  lack  of 
cause of action and provision of Order VII Rule 11 CPC are fully 
applicable  to  the  suit  of  the  respondents.  All  the  above  material 
fact and legal aspects of the matter have not been considered by 
the  lower  judicial  fora  and  committed  glaring  illegality  in 
dismissing  the  application  under  Order  VII  Rule  11  CPC  which 
finding  have  no  sanctity  in  the  eyes  of  law.  Both  the  learned 
courts  below  erroneously  dismissed  the  said  application  for 
rejection of the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 CPC.            
10.  For  what  has  been discussed  above, the  instant  writ petition 
is  allowed.  Order  dated  24.05.2018  passed  by  the  learned  Civil 
Judge, Lahore and order dated 18.08.2018 passed by the learned 
Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore  are  set  aside,  resultantly  the 
plaint of respondent suit is hereby rejected. 
(CH. MUHAMMAD IQBAL) 
JUDGE 
Shahzad Mahmood  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
           JUDGE  
