 
 
 
          Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
    
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
 
 
 
 
          WP No.1193 of 2017     
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Muhammad Ayaz 
Versus 
Government of Punjab through its Chief Secretary etc. 
 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
Petitioner By: 
Respondents By: 
 
 
    J U D G M E N T  
1.2.2017. 
Mr.  Sharjeel  Haider  and  Mr.  Muhammad 
Yasin Hatif, Advocates. 
Mrs.  Samia  Khalid,  AAG  along  with  Asghar 
Ali  Tahir,  Deputy  Director  and  Mian  Ijaz 
Ahmad, Deputy Director (L&E), Environment 
Protection Agency.  
Ayesha A. Malik J: Through this Petition, the Petitioner has 
impugned order dated 11.1.2017 issued by Respondent No.5 whereby 
the  Deputy  Director,  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Punjab, 
Gujranwala  ordered  for  the  sealing  of  the  plant  of  the  Petitioner  in 
order  to  implement  the  Environmental  Protection  Order  issued  on 
6.11.2015. 
2. 
The  facts  of  the  case  are  that  the  Petitioner  runs  a  business  in 
the  name  of  Ali  Steel  Works  in  Allama  Iqbal  Colony,  Street  No.2, 
Gujranwala.  The  residents  of  the  area  filed  a  complaint  against  the 
business of the Petitioner on the ground that it causes air pollution as 
well  as  noise  pollution  and  vibration  which  is  hazardous  to  the 
environment and to the health of the residents of the area. The District 
Officer (Environment), Gujranwala inspected the unit of the Petitioner 
on 14.5.2015 and found that it had been established without obtaining 
the  environment  approval  from  the  Environment  Protection  Agency, 
Punjab  (“EPA”)  and  that  the  noise  pollution  exceeded  the  National 
Environment  Quality  Standards (“NEQS”)  limits.  The  Petitioner  was 
WP No.1193/2017 
2 
issued  Environmental  Protection  Order  (“EPO”)  on  6.11.2015  under 
Section 16 of the Punjab Environmental Protection Act, 1997 (“Act”) 
after being given two opportunities, one on 11.6.2015 and the other on 
22.6.2015  to  controvert  the  allegations  raised  against  him.  Since  the 
Petitioner  was  unable  to  do  so,  EPO  was  issued  on  6.11.2015.  The 
EPO stated that the Petitioner should, 
“Immediately stop  operation of  your unit till its regularization from 
competent  forum  to  ensure  compliance  of  Section  12  of  Punjab 
Environmental Protection Act, 1997 (amended 2012).  
No appeal was filed against the EPO and the Petitioner continued its 
business  without  compliance of the  EPO.  Thereafter the  complainant 
filed  WP  No.31185/2016  in  which  a  direction  was  issued  on 
5.10.2016 that he should avail remedy under Section 17 of the Act for 
compliance of the EPO. In the meanwhile a follow up inspection was 
carried out and it was found that the Petitioner had not complied with 
the  EPO,  hence  the  Deputy  Director,  Environmental  Protection 
Agency, Punjab, Gujranwala while invoking the powers under Section 
6(1)(a)  of  the  Act  sealed  the  unit  of  the  Petitioner  on  11.1.2017. 
Hence this Petition. 
3. 
The  basic  issue  before  the  Court,  as  raised  by  the  Petitioner  is 
the power of the Deputy Director, Environmental Protection Agency, 
Punjab, Gujranwala/Respondent No.5 to pass a sealing order. Learned 
counsel  for  the  Petitioner  argued  that  Respondent  No.5  did  not  have 
any power to seal the unit of the Petitioner. The power of sealing lies 
exclusively with the Environmental Protection Tribunal (“Tribunal”) 
under Section 17(5)(c) of the Act. Learned counsel further argued that 
the  order  of  sealing  was  done  without  following  due  process  and 
without  notice  to  the  Petitioner.  Learned  counsel  further  submitted 
that  the  complainant  filed  WP  No.31185/2016  before  the  Court 
wherein a direction was issued on 5.10.2016  that he should approach 
the Tribunal, therefore the act of sealing was in derogation to the said 
orders of this Court. Learned counsel places reliance on the case titled 
WP No.1193/2017 
3 
Messrs  Mega  Steel  Mills  Private  Limited  v.  Government  of  Punjab 
through  Secretary,  Environmental  Protection  Department,  Punjab, 
Lahore and 6 others (2016 CLC 1095) in support of his contentions. 
4. 
Learned Law Officer argued that sufficient notice was given to 
the  Petitioner  before  issuance  of  the  EPO  and  the  Petitioner  was 
unable  to  refute  the  allegations  that  the  noise  level  exceeded  the 
NEQS  limits.  Furthermore  despite  the  EPO,  the  Petitioner  made  no 
effort  to  control the noise  and  vibration  level  and  continued  with  his 
business.  Learned  Law  Officer  further  argued  that  the  EPO  dated 
6.11.2015 issued under Section 16 of the Act was not complied with 
and on  11.1.2017 an order  was passed  in terms  of  the  powers vested 
with  the  EPA  to  seal  the  unit  of  the  Petitioner.  Learned  Law  Officer 
argued that the EPA has power to implement its orders under Section 
16(3)  read  with  Section  16(2)  of  the  Act.  She  argued  that  when  a 
person  does  not  comply  with  the  order  of  the  EPA,  the  EPA  can 
initiate action under the Act and can also take necessary measures to 
ensure that the direction given in the EPO is implemented. In this case 
an  immediate  stop  order  was  passed  on  6.11.2015,  subsequent 
inspections were carried out and it was seen that the Petitioner was not 
compliant  with  the  EPO.  Sufficient  warnings  were  given  to  him, 
opportunity of hearing was provided and ultimately in order to prevent 
the  continuation  of  the  environmental  hazardous,  sealing  order  was 
issued on 11.1.2017. Learned Law Officer has placed reliance on the 
case titled Ms. Imrana Tiwana and others v. Province of Punjab and 
others  (2015  CLD  983)  to  urge  the  point  that  right  of  appeal  is 
provided  for  under  the  Act  and  remedy  of  a  second  appeal  is  also 
available  before  a  Division  Bench  of  this  Court.  However,  the 
Petitioner  has  failed  to  avail  the  said  remedy  provided  for  under  the 
Act, hence the instant Petition is not maintainable. 
5. 
Arguments heard and record perused. 
WP No.1193/2017 
4 
6. 
On the issue of maintainability the question before the Court is 
with reference to the power exercised by the EPA under Section 16 of 
the Act. Learned Law Officer further argued that since the remedy of 
appeal  is  available  to  the  Petitioner,  the  instant  Petition  is  not 
maintainable.  However  given  that  the  question  involved  relates  to 
interpretation of Section 16 and the powers of the EPA  versus power 
of  the  tribunal  to  enforce  the  EPO,  the  remedy  of  appeal  is  not 
efficacious. Hence the instant Petition is maintainable.   
7. 
The  basic  question  raised  in  this  Petition  is  whether  the  EPA 
has  the  power  to  seal  a  unit  which  is  not  compliant  with  the  EPO. 
Section  5  of  the  Act  authorizes  the  Director  General  to  carry  out  all 
powers and functions  of  the  EPA  and  Section 5(5) of the  Act allows 
the  Director  General  to  delegate  any  of  his  powers.  By  way  of 
Notification  No.  176/F-02/LS  dated  21.08.2007  and  503/F-02(V-
II)/LS/EPA  dated  27.02.2008,  the  powers  and  functions  under  the 
EPA  were  delegated  by  the  Director  General  with  respect  to  the 
different  provisions  of  the  Act.  The  Notification  mentioned  above 
delegates  powers  to  the  Deputy  Directors  in  matters  pertaining  to 
Section  16  of  the  Act.  Section  16  of  the  Act  being  the  relevant 
provision is reproduced hereunder:- 
Environmental protection order.(1) Where the  Provincial Agency 
is satisfied that the discharge or emission of any effluent, waste, air 
pollutant  or  noise,  or  the  disposal  of  waste,  or  the  handling  of 
hazardous substance, or any other act or omission is likely to occur, 
or is occurring, or has occurred, in violation of any provisions of this 
Act, rules or regulations or of the conditions of a licence, or is likely 
to  cause,  or  is  causing,  or  has  caused  an  adverse  environmental 
effect, 
the  person 
responsible  for  such  discharge,  emission,  disposal,  handling,  act  or 
omission an opportunity of being heard, by order direct such person 
to  take  such  measures  as  the  Provincial  Agency  may  consider 
necessary within such period as may be specified in the order.  
the  Provincial  Agency  may,  after  giving 
In  particular  and  without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the 
(2)  
foregoing power, such measures may include— 
(a)  
stoppage,  preventing, 
the  discharge, 
lessening  or 
immediate 
controlling 
emission,  disposal, 
handling,  act  or  omission,  or  to  minimize  or  remedy 
the adverse environmental effect;  
WP No.1193/2017 
5 
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
installation, 
replacement  or  alteration  of  any 
equipment or thing to eliminate or control or abate on 
a  permanent  or  temporary  basis,  such  discharge, 
emission, disposal, handling, act or omission;  
action to remove or otherwise dispose of the effluent, 
waste,  air  pollutant,  noise,  or  hazardous  substances; 
and  
action  to  restore  the  environment  to  the  condition 
existing  prior  to  such  discharge,  disposal,  handling, 
act or omission, or as close to such conditions may be 
reasonable in the circumstances, to the satisfaction of 
the Provincial Agency.  
(3)   Where the person, to  whom  directions under sub-section (1) 
are given, does not comply therewith, the Provincial Agency may, in 
addition to the proceedings initiated against him under this Act or the 
rules and regulations, itself take or cause to be taken such measures 
specified in the order as it may deem necessary and may recover the 
costs  of  taking  such  measures  from  such  person  as  arrears  of  land 
revenue. 
 
8. 
Section 16 of the Act governs the procedure and powers related 
to  an  EPO.  An  EPO is a  written  order that  is designed to protect the 
environment.  It  is  issued  to  secure  compliance  by  a  person  who  is 
causing harm to the environment in order to protect human health and 
the  environment.  It  specifies  the  sensation  of  the  harm  and  provides 
for the methods to cure or stop/prevent the harm within a given time 
frame. Essentially the EPO provides the action that needs to be taken 
and the timeframe during which it must be taken, to rectify the wrong. 
In terms of Section 16(1) of the Act, the EPA has to satisfy itself that 
there  is  discharge  or  emission  of  any  waste  or  pollutant  or  noise  in 
violation  of  the  Act.  Once  satisfied  it  must  give  an  opportunity  of 
hearing to the person causing the pollution and can then pass an order 
directing  the  person  to  take  necessary  measures  to  cure  the  problem. 
However,  the  EPO  can  also  direct  measures  requiring  immediate 
action. The measures under Section 16(2) of the Act require instant or 
emergent action, such as immediate stoppage or immediate control of 
the equipment or thing causing the pollution or removal or disposal of 
the  hazardous  or  pollutant  substance  or  action  that  helps  restore  the 
environment to the condition it was in before the pollutant. While the 
WP No.1193/2017 
6 
EPO  under  Section  16(1)  of  the  Act  provides  for  remedial  or 
corrective measures to cure pollution or stop further pollution; Section 
16(2)  of  the  Act  lays  down  preventative  measures  that  require 
immediate  action  for  an  immediate  effect.  Therefore  the  distinction 
between  Section  16(1)  and  (2) 
is  essentially 
that 
the 
latter 
acknowledges the need for immediate action  as a necessary response 
mechanism 
to 
imminent 
threat  or 
irreparable  damage 
to 
the 
environment.  
9. 
The  vital  question  is  whether  the  EPA  can  enforce  its  orders 
under  the  EPO  where  a  person  fails  to  comply  with  the  measures 
prescribed by the EPA. In terms of Section 16(3) of the Act, the EPA 
can either proceed against the person under the Act which could mean 
proceeding  under  Section  17  of  the  Act  to  impose  penalties  or 
proceeding under Section 21 of the  Act where it can file a complaint 
against the person disobeying the EPO or it can itself take or cause to 
be taken such measures necessary in the order to implement its EPO. 
Therefore Section 16(3) of the Act itself provides for an enforcement 
mechanism  which  is  in  addition  to  remedy  under  the  Act.  The 
mandate  of  the  law  under  Section  16(3)  of  the  Act  is  very  clear.  An 
EPO  can  be  passed  to  prevent  any  form  of  pollution  be  it  air,  water, 
noise  or  waste  or  handling  of  hazardous  substance.  Section  16(3)  of 
the  Act  is  an  enabling  provision  to  ensure  compliance  with  orders 
under section 16(1) and (2) of the Act, enabling immediate action by 
the  EPA  to  enforce  orders  where  necessary.  The  need  to  provide  for 
enforcement  powers  in  the  EPA  is  essential  given  that  immediate 
measures  may  be  required  to  prevent  environment  degradation.  The 
purpose  and  overarching  objective  of  the  Act  to  protect  the 
environment and promote sustainable development would be rendered 
redundant if such powers did not exist. 
10.  The  spirit  of  Section  16  of  the  Act  is  based  on  the 
Precautionary  Principle.  The  Precautionary  Principle  requires  the 
WP No.1193/2017 
7 
relevant  agency  to  anticipate  the  danger  and  take  immediate  steps  to 
prevent harm or danger to the environment.  The Rio Declaration and 
Agenda 21 in 1992 adopted the Precautionary Principle as a necessary 
mechanism in the following terms: 
…to  protect  the  environment,  the  precautionary  approach  shall 
be  widely  applied  by  States  according  to  their  capabilities. 
Where  there  are  threats  of  serious  or  irreversible  damage,  lack 
of  full  scientific  certainty  shall  not  be  used  as  a  reason  for 
postponing  cost  effective  measures  to  prevent  environment 
degradation. (Article 15, Rio Declaration)  
 
Essentially,  the  Precautionary  Principle  is  a  tool  for  ensuring 
sustainable development. The court in M.C. Mehta v. Union of India 
Court  (1997  (2)  SCC  353:  AIR  1997  SC  734)  affirmed  that,  „The 
Precautionary  Principle‟  and  „The  Polluter  Pays  Principle‟  are 
necessary tools for sustainable development. The court elaborated on 
this, holding that: 
If  an  activity  is  allowed  to  go  ahead,  there  may  be  irreparable 
damage  to  the  environment  and  if  it  is  stopped,  there  may  be 
irreparable damage to economic interest. In case of doubt, however, 
protection of environment would have precedence over the economic 
interest.  Precautionary  principle  requires  anticipatory  action  to  be 
taken  to  prevent  harm.  The  harm  can  be  prevented  even  on  a 
reasonable suspicion. It is not always necessary that there should be 
direct evidence of harm to the environment.  
The  Precautionary  Principle  was  further  recognized  by  the  G8 
Ministers  in  2002  as  a  means  to  safeguard  the  protection  of  the 
environment.  Therefore  the  Precautionary  Principle  focuses  on 
empowering  regulators  to  act  in  anticipation  of  environmental  harm 
and  ensure  it  does  not  occur.  Pakistan‟s  commitment  to  uphold 
sustainable development and the Precautionary Principle was affirmed 
through  ratification  of  the  Rio  Declaration  (ratified  01-06-1994)  and 
several  other  international  instruments  (United  Nations  Framework 
Convention  on  Climate  Change 
(ratified  01-06-1994),  The 
Biodiversity  Convention  (ratified  01-06-1994),  etc).  The  Bhurban 
Declaration  2002  further  emphasized  the  need  to  take  immediate 
WP No.1193/2017 
8 
action  and  employ  the  Precautionary  Principle  to  protect  life  and 
nature for present and future generations.  
11.  Since  the  Ms.  Shehla  Zia  and  others  v.  WAPDA  case  (PLD 
1994  SC  693),  superior  courts  have  taken  an  active  approach  in 
accepting  environmental  justice  and  recognized  the  Precautionary 
Principle as an integral issue. In the cited case the court held that: 
The rule of precautionary  policy is  to  first  consider the welfare and 
safety of the human beings and the environment and then to pick up 
a  policy  and  execute  the  plan  which  is  more  suited  to  obviate  the 
possible  dangers  or  make  such  alternate  precautionary  measures 
which may ensure safety. To stick to a particular plan on the basis of 
old studies or inconclusive research cannot be said to be a policy of 
prudence and precaution.  
 
Following  this,  several  cases  have  acknowledged  the  Precautionary 
Principle  and  its  importance  as  an  enforcement  mechanism  for 
protection  of  the  environment  and  sustainable  development.  The 
Supreme  Court  in  Adeel-Ur-Rehman  v  Federation  of  Pakistan  held 
that: 
It is the duty of the State to see that the life of a person is protected 
as  to  enable  him  to  enjoy  it  within  the  prescribed  limits  of  law. 
Pollution, environmental degradation and impure food items also fall 
in the category of deprivation of life. [2005 PTD 172] 
 
In  Imrana  Tiwana v. Province of Punjab (2015  CLD 983),  the  court 
took  this  further  and  established  environmental  justice  as  a  concept 
that fell within the scheme of the Constitution, 
To  us  environmental  justice  is  an  amalgam  of  the  constitutional 
principles  of  democracy,  equality,  social,  economic  and  political 
justice guaranteed under our Objectives Resolution, the fundamental 
right to life, liberty and human dignity (article 14) which include the 
international  environmental  principles  of  sustainable  development, 
precautionary principle,  environmental impact  assessment,  inter and 
intra-generational  equity  and  public 
to 
environment  that  is  not  harmful  to  the  health  or  well-being  of  the 
people  and  an  environment  that  protects  the  present  and  future 
generations is an essential part of political and social justice and even 
more integral to the right to life and dignity under our Constitution. 
trust  doctrine.  Right 
 
In  Ali  Steel  Industry  v.  Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  and 
another  (2016  CLD  569)  the  need  to  use  precautionary  and 
WP No.1193/2017 
9 
preventative measures to ensure the protection of rights under Article 
9  and  14  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973 
was  reaffirmed.  The  court  found  no  illegality  with  respect  to  the 
sealing  of  the  premises  or  the  direction  of  stoppage  to  the  petitioner 
even  though  the  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Environmental  Protection  Act 
2014  did  not  extend  to  PATA.  The  court  stressed  on  the  duty  to 
combat  environmental  degradation,  again  pointing  towards  the  need 
for immediate enforcement mechanisms. 
12.  Therefore it is clear that the state and its officers must employ 
measures 
to  achieve  environmental 
justice  and  preserve 
the 
environment.  With  the  growth  of  jurisprudence  on  the  establishment 
of  environmental  justice  in  Pakistan,  it  is  necessary  to  now  shift  the 
focus  on  enforcement  mechanism  especially  where  certain  kinds  of 
harm  or  pollution  which  require  immediate  stoppage,  must  be 
stopped. The Act emphasizes on immediate measures empowering the 
EPA to protect the environment where there is imminent threat to the 
public or cause to believe environmental degradation/pollution will be 
irreversible.  In  such  cases,  the  enforcement  mechanism  must  act 
immediately  to  effectively  control  the  harm  and  prevent  any  further 
degradation  without  this  power  of  enforcement  the  issuance  of  an 
EPO  under  Section  16(2)  of  the  Act  specifically  would  become 
redundant.  If  the  EPO  requires  immediate  stoppage  or  immediate 
removal  of  the  pollutant  then  allowing  the  harm  and  pollution  to 
continue would defeat the purpose of Section 16(2) of the Act.   
13.  Another aspect of the case is the argument that due process was 
not  followed.  In  this  case  notices  were  issued  but  since  he  did  not 
appear,  no  hearing  was  given  prior  to  the  sealing  of  the  unit.  While 
due process and the right to a fair trial are embedded in Article 10A of 
the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 1973,  the  objective 
of the constitutional protection is to achieve justice. In cases of strict 
liability,  where  damage  to  the  environment  is  irreversible  and 
WP No.1193/2017 
10 
permanent, 
immediate  action  is  fortified 
in  order 
to  prevent 
irreparable damage. In such cases it is necessary to take precautionary 
measures, which do not immolate  or  infringe  the  right to fair  trial  or 
due  process,  but  simply  ensure  that  a  harm  or  hazard  does  not 
continue  during  the  time  spent  in  due  process.  The  august  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  held  in  the  case  titled  Warid  Telecom  (PVT.) 
Limited  v  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Authority  (2015  SCMR  338) 
that  where  actions  are  taken  to  stop  more  injustice  from  happening 
then such actions should not be seen as a violation of the right to fair 
trial or due process. In this case the august Supreme Court of Pakistan 
quotes Karnataka Public Service Commission v B.M. Vijaya Shankar 
(AIR 1992 SC 952): 
the  requirement  of  notice  and  providing  an 
When  meeting 
opportunity of hearing will cause “more injustice than justice” or it is 
not in the “public interest” the same may be withheld. 
 
Was natural  justice violated? Natural  justice is  a concept  which has 
succeeded  in  keeping  the  arbitrary  action  within  limits  and 
preserving  the  rule  of  law.  But  with  all  the  religious  rigidity  with 
which it should be observed; since it is ultimately weighed in balance 
of  fairness,  the  courts  have  been  circumspect  in  extending  it  to 
situations  where  it  would  cause  more  injustice  than  justice.  Even 
though  the  procedure  of  affording  hearing  is  as  important  as 
decisions  on  merits  yet  urgency  of  the  matter,  or  public  interest  at 
times  require,  flexibility 
the 
circumstances of the case and the nature of the matter required to be 
dealt  may  serve  interest  of  justice  better  by  denying  opportunity  of 
hearing  and  permitting  the  person  concerned  to  challenge  the  order 
itself  on  merits  not  for  lack  of  hearing  to  establish  bona  fide  or 
innocence but for being otherwise arbitrary or against rules.  
in  application  of 
the  rule  as 
 
The  Petitioner‟s  contention  that  the  right  to  due  process  and  Article 
10A  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  was 
violated is not sustainable because public safety, public health and the 
environment must be protected from irreparable harm. In this case, the 
issue  of  noise  pollution  and  vibrations  were  exceeding  the  NEQS, 
hence it required immediate action to secure public health and safety 
WP No.1193/2017 
11 
especially since the Petitioner had totally failed to rectify the cause of 
the  harm  in  any  manner  whatsoever.  Thus,  there  is  no  violation  of 
Article 10A of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 
14. 
In  this  case  the  EPA  acted  strictly  in  accordance  with  law.  In 
fact  it  complied  with  the  requirement  of  due  process  and  gave  the 
Petitioner  sufficient  time  to  comply  with  the  EPO  dated  6.11.2015. 
However,  not  only  was  the  Petitioner  unable  to  provide  any 
mechanism  to  control  the  noise  pollution  but  he  blatantly  and 
flagrantly disobeyed the EPO and once action was taken against him, 
he  challenged  the  legality  of  the  order.  More  than  one  year  lapsed 
after the issuance of the EPO yet on successive inspections of the unit 
it  was  noted  that  no  effort  was  made  by  the  Petitioner  to  rectify  the 
noise pollution or the vibration, nor did Petitioner attempt to comply 
with the EPO. The argument of the learned counsel that the power of 
sealing  lies only  with  the  Tribunal  and  that  the  EPA  was  required  to 
file  a  complaint under  Section 21  of  the Act  is  totally  misconceived. 
Section 21(7) of  the Act  provides  that  an application  can  be  filed  by 
any officer authorized by the Director General of the EPA if there is 
reasonable  suspicion  of  his  having  been  involved  in  contravention 
punishable under Section 17(1) of the Act which was available to the 
EPA in addition to the power it has to execute the measures provided 
in Section 16(2) of the Act. In the event that there is non-compliance 
of  Section  16(2)  of  the  Act,  Section  16(3)  enables  the  EPA  to,  itself 
take the measures that are prescribed in the EPO. The use of the words 
itself take or cause to be taken in Section 16(3) of the Act are for the 
benefit  of  the  environment  and  empowers  the  EPA  to  enforce  its 
orders in order to stop pollution which causes imminent danger to the 
people and the locality. 
15.  Learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  has  also  placed  reliance  on 
the case cited at 2016 CLC 1095 (supra) wherein it was held that the 
department did not have the power to seal the property. The said case 
WP No.1193/2017 
12 
is distinguishable on the facts. In this case an order was passed by the 
Tribunal  with  regard  to  the  pollution  caused  by  the  factory  of  the 
appellant.  The  appellant  filed  an  appeal  before  the  EPA  which  was 
first  dismissed  and  then  subsequently  restored.  However,  during  the 
process  of  restoration  the  officials  of  EPA  sealed  the  factory  of  the 
appellant  for  non-compliance  of  the  EIA.  The  issue  in  that  case  was 
with  reference  to  the  sealing  carried  out  under  Regulation  20  of  the 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Review of IEE and EIA) 
Regulations, 2000 whereas in the instant case the unit  was sealed for 
non-compliance of the EPO. Therefore the case is distinguishable and 
not applicable to the facts of this case. 
16. 
 Under the circumstances, no case for interference is made out. 
Petition is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allah Bakhsh* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (AYESHA A.MALIK) 
                JUDGE 
Approved for Reporting  
 
 
JUDGE 
