         Stereo. H C J D A-38.   
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
   C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
 
Mst. Surraya Bibi 
Versus 
Imtaiz Ahmad etc. 
J U D G M E N T 
 
  25.04.2018 
Mr. Ghulam Farid Sanotra, Advocate 
Sh. Sakhawat Ali, Advocate 
Date of hearing: 
 
Petitioner by: 
 
Respondents by: 
 
Ch.  Muhammad  Masood  Jahangir,  J.  The  brief  facts  for 
resolving  the  dispute  arising  out  of  the  Revision  Petition  in  hand 
were  that  Mst.  Surraya  Bibi,  present  petitioner,  was  exclusive 
owner  of  land  measuring  14  Kanals  17  Marlas.  Hidayat  Ullah, 
father  of  the  respondents,  was  her  real  brother.  The  property  of 
petitioner  lady  was  transferred  to  the  respondents,  sons  of  her 
brother  vide  sale  deed  No.807  dated  25.06.2003  (Exh.P1)  and  the 
former  within  next  three  months  brought  a  suit  for  declaration, 
possession  and  cancellation  of  Exh.P1  contending  therein  that 
actually  the  property  had  been  leased  out  to  father  of  the 
respondents,  who  in  its  garb  manevoured  a  sale  deed  in  favour  of 
his sons, which being result of fraud, misrepresentation and without 
consideration was liable to  cancellation. The suit was contested on 
behalf  of  respondents/defendants  through  written  statement,  but 
surprisingly  without  giving  any  details  with  regard  to  time,  date, 
month,  year,  venue  and  names  of  witnesses  to  disclose  that  when, 
where  and  before  whom  transaction  of  sale  reflected  in  impugned 
sale  deed  was  effected,  however,  it  was  only  pleaded  that  subject 
land  was  purchashed  for  value  of  Rs.100,000/-,  which  was  paid 
before the respectables. Facing with the contest, issues were settled, 
 
C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
2 
evidence  of  the  parties  was  collected  and  as  a  result  of  its 
appreciation,  initially  the  suit  was  decreed  vide  judgment  dated 
16.11.2006,  but  it  could  not  hold  the  field  as  the  learned  District 
Court  on  12.06.2007  remanded  the  suit  to  his  subordinate  after 
resettling 
the 
issues  with  slight  modification  and  afforded 
opportunity to the parties to lead further evidence. Pursuant thereto, 
one  of  the  beneficiaries,  respondent  No.  1  (DW1),  Hidayat  Ullah 
and Zafar Ullah the signatories of the sale deed being DW2 and 3 
respectively  as  well  as  Aftab  Ahmed  (DW5),  the  Registering 
Officer  were  again  examined,  whereas  the  earlier  statements  of 
DW1  and  2,  recorded  prior  to  remand  order  were  also  kept  intact. 
Anyhow,  second  time,  not  only  learned  Trial  Court  dismissed  the 
suit  vide  judgment  and  decree  dated 04.06.2012, but appeal of  the 
petitioner  before  the  learned  Appellate  Court  also  failed  through 
judgment and decree dated 15.04.2014, hence Petition in hand. 
2.  Mr.  Ghulam  Farid  Sanotra,  Advocate,  learned  counsel  for 
petitioner/plaintiff  has  submitted  that  impugned  sale  deed  being  a 
document  of  financial  liability  was  required  to  be  attested  at  least 
by  two  marginal  witnesses,  whereas  it  was  only  witnessed  by 
Hidayat Ullah, the father of the respondents and Zafar Ullah put his 
thumb  impressions  on  it  being  identifier of  the  vendor, who  could 
not be equated with a marginal witness; that the alleged vendor was 
illiterate,  folk  lady  and  sale  deed  on  her  behalf  had  been 
executed/sanctioned without any independent advice with her; that 
no  convincing  and  reliable  evidence  was  examined  on  behalf  of 
beneficiaries  to  prove  alleged  transaction,  whereas  available 
evidence  being  full  of  contradictions  was  neither  believable  nor 
persuasive  and  that  the  impugned  judgments  being  tainted  with 
misreading and non-reading of evidence were liable to be set aside. 
In  contra,  Sh.  Sakhawat  Ali,  Advocate,  learned  counsel  for 
respondents  refuted  the  arguments  of  his  counterpart  while 
accentuating  that  although  sale  deed  being  a  registered  instrument 
was clothed with strong presumption of correctness, which was not 
required to be formally proved, yet each and every signatory of the 
sale deed (Exh.P1) was examined to prove its construction as well 
 
C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
3 
as  transaction  reflected  therein  and  that  on  the  basis  of  minor 
contradictions  or  infirmities  the  statements  of  DWs  could  not  be 
discarded,  whereas  substances  and  gist  of  their  depositions  fully 
proved  the  case  of  respondents.  He  further  argued  with  great 
concern  that  concurrent  finding  of  fact  rendered  by  two  Courts 
below could not be disturbed while invoking jurisdiction  available 
to this Court under Section 115 of the Code, 1908. 
3. 
4. 
Heard and record perused. 
In order to enforce a sale, it is  sine qua non for a vendee to 
establish; firstly, that transaction was struck with a titleholder or  a 
person  having  authority  to  create  right;  secondly  it  was  settled 
against  consideration,  and  thirdly  such  sale  was  accompanied  by 
delivery of possession. Mere execution and registration of sale deed 
by  itself  do  not  furnish  proof  of  aforenoted  ingredients  of  the 
transaction  and  whenever  such  document  as  well  as  transaction 
cited therein is questioned or denied, onus lies on the beneficiary to 
prove both of these. 
At  the  cost  of  repetition  written  statement  of  the  contesting 
respondents was silent with regard to essential details of transaction 
and it is settled law that a party has to first assert facts and pleas in 
the  pleadings  and  then  it  can  prove  the  same  through  evidence.  A 
party is not allowed under the law to improve its case beyond what 
was originally setup in the pleadings.  
Anyhow,  as  per  available  record  the  lady  herself  while  appearing 
being PW1, explicitly worded in her statement-in-chief that Hidayat 
Ullah was her real brother to whom the property was leased out, but 
with  him  neither  any  sale  transaction  was  settled  nor  any 
consideration  was  received  and  that  she  never  executed  the  sale 
deed,  whereas  Hidayat  Ullah  procured  her  thumb  impression  on 
some  papers  to  accomplish  lease  deed.  The  petitioner  examined 
Zafar Iqbal (PW2), her son, who seconded her mother to that extent 
and also denied to have received any amount from the respondents. 
The  moment  PWs  denied  the  transaction  and  execution  of  sale 
deed,  onus  was  shifted  to  the  persons  claiming  benefit  of 
disposition of the land and to discharge it, Imtiaz respondent No.1, 
 
C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
4 
one of the beneficiaries being DW1, for the first time, exposed the 
details  of  transaction  while  stating  therein  that  on  25.06.2003  the 
transaction  was settled  against  Rs.100,000/-, which  was paid,  then 
they  came  to  Narowal  where  stamp  paper  was  purchased,  scribed 
and  registered  as  per  desire  of  his  aunt.  In  response  to  a  specific 
question,  DW1  categorically  nominated  that  Riaz  Cheema,  family 
member  of  the  vendor  and  son  of  the  latter  were  present  during 
entire proceedings, but surprisingly none of them witnessed the sale 
deed  despite  their  availability  nor  any  of  them  was  summoned  by 
the  respondents  to  affirm  that  some  independent  advice  was  with 
her to have understood the import and magnitude of the transaction 
for which instrument was executed. Regardless of it, the beneficiary 
(DW1)  failed  to  point  out  particular  persons,  who  being  witnesses 
thumb  marked  the  sale  deed.  The  perusal  of  impugned  instrument 
left no doubt that Zafar Ullah, one of its signatories, did not sign it 
being its marginal witness, rather he being identifier of the vendor, 
thumb marked it in such capacity. He as DW3 did not depose that 
after  execution  of  the  sale  deed  by  the  Deed  Writer  it  was 
signed/thumb  marked  before  him,  rather  he  indeed  stated  in  his 
statement-in-chief  that  the  document  was  thumb  marked  after 
accomplishment  of  its  registration  by  the  Sub-Registrar.  This 
witness  completely  failed  to  pinpoint  that  the  lady  was  known  to 
him or that she was identified by him before the concerned officer. 
He  was  the  sole  independent  witness,  who  even  failed  to  identify 
his  thumb  impression  over  the  sale  deed  with  the  pretext  to  have 
lost  eyesight,  however,  his  deposition  in  cross-examination  to  the 
following effect:- 
 سب  نے  بھٹی  کہ 
  ہے سترد  ۔  تھا  گیا  کر  لے  فترد  کے  راجسٹرر  سب  تبکا  بھٹی ہمیں
 
۔ کی ئیاورکا متما نے ںنہوا روا کہا  کو ںکوکلر کے ںوراجسٹرر
has left an impression that Sub Registrar did nothing on his part to 
attest  the  sale  deed.  Then  comes  the  statement  of  Hidayat  Ullah 
(DW2),  the  signatory  of  Exh.D1  being  its  marginal  witness.  He 
being  father  of  the  beneficiaries  was  the  most  interested  person, 
whose  statement  could  not  be  given  due  weight,  however  he  also 
 
C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
5 
did not state that sale deed after its execution was  read over to the 
vendor or that the parties along with him as well as DW3 put their 
signatures/thumb marks before the Deed Writer, rather he was also 
of the view that they did so before the Attesting Officer. The Deed 
Writer,  Muhammad  Azam  (DW4)  in  his  cross-examination  stated 
that Riaz Cheema, a relative of the lady/vendor was also available 
at the time of execution of sale deed, but due to non-availability of 
his  CNIC, he  was not  added  as  marginal witness  of the  sale  deed. 
Although Registering Officer (DW5) was examined too, but he did 
not utter a single word that petitioner had appeared before him for 
the execution of sale deed or that she made a statement before him, 
rather  he  simply  stated  that  sale  deed  (Exh.D1)  was  registered  by 
him.  Some  of  the  glimpses  of  his  cross-examination  given  below 
would  be  relevant  to  expose  his  irresponsible  attitude  towards 
discharge of his official duty:- 
ہم بقمطا کے ٹینور کہ  کہا  دخوزا  ۔ہے  نہ  یمیر  یرتحر  قیبا ہیں
 
 
ستخطد ےمیر  پر
 Ex:D1
 ٹنو یہ
•••••
ںہو نتاجا  نہ پر  رطو تیاذ میں ہے ہرظا  کو نہااگو۔ہیں تےکر
 
Initial
  رطو نینشا
 
۔کیا تسلیم سترد نے سا روا گئی ئیسنا کر ھپڑ کو ئعبا یجسٹرر کہ ہے لکھا نہ تھہا پنےا نے میں
5. 
There  is  no  denying  of  the  fact  that  a  document  involving 
 
financial  obligation  has  to  be  executed,  constructed  and  proved  as 
per  mode  provided  under  Articles  17  and  79  of  the  Qanun-e-
Shahadat  Order,  1984.  What  are  requisites  can  be  understood  by 
reading said provisions, which are reproduced hereunder:- 
17. Competence and number of witness.- 
 (1)  The  competence  of  a  person  to  testify,  and 
the  number  of  witnesses  required  in  any  case 
shall  be  determined  in  accordance  with  the 
injunctions  of  Islam  as  laid  down  in  the  Holy 
Quran and Sunnah. 
(2) Unless otherwise provided in any law relating 
to  the  enforcement  of  Hudood  or  any  other 
special law, 
(a)  in  matters  pertaining  to  financial  or  future 
obligations, if reduced to writing, the instrument 
shall be attested by two men or one man and two 
women,  so  that  one  may  remind  the  other,  if 
necessary and evidence shall be led accordingly; 
and 
(b) in all other matters, the Court may accept, or 
act  on,  the  testimony  of  one  man  or  one  woman 
or  such  other  evidence  as  the  circumstances  of 
the case may warrant. 
 
C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
6 
 
79.  If  a  document  is  required  by  law  to  be 
attested, it shall not be used as evidence until 
two  attesting  witnesses  at  least  have  been 
called 
its 
execution,  if  there  be  two  attesting  witnesses 
alive, and subject to the process of the Court 
and capable of giving evidence: 
the  purpose  of  proving 
for 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call 
an attesting witness in proof of the executant 
of any document, not being a will, which has 
been  registered 
the 
provisions of the Registration Act, 1908 (XVI 
of 1908), unless its execution by the person by 
whom  it  purports  to  have  been  executed  is 
specifically denied. 
in  accordance  with 
As  per  former  provision,  it  was  made  imperative  that  a  required 
number  of  persons  must  attest  any  such  document  being  its 
marginal witnesses and as per requirements of the latter provision, 
such a document can only be used as evidence  when two attesting 
witnesses, at  least, have been  called  for  the purpose  of proving  its 
contents,  execution  and  construction,  but  nothing  short  of  it  can 
even  be  imagined  for  proving  the  same.  As  observed  supra,  the 
document  under  challenge  was  thumb  marked  only  by  Hidayat 
Ullah  (DW2)  being  its  marginal  witness,  whereas  Zafar  Ullah 
(DW3)  put  his  thumb  mark  as  an  identifier,  hence  the  document 
was  not  constructed as  per  requirement  of  Article  17  ibid, as such 
was not admissible in evidence. The emphasis of Mr. Sakhawat Ali, 
learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  that  DW3  proved  the 
transaction  as  well  as  execution  of  sale  deed  and  merely  for  the 
elision on the part of Deed Writer, that he was written as identifier 
could  not  be  made  basis  for  not  treating  him  as  marginal  witness, 
was misconceived. It was not a case where judicial discretion of the 
Court could be invoked to treat identifier being attesting witness. It 
is  well  established  by  now  that  any  signatory  of  a  document 
involving  financial  obligation  cannot  be  treated  as  its  marginal 
witness,  until  he  has  signed  it  in  such  capacity.  Construing  the 
requirement  of  Articles  ibid  as  being  procedural  rather  than 
substantive and equating the testimony of an identifier with that of 
 
C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
7 
attesting  witness  would  not  only  defeat  philosophy  of  the  said 
provision,  but  it  would  also  be  violative  of  its  intent  and  purpose, 
which  was  specifically  introduced  while  re-enacting  the  law  on 
evidence. The attestation of sale deed by the identifier, who had an 
independent  role  in  the  series  of  facts  and  registration  of  the 
instrument  was  highly  unusual.  Such  omission  was  not  only 
significant  but  was  also  destructive  to  the  case  of  the  plaintiffs 
hence  for  violation  of  mandatory  requirement  of  the  provision 
under  discussion  sale  deed  was  inadmissible  and  was  wrongly 
relied upon by the Courts below. 
6. 
The other glaring backdrop of the case was that the sale deed 
under litigation in hand was executed on behalf of an illiterate lady 
and as per judgments of the apex Court rendered in cases reported 
as  Taleh  Bibi  and  others  Vs.  Mst.  Maqsooda  Bibi  and  another 
(1997 SCMR 459), Mian Allah Ditta through LRs Vs. Mst. Sakina 
Bibi and others (2013 SCMR 868), Ghulam Farid and another Vs. 
Sher  Rehman  through  LRs.  (2016  SCMR  862)  and  Phul  Peer 
Shah Vs. Hafeez Fatima (2016 SCMR 1225), the legal protection 
is to be extended to her, which is available to a pardanashin woman 
and  in  such  situation,  it  was  sine  qua  non  for  the  beneficiaries  to 
have  proved  that  not  only  independent  advice  was  available  with 
her,  but  she  had  settled  the  bargain  with  conscious  mind  of 
transferring  the  property  in  dispute  to  the  respondents.  The  Deed 
Writer (DW4), Identifier (DW3) and the Attesting Witness (DW2) 
admitted  in  their  testimonies  that  either  son  or  a  relative  of  the 
lady/vendor  was  available,  but  non-signing  of  the  document  on 
their  part  raised  serious  question  about  its  genuineness.  The 
disputed  transaction  on  behalf  of  lady  was  effected  in  favour  of 
siblings  of  her  brother.  The  latter  was  in  a  position  to  exert  his 
pressure or had got a relation of great confidence to wield influence 
upon her  and in such  situation  that  was  to  be seen  with doubt and 
care. The submission of Mr. Sakhawat, learned counsel that each of 
the  DWs  specifically  deposed  in  his  statement  that  the  Scribe  as 
well as the Registering Officer confirmed from the lady with regard 
to receipt of sale amount, who thereafter scribed and registered the 
 
C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
8 
sale  deed,  hence  there  was  no  further  requirement  for  making  the 
document  and  transaction  understandable  to  her  was  not  well 
founded. It was the defence of the lady that the property was never 
sold out, rather it was leased out, as such it was imperative upon the 
beneficiaries to have proved that the consideration, if any paid, was 
for the sale. 
7. 
The  argument  of  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  that 
thumb  mark  upon  Exh.D1  having  already  been  admitted  by  the 
petitioner/plaintiff, the respondents were no more required to prove 
its  valid  construction,  was  not  plausible.  Admittedly  the  lady 
pleaded  and  deposed  that  her  brother  procured  her  thumb 
impression for the execution of lease deed, so in such situation, her 
admission  would  not  ipso  facto  prove  the  sale  deed  as  well  as 
transaction  reflected  therein  to  raise  presumption  of  it  being  a 
genuine  document  having  legal  value.  The  other  emphasis  of 
learned counsel that sale deed was a duly registered document and 
it being a public document attained presumption  of correctness, as 
such Courts below were perfect to rely upon it, was not persuasive. 
As  per  reference  to  Article  85  (e)  of  the  Order  ibid,  whenever  the 
execution  or  validity  of  a  purportedly  registered  document  is 
denied, such registered document loses sanctity of being presumed 
to be correct, but its lawful veracity will depend upon quantum and 
quality  of  evidence  to  be  produced  to  prove  its  lawful  execution. 
Reliance can be placed upon judgments reported as Abdul Ghafoor 
and  others  Vs.  Mukhtar  Ahmad  Khan  and  others  (2006  SCMR 
1144)  and  Abdul  Majeed  and  6  others  Vs.  Muhammad  Subhan 
and 2 others (1999 SCMR 1245). In the latter case, the apex Court 
concluded in the following words:- 
the  genuineness  of 
It  is  axiomatic  principle  of  law  that  a 
registered deed by itself, without proof of the 
execution  and 
the 
transaction  covered  by  it,  would  not  confer 
any  right.  Similarly,  a  mutation  although 
acted  upon  in  Revenue  Record,  would  not  by 
its  own  force  be  sufficient  to  prove  the 
genuineness  of  the  transaction  of  which  it 
purports  unless 
the 
transaction  is  proved.  There  is  no  cavil  with 
the  genuineness  of 
 
C.R.No.2715 of 2014 
9 
the  proposition  that  these  documents  being 
part  of  public  record  are  admissible  in 
evidence  but  they  by  their  own  force  would 
not prove the genuineness of document. 
 
Additionally, under section 60 of the Registration Act, 1908, only a 
restricted  presumption  is  attached  that  registration  proceedings 
were regularly and honestly carried out by the attesting officer, but 
the said presumption attached to its certificate is always rebuttable.  
8. 
The argument of learned counsel for the respondents that the 
concurrent findings of the Courts below cannot be disturbed by this 
Court  while  exercising  revisional  jurisdiction  provided  under 
section 115 of Code, 1908 is not tenable as both the judgments and 
decrees having been found to be the result of misreading and non-
reading of evidence as well as non-adherence to the law applicable 
in this regard are not sustainable in the eye of law. It is correct that 
normally this Court does not interfere with the concurrent findings 
of  the  fact  recorded by  two  Courts  below, but  when  there  is  gross 
misreading and non-reading of evidence and patent violation of the 
law  is  floating  on  the  surface  of  such  concurrent  findings,  this 
Court cannot shut its eyes and is always under obligation to rectify 
the error by interference in such like illegal findings. Reliance can 
be  placed  upon  the  judgments  reported  as  Ghulam  Muhammad 
and  3  others  Vs.  Ghulam  Ali  (2004  SCMR  1001)  and  Mushtari 
Khan vs. Jehangir Khan (2006 SCMR 1238). 
9. 
Corollary  of  the  appreciation  of  evidence  and  legal  aspects 
discussed  hereinabove  is  that  this  Civil  Revision  is  accepted, 
impugned  judgments  and  decrees  are  hereby  set  aside  and  suit  of 
the petitioner/plaintiff is decreed. No order as to costs.  
 
                                    (Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amjad 
 
 
 
                       Judge 
 
 
 
 
                     Approved for Reporting 
 
 
            Judge 
