Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
1 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
LAHORE. 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
MUHAMMAD JAVED  
VS 
THE STATE, ETC. 
(1)       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1352/2014. 
 
MST. ASIA PARVEEN 
VS 
MUHAMMAD JAVED, ETC. 
(2)      CRIMINAL REVISION NO.697/2014. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
DATE OF HEARING:  
 
15.01.2018. 
APPELLANT BY:   
Rana Muhammad Azam Khan, Advocate. 
RESPONDENT BY:  
Hafiz  Ghulam  Shabir,  Advocate  for  the 
complainant. 
Rana 
Prosecutor General.   
Sultan  Mehmood,  Additional 
……………………………………………………. 
MUHAMMAD  QASIM  KHAN,  J:  -  Muhammad  Javed 
accused/appellant  faced  trial  before  the  learned  Additional  Sessions 
Judge,  Shahkot  District  Nankana  Sahib  in  case  FIR  No.54/2013  under 
section  302  PPC  registered  with  police  station  City  Shahkot,  District 
Nankana  Sahib  and  vide  judgment  dated  29.04.2014,  he  was  convicted 
under  section  302(b)  PPC  and  sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  life  with 
further  order  to  pay  Rs.50,000/-  as  compensation  under  section  544-A 
Cr.P.C.,  in  case  of  failure  to  pay  compensation,  to  undergo  simple 
imprisonment  for  six  months.  Benefit  of  section  382-B  Cr.P.C.  was 
extended.  This  conviction  and  sentence  is  under  attack  through  the 
instant criminal appeal, whereas, Crl.Rev.No.697/2014 has been filed by 
the complainant to seek enhancement of sentence. 
2. 
Briefly  the  facts  of  the  case  are  that  Mst.  Asia  Parveen  (PW-5) 
complainant  widow  of  Muhammad  Arshad 
(deceased) 
through 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
2 
complaint  Ex.PB  got  lodged  the  FIR  (Ex.PB/1)  on  01.02.2013  at  3.55 
a.m  (night)  to  the  effect  that  on  31.01.2013  after  Maghreb  prayer,  she 
along  with  Muhammad  Arshad  (husband),  Muhammad  Asghar  and 
Muhammad  Siddique  were  present  in  the  house,  when  Muhammad 
Javed accused/appellant came and called her husband outside the house. 
The  complainant,  Muhammad  Asghar  and  Muhammad  Siddique  saw 
Muhammad  Arshad  going  to  the  house  of  Javed  along  with  him.  At 
about  1/2.00  a.m  (mid  night)  on  hearing  the  report  of  fire,  the 
complainant, Muhammad Asghar and Muhammad Siddique went to the 
house of Javed, who already had left by keeping door of his house open. 
They entered and saw that in the room of upper storey (CHOUBARA) of 
Javed, on a cot Muhammad Arshad was lying dead smeared with blood, 
who  had  fire  injury  on  back  of  left  ear.  It  was  further  averred  that 
Muhammad  Javed  had  murdered  Muhammad  Arshad  for  some  grudge, 
on the instigation of Mst. Nusrat Parveen wife of Ghulam Bismillah and 
Mst. Ghulam Fatima wife of the accused. 
3. 
After chalking out the formal FIR, Mukhtar Ahmad Sub-Inspector 
(PW-10)  inspected  the  place  of  occurrence,  prepared  rough  site  plan 
Ex.PH,  inquest  report  Ex.PJ,  injury  statement  Ex.PK,  application  for 
post  mortem  examination  Ex.PL  and  sent  the  dead  body  for  autopsy. 
Thereafter,  he  secured  crime  empties  of  pistol  30-bore  through  memo 
Ex.PG,  blood  through  cotton  was  secured  through  memo  Ex.PD,  he 
recorded statements of witnesses, secured clothes of the deceased and a 
sealed  phial  vide  memo  Ex.PE.  On  06.02.2013  accused  Javed  was 
arrested,  who  on  17.02.2013  disclosed  and  got  recovered  pistol  P-10 
form  his  house  which  was  secured  into  possession  vide  memo  Ex.PG, 
rough  sketch  of  place  of  recovery  is  Ex.PG/1.  The  I.O  then  recorded 
statements  of  the  witnesses  and  submitted  report  under  section  173 
Cr.P.C. against the accused. 
4. 
Javed accused/appellant was charge sheeted, to which he pleaded 
innocence  and  claimed  to  be  tried.  During  trial,  the  prosecution 
examined Mukhtar Ahmad Sub-Inspector (PW-10) who had investigated 
the case and the functions performed by him have been detailed above. 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
3 
Dr. Usman Shoukat (PW-8) had conducted autopsy over the dead body 
of  Muhammad  Arshad  on  01.02.2013,  whereas,  Mst.  Asia  Bibi 
(complainant)  who  appeared  in  the  witness  box  as  PW-5  and 
Muhammad Asghar (PW-6) both deposed about the ocular account and 
Muhammad  Nazir  PW-9  is  the  witness  of  recovery  of  crime  weapon 
from  accused  Javed.  The  rest  of  the  witnesses  are  all  formal  in  nature 
and  they  reiterated  what  they  had  performed  during  the  course  of 
investigation.  On  close  of  oral  evidence,  the  learned  DDPP  submitted 
report of FSL in respect of cotton as Ex.PM and crime empty Ex.PN and 
closed  the  case  for  the  prosecution. The accused  when  examined  under 
section 342 Cr.P.C. while answering the question “Why this case against 
you and why the PWs have deposed against you”, stated that:- 
“I  have  been  falsely  involved  in  this  case  with  malafide  and  ulterior 
motive.  The  deceased  Muhammad  Arshad  was  not  of  good  character 
who  was  done  to  death  by  some  unknown  assailants  during  the  odd 
hours  of  night.  His  dead  body  was  recovered  from  the  agricultural 
fields. Later on a fake story was concocted and the case was registered 
against  me.  Neither  the  deceased  was  taken  away  by  me  as  stated  by 
the PWs nor his dead  body was recovered from my house. In order to 
black-mail  me  and  my  family,  I  was  arrayed  in  this  case  falsely  after 
making me a scape-goat.” 
The accused however, neither produced any defence evidence nor opted 
to  appear  as  his  own  witness  under  section  340(2)  Cr.P.C.  and  on 
conclusion  of  trial  he  was  convicted  and  sentence,  as  detailed  in  the 
opening paragraph of this judgment. 
5. 
It is argued by learned counsel that the prosecution case is full of 
improbabilities. He added that according to the prosecution case itself no 
one  witnessed  the  occurrence  and  furthermore  it  appears  that  accused 
was recognized only by his voice but nothing has come on the record to 
suggest  that  accused  was  already  known  to  the  complainant  lady  or  to 
the  other  witnesses.  The  learned  counsel  argued  that  there  is  no 
indication  from  the  entire  prosecution  evidence  that  after  hearing  the 
voice of Javed accused/appellant the witnesses also came out along with 
Muhammad Arshad deceased, thus in the absence of any such evidence, 
the statements of the witnesses that they saw deceased going along with 
Javed  accused,  is  totally  a  false  stance.  The  learned  counsel  contended 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
4 
that  both  the  witnesses  being  closely  related  interse  and  also  to  the 
deceased,  were  highly  interested  witnesses;  although  in  the  FIR  it  was 
alleged  that  murder  was  committed  by  Javed  accused/appellant  on  the 
abetment  of  Mst.  Nusrat  and  Ghulam  Fatima,  but  no  motive  or  reason 
whatsoever  was  mentioned  in  the  FIR  as  to  why  the  accused  would 
commit such an offence and why the two women could entice or abet the 
commission  of  the  crime.  The  learned  counsel  argued  that  recovery  of 
crime  weapon  in  this  case  is  inconsequential.  Lastly  submitted  that 
prosecution witnesses made dishonest improvements in their statements 
and they were duly confronted on important aspects, but the learned trial 
court 
totally  misread 
the 
entire 
evidence 
and 
recorded 
conviction/sentence, which is not sustainable in the eyes of law. 
6. 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the complainant assisted by 
learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  opposed  the  above  arguments  and 
contended  that  sufficient  evidence  was  produced  by  the  prosecution 
which  consisted  of  most  natural  witnesses  being  inmates  of  the  house, 
although  they  were  subjected  to  lengthy  cross-examination  but  nothing 
damaging to the prosecution or favourable to the defence could come out 
from  their  testimonies.  Further  argued  that  an  occurrence  could  be 
motiveless, therefore,  if  no  motive  has  been  set  by  the  prosecution, the 
defence cannot get any benefit of it, because otherwise, the prosecution 
succeeded  in  establishing  its  case  against  Javed  accused/appellant 
beyond any shadow of doubt and the learned trial court committed error 
by  imposing  lesser  sentence,  whereas,  he  was  entitled  to  capital 
punishment, therefore, the learned counsel argued that criminal revision 
filed  for  the  said  purpose  i.e.  enhancement  of  sentence,  merits 
acceptance. 
7. 
The  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  respective  parties  have 
been considered at length and the record of the case has been gone into. 
8. 
It  is  admitted  fact  that  prosecution  witnesses  are  not  only  related 
inter-se  but  also  related  to  the  deceased,  therefore,  highly  interested 
witnesses, therefore, their evidence is to be evaluated with extra care and 
caution. This court is also aware of the position that mere relationship of 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
5 
a  witness  is  not  sufficient  to  discard  his  testimony  and  the  defence  is 
required  to  elicit  something  favourable  to  it  during  cross-examination, 
otherwise,  conviction  can  be  recorded  and  sustained  even  on  the 
statement of a witness who may have relationship. 
9. 
According to the case of the prosecution itself the occurrence took 
place at about 1/2.00 am (mid night) on 31.01.2013 and the matter was 
reported  to  the  police  on  the  same  morning  at  3.55  am.  According  to 
Mst.  Asia  Bibi  (PW-5)  the  police  reached  at  the  place  of  occurrence  at 
about  5.00  a.m.  Mukhtar  Ahmad  Inspector/IO  (PW-10)  sent  the  dead 
body to mortuary through Faqeer Muhammad and Abdul Sattar (PW-1). 
Though  the  post  mortem  report  mentions  the  date  of  receipt  of  dead 
body  in  the  Dead  House  as  01.02.2013,  however,  no  time  of  receiving 
the  dead  body  has  been  written.  Anyhow,  after  the  visit  of  IO  to  the 
place  of  occurrence  and  sending  the  dead  body  to  the  hospital  for  post 
mortem examination might have taken an hour or so. Meaning thereby, 
the dead body must have reached the hospital roughly at 6 or 7.00 a.m., 
but from the post mortem report Ex.PF as well as from the statement of 
Dr.  Usman  Shoukat  (PW-8),  the  post  mortem  was  conducted  at  04.15 
p.m.  i.e.  with  a  delay  of  about  nine  hours  and  the  delay  in  conduct  of 
post mortem has not been explained by the doctor. Although in District 
Headquarter Hospitals doctors are available for twenty four hours, even 
otherwise,  morning  duty  starts  from  8.00  am.  If  it  is  presumed  that 
doctor  was  not  available  at  night  then  why  he  did  not  conduct  the  post 
mortem in the earlier hours of the morning i.e. 8.00 or 9.00 am, when the 
morning batch of the doctors must have joined their duties. Delay in post 
mortem examination, without any explanation to that effect, gives rise to 
a legitimate inference that as a matter of fact the FIR was not registered 
at  the  time  as  is  mentioned  in  the  FIR,  rather  due  to  non-recording  of 
FIR, inquest report  and other papers were not complete, the dead body 
was kept in the mortuary and once the above formalities were completed 
later-on, the post mortem was thus conducted with delay and this factor 
is  sufficient  to  create  doubt  about  prompt  registration  of  FIR.  In  this 
respect  reliance  is  placed  on  the  case  “ABDULLAH  and  others  versus 
THE  STATE  and  others”  (2006  P.Crl.L.J.  1726),  a  learned  Division 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
6 
Bench of this Court observed that delayed post mortem examination of a 
dead body was generally suggestive of a real possibility regarding time 
having  been  utilized  by  complainant  party  and  the  police  in  procuring 
and  planting  eye-witnesses  and  in  cooking  up  story  of  prosecution. 
Reference can be made to the cases “MUHAMMAD BILAL versus THE 
STATE”  (2006  YLR  2116)  and  “SAIF  ALI  versus  THE  STATE”  (2008 
YLR 375).  
10.  As  shall  be  seen  from  the  narration  of  facts  detailed  above,  the 
case of the prosecution in the complaint Ex.PB and in the FIR Ex.PB/1 is 
that:- 
 دمحم دنواخ ےریم ےن سج ایٓا ہید نکاس ںیئارٓا موق اللہ مسب ملاغ دلو ادیج فرع دیواج
 دمحم یمسم
 دیواج مزلم وک دشرا دمحم ےن قیدص دمحم ،رغصا دمحم ہعم ںیم وج ایلاب رہاب رکید زاوٓا وک دشرا
۔اھکید دوخ مشچب ےئوہ ےتاج رھگ ےکسا ھتاس ےک ادیج فرع  
Subsequently, however, Mst. Asia Bibi (PW-5) and Muhammad Asghar 
(PW-6)  while  appearing  in  the  witness  box  developed  their  case  by 
adding that “At that time, Javed accused present in the court came at the 
door  of  our  house,  knocked  at  the  door  whereupon  Arshad  deceased 
inquired about the person who knocked at the door, then Javed accused 
stated that he was at the door outside the house.”  
i) 
If  the  statements  of  the  witnesses  before  the  court  are 
considered 
it  would  mean 
that  accused  was  simply 
identified by the witnesses by his voice and informing of his 
name when he called the deceased admittedly from outside 
the  house,  but  the  entire  prosecution  evidence  is  silent  on 
the  aspect  whether  Muhammad  Javed  was  earlier  in  such 
terms with the witnesses that they would identify him by his 
voice.  
ii)  As  observed  above,  subsequent  change  of  stance  by  Mst. 
Asia  Parveen  PW-5  and  Muhammad  Asghar  PW-6  was 
total deviation from the stance taken by the complainant in 
the  FIR,  wherein,  it  had  been  clearly  mentioned  that 
accused/appellant had called the deceased by voice (not by 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
7 
knocking at the door) and furthermore, there is no mention 
that  on  asking  of  the  deceased,  the  accused/appellant 
himself  disclosed  his  name  as  Javed.  Further,  both  the 
witnesses  before  the  court  also  change  their  version  by 
stating  that  afterwards  Siddique  and  Asghar  PWs  went  to 
their  house  lateron.  On  these  aspects  Mst.  Asia  PW-5  was 
also  duly  confronted  by  the  defence  in  the  following 
words:- 
“I got recorded in Exh.PA that upon knocking of the 
door,  Arshad  deceased  inquired  about  the  person 
who knocked at the door, at this accused Javed stated 
that  he  is  at  the  door  outside  the  house.  Confronted 
with Exh.PA where it is not so recorded.” 
“I  also  got  recorded  in  Exh.PA  that,  thereafter, 
Siddique  and  Asghar  PWs  also  went  to  their  house. 
Confronted with Exh.PA where it is not so recorded.” 
On  same  lines  Muhammad  Asghar  (PW-6)  was  also 
confronted  with  his  statement  in  court  from  his  statement 
before the police.  
iii) 
It is an old known canon that “three things cannot be long 
hidden:  the  sun, the moon,  and the truth.”  This  saying  has 
proven correct in this case as it appears that while appearing 
before  the  court and making  statement  on  oath, truth  came 
out  from  the  mouth  of  the  prosecution  witnesses  namely 
Mst. Asia PW-5 and Muhammad Asghar PW-6, when they 
deposed  that  they  identified  the  accused  when  he  himself 
informed about his name. From the statements of witnesses 
it  appears  that  as  initial  impression  even  the  victim  could 
not  identify  the  accused  by  his  voice;  that  is  why  he 
inquired about the person who knocked at the door. Further, 
it could not be said that the person present outside the house 
had  correctly  told  his  own  name,  and  there  existed  the 
possibility  that  he  may  have  wrongly  named  himself  as 
Javed to conceal his own identity. 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
8 
iv) 
In  relation  to  the  cases  of  identifying  the  voice  of  the 
accused by the witness who heard the voice of the offender, 
the  court  has  to  mainly  depend  on  the  perception  or  the 
assertion  of  the  witnesses  regarding  the  voice  of  the 
offender. There is real possibility of mistake on expense of 
the  surrounding  circumstances  when  the  witness  perceived 
the  voice.  For  example,  the  medium  through  which  he 
perceived,  the  ability  to  remember  the  way  the  offender 
spoke,  ability  to  compare  the  voices  accurately,  how  long 
he heard the offender and the time passed between hearing 
the  offender  and  the  accused  voice.  The  non-expert  or 
witness’s  opinion  may  be  admissible  depending  upon  ‘the 
degree  of  familiarity  of  the  witness  with  the  suspect’s 
voice’  as  the  strangers  are  likely  to  make  mistakes. 
However,  the  danger  of  misidentification  cannot  be  wiped 
out  by  the  degree  of  familiarity  of  the  witness  with  the 
voice of the accused and in order to use the said element as 
evidence,  not  only  the  prosecution  is  required  to  create  all 
possible  links,  the  court  is  also  obligated  to  take  such 
evidence  with  extra  care.  But,  as  observed  above,  the 
prosecution  witnesses  did  not  explain  that  they  already 
knew Muhammad Javed and that they were in a positon to 
identify  him  by  his  voice.  In  the  absence  of  such 
clarification,  chances  could  not  be  ruled  out  that  even 
someone else  might have  wrongly  named  himself as Javed 
who  had  called  the  deceased  from  outside  the  house.  The 
above piece of evidence becomes further doubtful when we 
see  that  there  is  no  indication  in  the  statement  before  the 
court  that  any  of  the  witness  went  outside  the  house  along 
with  Muhammad  Arshad  deceased  and  thus  saw  the 
deceased  going  along  with  the  accused/appellant.  Reliance 
can be placed on the case “MISRI and 3 others versus THE 
STATE”  (PLJ  1984  Cr.C  (Karachi)  327)  and  “ALI  versus 
THE STATE” (1977 P.Cr.L.J. 136). 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
9 
11. 
It  is  also  worth  noticing  that  in  the  FIR  there  is  no  mention  that 
Siddique  and  Asghar  PWs  later  on  went  to  their  house  and  from  the 
contents  of  the  FIR  it  appears  that  at  about  mid  night  on  hearing  the 
noise  of  fire  shot,  the  complainant  along  with  Muhammad  Asghar  and 
Muhammad  Siddique  right  from  the  house  of  the  complainant,  went 
towards  the  house  of  Javed  accused/appellant  and  that  already  Javed 
accused/appellant  had  escaped  by  keeping  the  door  open.  On  the 
contrary, in their statements before the court both the witnesses changed 
their stance by stating that witnesses went to their house later on, when 
Muhammad Arshad had gone with Javed accused/appellant. On hearing 
the  noise  of  fire  shot,  PWs  Asghar  and  Siddique  came  to  the  house  of 
the  complainant  and  thereafter  they  were  going  towards  the  house  of 
Javed,  when  witnessed  Javed  accused  while  going  from  his  house 
having  pistol  in  his  hand.  This  part  of  the  statement  is  also  material 
improvement  from  the  case  set  out  in  the  FIR,  wherein,  it  had  been 
specifically  got  recorded  that  accused  had  already  left  his  house  by 
keeping  the  door  open;  there  is  no  mention  that  the  witnesses  had 
actually seen Javed while escaping and similarly there is no mention in 
the FIR that accused also had a pistol in his hands. In this respect also 
the defence duly confronted the complainant in the following manner:- 
“I also got recorded in the application that after reporting of 
the  fire  shots,  PWs  Asghar  and  Siddique  came  to  my  house. 
Confronted with Exh.PA where it is not so recorded.” 
“I  also  got  recorded  in  Exh.PA  that  when  we  are  at  some 
distance  from  his  house,  accused  Javed  fled  away  from  his 
house while having pistol in his hand. Confronted with Exh.PA 
where fleeing away of Javed accused along with pistol is not 
recorded.” 
On same lines Muhammad Asghar (PW-6) was also confronted with his 
statement  in  court  from  his  statement  made  before  the  police  during 
investigation.  Such  dishonest  and  deliberate  improvements  and  change 
of stances made the witnesses unreliable and it appears that they had not 
witnessed the occurrence, and are not trustworthy. It is held in the case 
of  Amir  Zaman  Vs.  Mahboob  and  others  (1985  SCMR  685)  that 
testimony  of  witnesses  containing  material  improvements  are  not 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
10 
believable and trustworthy. Likewise in Akhtar Ali’s case (2008 SCMR 
6)  it  was  held  that  when  a  witness  made  improvement  dishonestly  to 
strengthen  the  prosecution’s  case  then  his  credibility  becomes  doubtful 
on the well-known principle of criminal jurisprudence that improvement 
once  found  deliberate  and  dishonest,  cast  serious  doubt  on  the  veracity 
of such witness. In Khalid Javed’s case (2003 SCMR 149) such witness 
who improved his version during the trial, was found wholly unreliable. 
12.  Another  aspect 
is 
that  prosecution  witnesses  during 
their 
statements  in  court  have  shown  consistency  on  the  point  that  after 
hearing  the  noise  of  fire  shot,  Muhammad  Asghar  PW-6  came  to  the 
house of the complainant (PW-5) and then they straightaway proceeded 
towards the house of Javed accused/appellant. During cross-examination 
Mst. Asia Bibi (PW-5) deposed that:- 
“My  village  is  situated  on  both  sides  of  the  above  mentioned 
road. The street which leads to our house from the above said 
road is situated on the right side of the road. 7/8 houses fall in 
the street from the main road up till my house in the said street. 
The  said  street  is  the  first  street  of  the  village  Abadi  which  is 
situated on the east of the above said road. House of Siddique 
and Asghar is situated in the third street from my house. House 
of Siddique mentioned above is also situated in the street after 
6/7  houses  from  the  main  road.  Masjid  Bazar  is  located  after 
three  streets  from  the  house  of  Siddique  mentioned  above. 
House  of  accused  Javed  is  situated  towards  west  from  Masjid 
Bazar. House of accused Javed is 12th house in the street from 
the  metalled  road,  thereafter  the  agricultural  fields  are 
located.” 
Considering  the  location  of  the  house  of  the  complainant,  the  house  of 
Muhammad  Asghar  and  the  house  of  deceased,  as  detailed  by  the 
complainant in the above reproduced lines, it becomes obvious that first 
there  was  the  house  of  the  complainant  and  the  house  of  Muhammad 
Asghar (PW-6) was away in the third street from her house, whereas, the 
house  of  accused  was  further  three  streets  away  from  the  house  of  the 
witness  and  that  too  12th  in  the  street.  This  mean  that  house  of  the 
witness  was  in  the  street  falling  in  the  middle  of  the  street  of  the 
complainant  and  the  deceased.  Thus  if  Muhammad  Asghar  PW-6  had 
heard  the  noise  of  fire  shot,  as  a  natural  consequence  he  must  have 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
11 
rushed towards the site of fire shot, but according to the prosecution case 
instead  of  going  towards  the  site  of  fire  shot,  he  firstly  ran  towards 
opposite direction i.e. the house of the complainant, took her along and 
then came back to the place of occurrence, which is the most unnatural 
conduct.  Furthermore,  it  has  come  in  the  evidence  of  prosecution 
witnesses that house of the accused was surrounded by other house, but 
surprisingly  none  from  the  surrounding  houses  came  at  the  spot  after 
hearing  the  fire  shot  coming  from  their  neighborhood,  whereas, 
Muhammad  Asghar  whose  house  was  situated  three  streets  away  heard 
the  sound  of  fire  shot.  Further,  had  the  witnesses  seen  Javed 
accused/appellant  escaping  from  the  place  of  occurrence  along  with 
crime weapon in his hand in the odd hours of the night, they must have 
asked from him as to what had happened to him and where he was going 
with weapon in his hands, but the prosecution witnesses did not put any 
question to him at that moment. The witnesses even did not inquire from 
him regarding the whereabouts of Muhammad Arshad deceased.  
13.  As  shall  be  seen  from  the  contents  of  the  FIR  although  it  was 
alleged  that  Javed  accused/appellant  had  committed  the  murder  under 
the  abetment  of  Nusrat  Parveen  and  Ghulam  Fatima,  but  no 
reason/motive  was  set  either  in  the  FIR  or  in  the  statements  of  the 
witnesses  that  what  prompted  the  accused  appellant  to  commit  the 
murder  and  why  the  above  two  ladies  would  abet  the  commission  of 
such  crime,  instead  the  complainant  furnished  an  affidavit  during  the 
course  of  investigation  that  both  the  above  ladies  were  not  involved  in 
the case as abettors and that they were innocent. 
14.  According  to  Mukhtar  Ahmad  Sub-Inspector/I.O  (PW-10)  one 
empty P-1 was taken into possession by him vide recovery memo Ex.PC 
on the day of occurrence i.e. 01.02.2013.  
i) 
Accused  was  taken  into  custody  on  06.02.2013,  he 
remained  with  police  on  physical  remand  and  during  this 
period  on  12.02.2013,  the  empty  was  sent  to  the  FSL  for 
comparison.  Although  it  is  alleged  that  crime  weapon  i.e. 
Pistol  P-10  secured  vide  memo  Ex.PG  was  recovered  on 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
12 
17.02.2013  from  the  house  of  accused/appellant  on  his 
pointation  and  disclosure,  but  as  in  these  proceedings 
relating to recovery  of crime weapon from the accused, no 
witness  from  the  locality  has  been  associated.  In  this 
situation sending of the empty after six days of arrest of the 
accused create doubt that empty was sent after concocting a 
story  and  in  order  to  strengthen  the  prosecution  case  the 
same  was  shown  to  have  been  recovered  on  17.02.2013. 
Furthermore, considering the facts and circumstances of the 
case, the prosecution had sufficient opportunity to join any 
independent  person  from  the  locality  in  the  recovery 
proceedings, but even no attempt was made in this respect, 
as such, there is obvious violation of Section 103 Cr.P.C. 
ii)  Another 
important  aspect 
is 
that  according 
to 
the 
prosecution case on the night of occurrence i.e. 01.02.2013, 
Javed  accused/appellant  was  seen  by  the  witnesses  while 
escaping  from  his  house  with  crime  weapon  in  his  hand. 
Subsequently  the  accused  was  arrested  on  06.02.2013  and 
on  his  disclosure/pointation  crime  weapon  P-10  was 
recovered  from  his  dwelling  house  on  17.02.2013.  It  is 
repellent  to  common  sense  that  once  the  accused  had 
successfully  managed  his  escape  from 
the  place  of 
occurrence  along  with  crime  weapon,  afterwards  he 
returned back to his house (place of occurrence) along with 
weapon  of  offence,  put  it  in  his  dwelling  house  and 
subsequently  get  the  same  recovered  during  investigation. 
These 
all 
factors  when 
considered  make 
the 
recovery/recovery proceedings extremely doubtful. 
15.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above, I  am  of  the  considered  view 
that  this  was  a  blind  and  motiveless  murder  and  the  prosecution  could 
not  connect  the  accused/appellant  with  the  commission  of  said  crime 
without any shadow of doubt. Consequently, this appeal is allowed, the 
conviction/sentence  of  the  accused/appellant  is  set-aside  and  he  is 
Crl.A.No.1352/2014. 
Crl.Rev.No.697.14. 
13 
acquitted of the charge. He shall be released forthwith if not required in 
any  other  case.  The  case  property,  if  any,  shall  be  disposed  of  in 
accordance with law and the record of the learned trial court be sent back 
immediately. 
17.  For the above reasons, the criminal revision fails and is dismissed. 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
 
                Javed* 
 
 
 (MUHAMMAD QASIM KHAN) 
 
 
 
 JUDGE. 
