 
ORDER SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Election Appeal No.356-A/2018 
Saud Majeed 
 
Vs 
 
Returning Officer etc. 
 
S.No. of 
Order/ 
Proceeding 
 
Date of 
order/ 
Order  with  signature  of  Judge  and  that  of  parties  or 
counsel where necessary 
proceeding 
07.11.2018  Mr. Khalid Ishaque, Advocate for the appellant. 
 
Mr.  Imran  Arif  Rnjha,  Legal  Advisor  for  Election 
Commission  of  Pakistan  alongwith  Hafiz  Adeel  Ashraf, 
Assistant  Law  Officer  on  behalf  of 
respondents  
No.1 and 3. 
Mr.  Khurram  Shahbaz  Butt,  Advocate  for  respondent 
No.2. 
 
This  Election  Appeal  under  Section  113  of  the 
Elections Act, 2017 has been filed against the order dated 
03.11.2018  passed  by  the  Returning  Officer  for  Senate  
Bye-Elections-2018  whereby  objection  petition  filed  by 
Saud  Majeed  (hereinafter  referred  as  appellant)  was 
dismissed  and  nomination  paper  of  Walid 
Iqbal 
(hereinafter  referred  as  respondent  No.2)  for  Senate  
Bye-Elections-2018  for  General  Seat  from  Province  of 
Punjab was accepted. 
2. 
Brief 
facts  are 
that 
respondent  No.2 
filed 
nomination  paper  for  Senate  Bye-Elections-2018  for 
General Seat from Province of Punjab, against which, the 
appellant filed objection petition.  The Returning Officer 
after  hearing  both  the  parties  dismissed  the  objection 
petition and accepted the nomination paper of respondent 
No.2  vide  order  dated  3.11.2018  (hereinafter  referred  as 
impugned order).  Hence, this Election Appeal. 
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  contended 
that respondent No.2 has not disclosed his assets and also 
 
 
 
 
Election Appeal No.356-A/2018 
2 
concealed  required  information  in  his  nomination  paper, 
in support of his contention he has referred Page-7 of the 
nomination  paper  i.e.  Form-B  (Statement  of  Assets  and 
Liabilities),  submitted  by  respondent  No.2,  and  pointed 
out  that  against  Sr.  No.1(b)  “Immovable  Property  Held 
outside  Pakistan” 
respondent  No.2  has 
referred 
Annexure  B  attached  with  his  nomination  paper,  which 
reflects  that  respondent  No.2  has  not  mentioned  any 
immovable  property  outside  Pakistan.    He  has  also 
referred Sr. No.2(b) and stated that respondent No.2 was 
required  to  provide  the  details  of  “Business  Capital 
outside  Pakistan”,  however,  respondent  No.2  has  opted 
to  strike  through  the  word  “outside”  and  himself 
amended  it  as  “within”  in  order  to  conceal  the  true 
statement of affairs.  He has also submitted that at Page-8 
of  nomination  paper  in  Sr.  No.2(k)  in  column-2  i.e.  
Cost  of  Asset,  respondent  No.2  has  written  the  words  
“Not Applicable” and thus cost/amount of said trust has 
been  concealed.    In  support  of  his  contention  he  has 
referred  case  of  “Muhammad  Hanif  Abbasi  Versus 
Jehangir Khan Tareen” (PLD 2018 SC 114) and prayed 
for setting aside impugned order passed by the Returning 
Officer and also prayed for rejection of nomination paper 
of respondent No.2. 
4. 
Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2  while 
replying  to  aforementioned  contention  qua  Sr.  No.1  (b) 
submitted  that  since  small  space  is  available  in  said 
column, which is not sufficient for providing full details, 
hence, for want of space respondent No.2 draw a bracket 
against  both  sub-columns  of  said  column  and  provided 
required  details  of  immovable  property  held  by  him,  his 
spouse  and dependent  children  through  annexure  B.   He 
further submitted that since no such immovable property 
 
 
Election Appeal No.356-A/2018 
3 
is  being  held  outside  Pakistan,  hence  no  such  detail  has 
been provided. 
 
In  reply  to  contention  regarding  Sr.  No.2(b), 
learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2  has  submitted  that 
since  sufficient  space  is  not  available  to  mention  details 
of  business  capital  within  Pakistan  against  sub  column 
i.e.  2(a),  hence  in  sub  column  2(b)  word  “outside”  was 
cut  and  word  “within”  was  written,  and  complete  detail 
qua  business  capital  within  Pakistan  was  provided  by 
using  whole  space  available  against  both  sub-columns.  
He  further  adds  that  since  there  was  no  such  business 
capital  outside  Pakistan,  hence  there  was  nothing  to  be 
mentioned  against  sub  column  2(b),  so  space  available 
against said sub column was used for providing detail of 
business  capital  within  Pakistan  by  cutting  the  word 
“outside” and mentioning the word “within”. 
 
While  replying  to  contention  qua  mentioning  the 
words “Not Applicable” by respondent No.2 in column-2 
of Sr. No.2 (k), learned counsel for respondent No.2 has 
added that it is not fatal for nomination paper because it 
is supplemented by the copies of statement of assets and 
liabilities  of  dependent  children  submitted  before  the 
Federal  Board  of  Revenue,  which  have  been  annexed 
with nomination paper of respondent No.2 as Annexures 
E/3,  E/4,  E/5. 
  He  also  submitted 
that  case  of 
“Muhammad  Hanif  Abbasi  Versus  Jehangir  Khan 
Tareen”  (supra)  is  not applicable in the  instant case  and 
referred  page  144  of  the  said  judgment,  relevant  portion 
is being reproduce below: - 
OFF-SHORE COMPANY-TRUST (Proposition No.2): 
(That  respondent  No.1  has  publically 
admitted  that  his  children  own  off-shore 
for  conducting  business  and 
company 
holding  properties 
in  United  Kingdom 
coupled with fact that he receives huge sums 
 
 
Election Appeal No.356-A/2018 
4 
his 
from 
in  his 
children 
tax  returns  or 
of  money 
thus 
demonstratively  making  him  the  beneficial 
owner  of  the  business  and  properties  in 
United  Kingdom  which  he  has  failed  to 
disclose 
the 
statements  of  assets  and  liabilities  before 
Election  Commission  of  Pakistan 
thus 
making  him  not  qualified  to  contest  the 
election  of,  or  being  a  member  of 
Parliament  by  virtue  of  the  provisions  of 
Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan). 
in 
 
He  also  added  that  in  the  instant  case,  respondent  No.2 
has  clearly  mentioned  NWI  Family  Trust 
in  his 
nomination  paper,  which  fact  is  also  mentioned  by  his 
dependent  children  in  their  statements  of  assets  and 
liabilities,  submitted  before  the  Federal  Board  of 
Revenue, hence facts of the case of “Muhammad Hanif 
Abbasi  Versus  Jehangir  Khan  Tareen”  (supra)  are  not 
identical to the case in hand, thus not applicable. 
  
Learned  counsel  for  the  official  respondents  has 
supported the impugned order. 
5. 
Arguments heard.  Record perused. 
6. 
It  has  been  found  that  objection  with  regard  to 
drawing  a  bracket  against  sub-columns  (a)  and  (b)  of 
column  1  of  Form-B  at  Page-7  of  the  nomination  paper 
for  the  purpose  of  writing  immovable  property  has  not 
resulted any defect of substantial nature as mentioned in 
Section 112(6)(d)(ii) of the Elections Act, 2017 and it has 
also not made statement submitted by respondent No.2 as 
false or incorrect in any material particular as mentioned 
in Section 112(6)(c) of the Elections Act, 2017. 
 
This  is  not  the  case  of  appellant  that  respondent 
No.2,  his  spouse  and  dependent  children  have  some 
immovable  property  outside  Pakistan  and  respondent 
No.2  has  not  mentioned  the  same  in  column  No.1(b)  of 
 
 
Election Appeal No.356-A/2018 
5 
Form-B and even otherwise appellant could not point out 
or  bring  on  record  any  material  to  show  any  such 
immovable  property  held  outside  Pakistan  by  them, 
hence  this  objection  is  holding  no  water  and  thus 
rejected. 
 
It has  also been observed that it  is not the  case  of 
appellant that respondent No.2, his spouse and dependent 
children  held  any  business  capital  outside  Pakistan  and 
even  otherwise  no  material  regarding  such  business 
capital  outside  Pakistan  could  be  pointed  out  or  brought 
on record by the appellant, hence objection in this regard 
qua cutting word  “outside” in Serial No.2(b) of Form B 
and  mentioning  the  word  “within”  there,  also  does  not 
hold water, particularly, when said cutting and adding the 
words was only done to use space available against said 
sub column in order to mention detail of business capital 
within Pakistan.  This cutting and adding of word neither 
has  resulted  any  defect  of  substantial  nature  nor  made 
statement of respondent No.2 as false or incorrect in any 
material particular.  So this objection is also rejected. 
7. 
As  far  as  third  and  last  objection  qua  mentioning 
of  words  “Not  Applicable”  in  Serial  No.2  (k)  at  Page-8 
of the nomination paper in the column of Cost of Asset is 
concerned, it comprises upon two questions; first question is 
to  analyze that whether by mentioning so,  statement  submitted 
by  respondent  No.2,  has  become  false  or  incorrect  in  any 
“material particular” within the meaning of Section 112 
(6)(c)  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017?    Answer  is  very 
simple  that  if  by  mentioning  cost  of  trust,  respondent 
No.2 was going to be disqualified for contesting election, 
then  of  course, 
it  makes  statement  submitted  by 
respondent  No.2  as  false  or  incorrect  in  “material 
particular” and resulting defect of substantial nature but 
 
 
Election Appeal No.356-A/2018 
6 
learned counsel for the appellant could not point out that 
by  mentioning  “Not  Applicable”,  how,  respondent  No.2 
has avoided any disqualification and if he had mentioned 
cost  there,  then  how  it  could  have  been  fatal  for  his 
nomination paper and in this regard, reference can be had 
to case of  “Murad Bux Versus Karim Bux and others” 
reported  in  2016  SCMR  2042  and  case  of  “Syed  Fida 
Hussain  Shah  Versus  Election  Appellate  Tribunal  and 
others” reported in PLD 2018 Lahore 788.  So nutshell is 
that  by  mentioning  words  “Not  Applicable”  in  relevant 
column of Serial No.2(k) at the relevant space meant for 
cost/amount  of  asset/trust  neither  makes  said  statement 
submitted by respondent No.2 as false or incorrect in any 
material  particular  nor  constituting  any  defect  of 
substantial  nature  justifying  rejection  of  nomination 
paper. 
 
Second question in this regard, which is of vital 
importance, is that either respondent No.2 has suppressed 
or  not  given  cost/amount/value  of  NWI  Trust  while 
submitting  his  nomination  paper?    Answer  is  very 
simple that respondent No.2 has not suppressed the same 
and  in  this  regard  Serial  No.2(k)  available  at  Page-8  of 
nomination paper requires reproduction here: - 
 
ASSET 
1 
COST OF 
ASSET 
2 
REMARKS 
3 
(k)  Any  other  assets  NWI 
Family Trust (U.K) 
 
Not Applicable  Beneficial  ownership  of  three 
minor  children  in  equal  shares 
for  the  sake  of  completeness, 
copies  of  statement  of  assets 
and  liabilities  of  Walid  Iqbal, 
spouse  Syeda  Nuna  Humaira 
Rafique, 
children 
Shamsher Iqbal, Saif Iqbal and 
Inara  Iqbal,  as  on  30  June 
2017, as filed with the Federal 
Board 
are 
attached  hereto  as  Annexures 
E/`1, E/2, E/3, E/4 and E/5. 
of  Revenue, 
and 
 
 
Election Appeal No.356-A/2018 
7 
 
Now  Perusal  of  Annexures  E/3,  E/4  and  E/5 
(which  are  statements  of  Assets  and  Liabilities  filed  by 
Shamsher Walid Iqbal, Saif Murad Walid Iqbal and Inara 
Munir  Bano  Rania  Iqbal  respectively  before  the  Federal 
Board  of  Revenue)  reveals  that  at  Page-2  of  each 
statement  (which  are  Page  No.28,  31  and  34  of  the 
nomination  paper  filed  by  respondent  No.2)  under  the 
heading  of  Personal  Assets/Liabilities,  in  the  column  of 
Description,  it  has  been  expressly  mentioned  in  the 
category  of  Any  Other  Asset  –  1/3  SHARES  –  NWI 
FAMILY TRUST (U.K.), Code is mentioned as 7013 and 
amount of the same has been mentioned as ‘0’, for ready 
reference said entry is hereby reproduced: - 
Personal Assets/Liabilities 
Description 
Household Effect 
Any other Asset 
Any other Asset-FURNITURE & FIXTURES: 
EXPEDITORS INTERNATION (PVT) LTD. 
(GIFT FROM GRANDFATHER) 
Any Other Asset  – 1/3 SHARES NWI 
FAMILY TRUST (U.K) 
Any Other Asset-EFU LIFE INSURANCE 
 
Code  Amount 
 
 
7010 
0 
7013 
100,000 
7013 
7013 
0 
0 
7013 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
The above said fact also stands mentioned in Annexures 
E/4 (Page 31 of the nomination paper) and E/5 (page 34 
of  the  nomination  paper).    Hence,  cost/amount  of  said 
trust i.e. NWI Family Trust U.K. has not been suppressed 
by 
respondent  No.2 
rather 
disclosed 
through 
aforementioned  annexures  E/3,  E/4  and  E/5.  So,  in  the 
light of above discussion, this objection is also rejected. 
8. 
One may not lose sight of the fact that scrutiny of 
the  nomination  paper  is  summary  inquiry  and  further 
niceties on the subject can be examined through Election 
Petition provided under Section 139 of the Elections Act, 
2017. 
9.  With utmost respect, it is being observed that facts 
of  case  reported  in  case  of  “Muhammad  Hanif  Abbasi 
 
 
Election Appeal No.356-A/2018 
8 
Versus Jehangir Khan Tareen” (PLD 2018 SC 114) are 
not identical to the facts of instant case. 
10.  Resultantly,  Election  Appeal  in  hand  is  hereby 
dismissed. 
 
(Farooq Haider) 
Judge 
Naeem 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
