CJDA 38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.481/2016 
(Muhammad Iqbal vs. The State etc.) 
Murder Reference No.140/2016 
(The State  vs  Muhammad Iqbal) 
Date of hearing:  05.12.2018. 
 
Appellant: 
Mr.  Muhammad  Adil  Khan,  Advocate/ 
Defence Counsel at State expense. 
State: 
Rai Akhtar Hussain, Deputy Prosecutor 
General. 
Complainant:  Mr. Imtiaz Hussain Khan Baloch, Advocate. 
 
FAROOQ  HAIDER,  J.  Through  this  single 
judgment  Criminal  Appeal  No.481  of  2016  filed  by 
Muhammad  Iqbal  appellant  against  judgment  dated 
27.2.2016  passed  by  learned  Addl.  Sessions  Judge, 
Jhang,  whereby  he  has  been  convicted  and  sentenced 
under section 302(b) PPC as Ta'zir to death on account 
of committing qatl-e-amd of Imam Bukhsh with payment 
of  compensation  Rs.5,00,000/-  to  the  legal  heirs  of 
deceased  under  Section  544-A  Cr.P.C  and  in  default 
thereof  to  further  undergo  six  months  S.I.  in  private 
complaint  arising  out  of  case  FIR  No.340  dated 
14.9.2012  under  Sections  302/109/34  PPC  registered  at 
Police  Station  Qadirpur,  District  Jhang  and  Murder 
Reference  No.140/2016  sent  by  learned  trial  Court 
under  Section  374  Cr.P.C.  for  confirmation  of  death 
sentence  awarded 
to  Muhammad  Iqbal  (appellant) 
through  above  mentioned  judgment,  are  being  decided 
together  because  both  these  matters  have  arisen  out  of 
one and same judgment. 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
2 
2. 
Facts of the case have been stated by Ghulam Raza 
complainant PW-1 in his statement before the trial court, 
which is hereby reproduced for narration of the facts: - 
In 
Imam  Bakhsh  deceased. 
“ 
About  three  years  and  some  days 
back,  at  about  6/6.30  AM.  1  alongwith 
Muhammad  Waseem  s/o  Muhammad  Yar, 
Nawaz s/o Ranjha, was present in the house 
of 
the 
meanwhile, Iqbal armed with 30 bore pistol, 
Muhammad  Nawaz  accused  armed  with  12 
bore  gun  alongwith  an  unknown  accused, 
armed  with  firearm  weapon  came  there. 
Accused  Nawaz  present  in  the  court  raised 
lalkara  to  my  father  in  law  that  they  had 
come to teach a lesson for pursuing the case 
of  Aalya  Bibi.  Iqbal  accused  made  a  fire 
which  hit  on  the  head  of  Imam  Bakhsh. 
Nawaz  accused  raised  lalkara  if  someone 
came  near  he  will  be  killed.  The  accused 
kept  on  making  aerial  firing  and  fled  away 
on motorcycles. Imam Bakhsh succumbed to 
the injuries within 1/2 minutes at the spot. 
 
The  motive  behind  this  occurrence  is 
that Imam Bakhsh was pursuing the case of 
Umair  Hayat  his  nephew,  due  to  this 
grudge, they committed the murder of Imam 
Bakhsh. The occurrence was seen by Nawaz 
s/o  Ranjha,  Waseem  s/o  Muhammad  Yar 
alongwith other people including myself. 
 
Sharif accused asked Nawaz accused to 
commit  the  murder  of  Imam  Bakhsh  and 
they  will  handle  the  matters.  Mehmoob-ul-
Hassan  s/o  Muhammad  Ashraf  and  Imtiaz 
s/o  Ijaz  heard  the  conspiracy  hatched  by 
Sharif accused. 
 
I  have  already  informed  the  police 
telephonically about the occurrence, when I 
reached  at  Adda  Kot  Esa  Shah,  the  police 
has  reached  there.  I  made  my  statement 
before  Investigating  Officer,  who  recorded 
my  statement,  which  is  Ex.PA,  where  my 
thumb 
is  Ex.PA/1.  The 
Investigating Officer did not investigate this 
case  on  merit  and  after 
feeling 
aggrieved I filed private complaint which is 
Ex.PA/2,  where  my  thumb  impression  is 
Ex.PA/3.” 
impression 
this 
 
” 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
3 
3. 
After  receipt  of  private  complaint,  learned  trial 
court  recorded  the  cursory  evidence  produced  by  the 
complainant  and  thereafter  summoned  the  appellant  and 
his co-accused mentioned above to face trial.  
4. 
Learned trial court after observing legal formalities 
provided under the Criminal Procedure Code framed the 
charge  against  the  appellant  and  his  co-accused  (since 
acquitted by the Trial Court through impugned judgment) 
under section 302/109/34 PPC to which they pleaded not 
guilty and prosecution evidence was summoned.  
5.  Medical  evidence  has  been  furnished  by  Dr. 
Muhammad  Arsalan  Tayyab  PW5,  who  conducted 
postmortem  examination  on  the  dead  body  of  Imam 
Bukhsh deceased  and observed as under:- 
“Injury No.1:-  
line.  Compound 
A  lacerated  wound  3  cm  x  2  cm  with 
burning,  blackening,  greasing,  collar  of 
abrasion,  inverted  margins  into  star  shape 
on the top and middle of the head 7cm from 
hair 
fracture  of  skull 
measuring about 18x10 cm extending to the 
left  eye  ball  was 
found  with  multiple 
fragments of bone present on exploration of 
brain  matter.  Membrane  ruptured  and 
massive  hematoma  of  about  13x8  cm  was 
found 
fractured  bone 
covering the brain matter. On exploration a 
small  piece  of  metallic  ballistic  was  found 
and preserved. 
just  beneath 
the 
REMARKS. 
In  my  opinion,  injury  No.l  is  the  cause  of 
death in this case i.e. compound fracture of 
skull  with  diffuse  brain  injury,  which  is 
sufficient to cause the death of the person in 
ordinary  course  of  nature.  Injury  No.l  was 
ante  mortem  and  was  caused  by  firearm 
weapon. 
  
Probable  time  that  lapsed  between 
injury  and  death  was  within  fifteen  minutes 
and  between  death  and  post  mortem  was  9 
to 10 hours.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
4 
6. 
Prosecution produced as many as 10 witnesses and 
after tendering certain documents, closed the prosecution 
evidence.  Investigating  Officer  was  examined  as  Court 
Witness i.e. CW-1. 
7. 
On the other hand, statement of Muhammad Iqbal 
appellant  along  with  his  co-accused  (mentioned  above) 
was  recorded  under section 342  Cr.P.C, who refuted the 
case  of  prosecution.    The  appellant  neither  opted  to 
appear  as  witness  under  section  340(2)  Cr.P.C  nor 
produced  any  evidence  in  defence,  in  reply  to  question 
“why  this  case  against  you  and  why  the  PWs  deposed 
against  you?”  Muhammad  Iqbal  appellant  replied  as 
under: - 
the 
introduced  by 
“The  false  and  fabricated  story  has  been 
engineered against me and co-accused with 
mutual consultation and deliberation, which 
has no nexus with the reality, same has been 
based on pseudopodial footings. I have been 
involved  in  the  instant  case  on  the  motive 
that  Aalya  Bibi  was abducted  by  Umair the 
close  relative  of  complainant  party.  I  am 
implicated  alongwith  other  co-accused  due 
to  previous  enmity.  The  motive  which  has 
been 
complainant 
regarding  abduction  of  my  paternal  cousin 
Aalya Bibi by Umair Hayat said to be close 
to  the  complainant  party  is  false  one, 
because,  Umair  Hayat is not  the  nephew of 
deceased  Imam  Bakhsh  and  same  fact  has 
been 
cross 
examination.  If  the  motive  part  of  story  of 
the  prosecution  is  kept  in  mind,  then  surely 
we  have  to  take  the  revenge  from  Umair 
Hayat directly not from deceased. According 
to 
the  cross 
examination  it  is  established  that  Imam 
Bakhsh  deceased  was  done  to  death  by 
complainant  party  by  himself  as  he  has 
developed illicit  relation  with  the  mother of 
complainant  and  wife  of  his  brother 
Muhammad  Yar  The  complainant  party 
while cross examination on the Investigating 
Officer  also  admitted  the  fact  that  one 
female  shoe  was  present  below  the  cot  of 
deceased  Imam  Bakhsh,  which  strengthen 
our  defence  version  that  the  deceased  was 
investigation  and  during 
transpired 
during 
the 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
5 
the 
failed 
murdered  by  the  complainant  party  due  to 
honour and the murder was result of honour 
incriminating  material  was 
killing.  No 
collected  by 
Investigating  Officer 
against  me  and  my  co-accused  as  well  as 
prosecution  has 
to  produce  any 
incriminating  material  against  me  and  co-
accused.  No  recovery  of  crime  weapon  was 
effected  by  the  Investigating  Officer  by  me 
as  well  as  co-accused.  Although  I  was 
subjected  to  physical  remand  in  police 
custody  for  13  days.  Ocular  evidence  was 
also  falsified  by  the  medical  evidence.  No 
empty was recovered, which also makes the 
prosecution  case  and  story  highly  doubtful 
regarding  the  manner  of  occurrence,  The 
prosecution  failed  to  prove  regarding  my 
coming  and  retreating  from  the  place  of 
occurrence. It is also established that on the 
tongue  of  the  people  of  the  area  that  Imam 
Bakhsh  was  done  to  death  due  to  domestic 
differences  of  complainant  party.  No 
independent  witness  has  been  engaged  by 
the prosecution in order to prove their case. 
All  the  Pws  are  interested  one  and  closely 
related.  We 
to 
complainant  party  during  investigation  that 
we  are  ready  to  give  oath  on  holy  Quran 
that  we  have  not  murdered  the  deceased 
Imam  Bakhsh  and  today  also  before  the 
court  we  are  ready  to  swear  on  the  Holy 
Quran  that  we  have  no  nexus  with  the 
occurrence and are totally innocent.” 
furnish 
offer 
also 
 
8. 
After  conclusion  of  the  trial,  learned  trial  court, 
while acquitting co-accused (mentioned above) convicted 
and  sentence  the  appellant  as  mentioned  above  through 
the impugned judgment. 
9. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  contended 
that  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  its  case  against  the 
appellant; that witnesses produced by the prosecution are 
chance  witnesses;  that  ocular  account  has  been  negated 
by  the  medical  evidence;  that  no  incriminating  material 
was  recovered  from  the  appellant  although  he  remained 
on physical remand for thirteen days; that after thorough 
investigation, the appellant was found as not involved in 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
6 
the  occurrence;  and  that  impugned  judgment  containing 
conviction and  sentence is  against  the  law  and  facts  and 
is liable to be set aside. 
10.  Learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  assisted  by 
learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  has  supported  the 
impugned  judgment  by  contending  that  it  is  a  day  light 
occurrence  and  prosecution  has  proved  its  case  beyond 
shadow of doubt against the appellant. 
11.  After  hearing  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties 
and going through the record, it has been observed by us 
that  as per case of prosecution, occurrence  took place  at 
6.30  a.m. on 14.9.2012  but  First  Information  Report  has 
been  recorded  at  9.30  a.m.,  for  which,  no  explanation 
whatsoever  has  been  given  by  the  prosecution.    In  this 
regard,  complainant/PW-1  tried  to  introduce  dishonest 
improvement  while  stating  in  his  examination-in-chief 
that  I  have  already  informed  the  police  telephonically 
about the occurrence but when during cross examination 
he was duly confronted with his statement Ex.PA, it was 
not  found therein;  relevant portion  from  his statement  is 
hereby reproduced:- 
“I  have  stated  in  my  statement  Ex.PA  and 
complaint  Ex.PA/2,  that  I  informed  the 
police  telephonically  about  the  occurrence.  
Confronted with Ex.PA and Ex.PA/2, where 
it is not so mentioned”. 
 
It is further important to mention here that PW-1 during 
cross examination has stated as under: - 
“I  have  got  recorded  my  statement  for 
registration  of  F.I.R  before  Investigating 
Officer after half an hour of the occurrence.  
The  Investigating  Officer  reached  at  the 
place of occurrence after half hour” 
 
Perusal  of  above  deposition  of  the  complainant/PW-1 
leads towards three situations: one is that if Investigating 
Officer  reached  at  the  place  of  occurrence  after  half  an 
hour and PW-1/complainant got recorded his statement to 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
7 
him  after  half  an  hour  of  the  occurrence,  then  this 
occurrence  has  not  occurred  at  6.30  a.m.  rather  at  8.00 
a.m. because the time of recording of statement of PW-1/ 
complainant  in  Ex.PA  at  its  bottom  has  been  mentioned 
as  8.30  a.m.    So,  in  the  light  of  this,  occurrence  has  not 
taken place at 6.30 a.m. and prosecution could not prove 
exact time of the occurrence, which sole fact is sufficient 
to  give  fatal  blow  to  the  case  of  the  prosecution;  while 
considering the second situation, if occurrence has taken 
place  at 6.30  a.m. and  Investigating  Officer  had  reached 
at  the  place  of  occurrence  after  half  an  hour  meaning 
thereby  Investigating  Officer  reached  at  the  place  of 
occurrence at 7.00 a.m. and complainant has got recorded 
his  statement  to  him  at  7.00  a.m.,  then  where  is  that 
statement because F.I.R of the case in hand has not been 
got  registered  on  any  statement,  which  might  have  been 
recorded  at  7.00  a.m.    Hence,  one  can  come  to  the 
conclusion 
that  said  statement  was  destroyed  and 
thereafter  another  statement  has  been  prepared  at  8.30 
a.m.  and  in  the  light  of  same,  instant  F.I.R  has  been 
registered,  which  again  is  fatal  for  the  prosecution  and 
the third situation coming out from the scenario is that if 
Investigating  Officer  had  reached  at  the  place  of 
occurrence  after  half  an  hour,  then  time  has  been 
consumed for consultation, deliberation, inducement and 
procurement and thereafter this case has been registered, 
which  further  signals  that  occurrence  was  un-witnessed 
and  this  time  has  been  consumed  for  above  mentioned 
purposes, which is again fatal for the prosecution.  Even 
if  all  these  three  situations  are  ignored  and  simply 
registration  of  the  case  through  F.I.R  Ex.PA/4  is 
considered,  same  is  delayed  without  any  plausible 
explanation and straightaway leads to the view that same 
is  afterthought,  result  of  concoctions,  deliberation, 
consultation  and  this  time  has  been  consumed  for 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
8 
procuring and engaging witnesses and concocting version 
for  registration  of  the  case.    So,  this  aspect  which  lays 
foundation of the case, has given fatal blow to the case of 
prosecution.    Reliance  is  placed  upon  the  case  of 
“Mehmood  Ahmad  and  3  others  versus  The  State  and 
another” (1995 SCMR 127).  It is important to mention 
here  that  had  any  cited  eyewitness  or  complainant  been 
present  at  the  place  of  occurrence,  then  situation  might 
had  been  otherwise  i.e.  case  would  have been  registered 
promptly after the occurrence.  So this aspect has negated 
the  presence  of  complainant  and  cited  eyewitnesses  at 
time of occurrence. 
12.  As far as ocular account is concerned, prosecution 
has produced two cited eyewitnesses i.e. Ghulam Raza as 
PW-1, who also happens to be complainant of F.I.R, and 
Muhammad Waseem as PW-2.  Ghulam  Raza/PW-1 did 
not  give  any  plausible  reason  about  his  presence  at  the 
place  of  occurrence 
in  Fard  Bayan  Ex.PA  and 
complainant  Ex.PA/2.    Similarly  Muhammad  Waseem/ 
PW-2 also did not give any reason for his presence at the 
time and place of occurrence; during his evidence before 
Court deposed as under: - 
“It  is  correct that  I have  not  mentioned  the 
reason  of  my  presence  in  my  statement 
before the police as well as court at the time 
of cursory statement” 
These  both  witnesses  are  not  resident  of  the  house  of 
occurrence,  they  could  not  give  any  plausible  reason 
about  their  presence  at  the  place  of  occurrence.    It  is 
strange enough to note that they are resident of the same 
village and claimed that  they were sleeping in the house 
of  deceased  without  any  plausible  cause.    Hence,  their 
presence  seems  to  be  improbable  and  they  are  not  only 
chance  and  casual  witness  rather  interested  and  related 
also, thus, cannot be believed/relied.  Guidance has been 
sought 
from 
the  dictum 
laid  down 
in  case  of  
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
9 
“Mst. Sughra Begum and another versus Qaiser Pervez 
and  others”  (2015  SCMR  1142),  the  relevant  portion 
whereof is reproduced as under: - 
“14.  A chance witness, in legal parlance is 
the  one  who  claims  that  he  was  present  on 
the crime spot at the fateful time,  albeit, his 
presence there was a sheer chance as in the 
ordinary  course  of  business,  place  of 
residence  and  normal  course  of  events,  he 
was  not  supposed  to  be  present  on  the  spot 
but  at  a  place  where  he  resides,  carries  on 
business or runs day to day life affairs.  It is 
in  this  context  that  the  testimony  of  chance 
witness,  ordinarily,  is  not  accepted  unless 
justifiable  reasons  are  shown  to  establish 
his  presence  at  the  crime  scene  at  the 
relevant 
the 
presumption  under  the  law  would  operate 
about his absence from the crime spot.  True 
that  in  rare  cases,  the  testimony  of  chance 
witness  may  be  relied  upon,  provided  some 
convincing 
to 
prudent  mind  for  his  presence  on  the  crime 
spot are put forth, when the occurrence took 
place  otherwise,  his  testimony  would  fall 
within the category of suspect evidence and 
cannot be accepted without a pinch of salt” 
explanations  appealing 
  In  normal  course, 
time. 
Guidance  can  also  be  sought  from 
the  case  of 
“Muhammad  Ameer  and  another  versus  Riyat  Khan  and 
others” (2016 SCMR 1233), the relevant portion whereof 
is also reproduced: - 
by 
upon 
relied 
“4.  As already observed above, one of the 
eye-witnesses 
the 
prosecution,  i.e.  Noor  Muhammad  had  not 
been produced by the prosecution before the 
trial  Court  and  the  ocular  account  was 
furnished in this case only by Ghulam Abbas 
(PW-9).  The said witness was a first cousin 
of  Muhammad  Afzal  deceased  and  was 
admittedly  a  chance  witness  who  ordinarily 
resided  about  one  kilometer  away  from  the 
place  of  occurrence.    The  stated  reason  for 
availability of this witness near the place of 
occurrence  had  never  been  established 
through any independent evidence at all” 
Even  no  convincing  reason  or  plausible  explanation  has 
come  on  the  record  to  corroborate  presence  of  PW-2 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
10 
Muhammad Waseem at the place of occurrence, hence he 
is  also  a  chance/casual  witness,  interested  and  related 
witness.  Nutshell is that testimony of both eye witnesses 
PW-1 Ghulam Raza and PW-2 Muhammad Waseem fell 
within  the  category  of  suspect  evidence,  hence,  neither 
can be accepted nor relied. 
13.  Another  important  aspect  is  that  it  is  own  case  of 
the complainant in his statement Ex.PA that he alongwith 
Muhammad Waseem PW-2 and Muhammad Nawaz PW 
(given  up)  was  sleeping  in  the  house  of  Imam  Bakhsh, 
when  at  once  at  6.30  a.m.  accused  persons  came  there 
and  soon  after  their  arrival,  accused  Muhammad  Nawaz 
raised  lalkara  and  accused  Iqbal  fired  at  Imam  Bakhsh 
deceased  but  during  his  examination 
in  chief  he 
intentionally  omitted  word  sleeping,  however,  when  he 
was  confronted  during  his  cross  examination,  then 
following  deposition  came  on  record,  which  is  hereby 
reproduced: - 
“I have got recorded in my statement about 
the presence  of  PWs  and  mine in  the house 
of  Imam  Bakhsh  deceased  at  the  time  of 
occurrence  in  complaint  Ex.PA/2  and  Fard 
Bayan  Ex.PA.  confronted  with  Ex.PA/2  and 
Ex.PA  where  the  Ghulam  Raza  alongwith 
other  PWs  were  present 
in  sleeping 
condition” 
Now  perusal  of  aforementioned  deposition  reveals  that 
dishonest  omission  was  made  by  PW-1  in  order  to 
conceal  sleeping  condition  and  it  is  crystal  clear  that 
this  dishonest  omission  was  caused  because  from  the 
perusal of  contents  of  Fard  Bayan  Ex.PA,  it  reveals  that 
complainant  alongwith  other  cited  eyewitnesses  were 
sleeping when at once accused came and made fire shot, 
in  this  situation  when  only  one  fire  shot  has  been 
allegedly  made  by  the  accused/appellant  and  said  first 
and only fire shot has been received by the deceased, and 
after hearing report of said fire shot, the complainant and 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
11 
other cited eyewitnesses awoke then in that situation how 
it  was  possible  for  them  to  see  that  who  has  made  said 
fire shot  and  where it  has landed;  this  factor clearly  hits 
the  claim  of  the  complainant  and  cited  eyewitnesses 
regarding  seeing  the  episode,  hence  this  dishonest 
omission  was  introduced.    Reliance  is  placed  upon  the 
case  of  “Syed  Saeed  Muhammad  Shah  and  another 
versus  The  State”  (1993  SCMR  550),  the  relevant 
partition whereof is reproduced below: - 
that 
“27.  Secondly,  statements  of  the  witnesses  in 
the  Court  in  which  improvements  are  made  to 
strengthen  the  case  of  the  prosecution  are  not 
worthy  of  reliance.    It  is  held  in  the  case  of 
Amir  Zaman  v.  Mehboob  and  others  (1985 
testimony  of  witnesses 
SCMR  685) 
containing  material 
improvements  are  not 
believable.    Reference  can  also  be  made  to  the 
cases  of  Haji  Bakhsh  v.  The  State  (PLD  1963 
Kar.  805),  Qaim  Din  and  others  v.  The  State 
(1971  PCr.LJ  229)  and  Fazla  and  another  v. 
The State (PLD 1960 Lah. 373)” 
 
Reliance is further placed upon the case of “Muhammad 
Saleem  versus  Muhammad  Azan  and  another”  (2011 
SCMR  474),  the  relevant  portion  whereof  is  reproduced 
as under: - 
“It  is  settled  law  that  the  witnesses  while 
appearing in the court had made improvements 
in their statements to strengthen the prosecution 
case  cast  serious  doubt  on  the  veracity  of  such 
witnesses,  therefore,  the  learned  High  Court 
was  justified  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
their statements are not worthy of reliance.  See 
Saeed  Muhammad  Shah’s  case  (1993  SCMR 
550)  and  Muhammad  Shafique  Ahmad’s  case 
(PLD 1981 SC 472)” 
 
In  this  regard  statement  of  PW-2  Muhammad  Waseem 
can  also  be  referred, who  has  categorically  deposed  that 
he alongwith Ghulam Raza complainant and Nawaz was 
sleeping  in  the  house  of  Imam  Bakhsh  when  accused 
came  and  fire  was  made.    In  this  scenario,  it  was  not 
possible  for  these  cited  eyewitness  to  see  that  who  has 
made  fire  shot and to  whom  it  had hit because only  one 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
12 
fire  shot  was  made  and  its  report  awoke  all  these  cited 
eyewitnesses.    When  complainant  or  eyewitness  makes 
such  sort  of  conflicting  statements,  he  cannot  be 
considered  as  truthful  witness.    Reliance  is  placed  upon 
the  case  of  “Muhammad  Nadeem  alias  Banka  versus 
The State” (2011 SCMR 1517). 
14.  There is another important feature of the case that 
Ghulam Raza complainant in his Fard Bayan Ex.PA  has 
not  recorded  the  “nature  of  firearm  weapon”  allegedly 
carried  by  Muhammad  Iqbal  appellant  and  only  firearm 
has  been  mentioned  therein,  however,  he  introduced 
dishonest  improvement  in  this  regard  while  appearing 
before  the  Court  and  in  his  examination-in-chief  stated 
that  Iqbal  was  armed  with  pistol  30-bore  but  when  he 
was  duly  confronted  during  cross  examination,  then 
following reply was offered: - 
“I have got recorded that the accused Iqbal 
was  armed  with  30-bore  pistol  in  Fard 
Bayan  in  Ex.PA  and  complaint  Ex.PA/2, 
confronted with Ex.PA and Ex.PA/2 where it 
is not so recorded” 
 
Same  is  position  regarding  PW-2  Muhammad  Waseem, 
who  stated  in  his  examination-in-chief  before  the  Court 
that  Iqbal  was  armed  with  pistol  but  during  his  cross 
examination he replied as under:- 
“I have not got recorded that Iqbal accused 
was  armed  with  pistol  at  the  time  of 
occurrence  in  my  statement  under  Section 
161 of Cr.P.C.” 
 
So,  the  factum  of  not  deposing  about  kind  of  firearm 
weapon  by 
these  witnesses  also  raises  eyebrows 
regarding  their  presence  at  the  place  of  occurrence  and 
further  introduction  of  dishonest  improvement  in  this 
regard  shatters  testimonial  value  of  their  evidence.    So, 
conduct  of  these  both  witnesses  does  not  establish  their 
presence  at  the  place  of  occurrence  and  they  are  not 
reliable. 
  Reliance 
is  placed  upon 
case  of  
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
13 
“Muhammad  Akram  versus  The  State”  (2010  P.Cr.L.J. 
1515)  and  “Ghulam  Qasim  versus  The  State”  (2007 
YLR 1067). 
15. 
It is case of prosecution that Iqbal appellant made 
firearm  shot  which  hit  Imam  Bakhsh  deceased  at  his 
head.    In  the  postmortem  report  and  statement  of  the 
doctor  said  injury  was  carrying  burning,  blackening, 
greasing  and  collar  of  abrasion.    Relevant  portion  of 
statement  of  Dr.  Muhammad  Arslan  Tayyab  PW-5  is 
hereby reproduced: - 
“It is correct that the forensic science is the 
part  of  MBBS  course.    It  is  correct  that  if 
fire  is  made  from  the  range  3/4  feet  then 
blackening occurs around the entry wounds.  
If  the  fire  is  made  within  the  range  of  6 
inches,  then  the  burning  occurs  around  the 
injury.  That if the fire is made at a distance 
of  16  feet  no  blackening  or  burning  occurs 
around the entry wound” 
 
Now  coming  to  the  case  of  prosecution,  Ghulam  Raza 
PW-1 in his statement deposed as under: - 
“The  site  plan  was  prepared  by 
the 
Investigating  Officer  as  well  as  draftsman 
on  my  pointation  as  well  as  pointation  of 
PWs” 
 
Similarly PW-2 in his statement deposed as under: - 
“It  is  correct  that  I  have  pointed  out  to 
Investigating  Officer  that  accused  Iqbal 
made  fire  to  Imam  Bakhsh  deceased  from 
the distance of 16 feet” 
 
Site  plan  with  scale  depicts  that  fire  was  made  at  Imam 
Bakhsh  from  a  distance  of  16  feet,  hence,  it  is  crystal 
clear that ocular account has been negated by the medical 
evidence because if a fire is made from a distance of 16 
feet,  then  no  burning  or  blackening  can  occur.    In  this 
regard,  guidance  has  been  sought  from  the  dictum  laid 
down  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the 
case  of  “Muhammad  Ali  versus  The  State”  (2015 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
14 
SCMR  137),  the  relevant  portion  whereof  is  hereby 
reproduced:- 
“The  doctor  has  also  found  blackening  on 
the  injuries  which  means  that  the  injuries 
could  have  been  caused  from  a  distance  of 
three  feet  or  less.    But  according  to  site 
plan,  the  distance  between  the  assailants 
and the deceased was about 2 karams which 
is  equal  to  11  feet.    In  such  circumstances, 
the presence of the eye-witnesses at the spot 
is doubtful” 
 
Reliance is further placed upon the case of “Faiz Meeran 
versus  Muhammad  Khan  and  others”  (2016  SCMR 
1456) where it has been held as under:  
said  allegation 
the  eyewitnesses  produced  by 
“The 
leveled  against 
respondents Nos.1 and 2 was not supported 
by  the  medical  evidence  because  according 
to 
the 
prosecution  respondents  Nos.1  and  2  had 
fired at and injured Muhammad Arif (PW7) 
from  a  distance  of  thirty-five  feet  but  the 
medical  evidence  had  shown  availability  of 
burning  on  the  relevant  injuries  which  was 
not  possible  from  a  distance  of  thirty-five 
feet” 
 
Hence, it can be safely held that ocular account has been 
negated  and  falsified  by  the  medical  evidence,  and  this 
state  of  affairs  negates presence  of  cited eyewitnesses at 
the place of occurrence. 
16.  Appellant  Muhammad  Iqbal  remained  in  custody 
of police on physical remand for a period of thirteen days 
but no weapon/incriminating material could be recovered 
from him. 
17. 
It  was  case  of  prosecution,  mentioned  in  Fard 
Bayan  Ex.PA,  that  accused  persons  had  got  registered 
case against Umair Hayat (nephew of the deceased of the 
case)  and  deceased  was  pursuing  the  same  and  due  to 
said  grudge  they  have  committed  murder  of  Imam 
Bakhsh.  It has come on record that Umair Hayat was not 
nephew  of  Imam  Bakhsh  deceased.    In  this  regard, 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
15 
relevant  portion  of  statement  of  PW-1 
is  being 
reproduced: - 
“Imam Bakhsh deceased was son of Ghulam 
Haider.  The grand father’s name of Umair 
Hayat is Ramzan” 
 
Relevant  portion  of  statement  of  PW-2  Muhammad 
Waseem  in  this  regard  is  also  being  reproduced  as 
under:- 
“The  name  of  the  father  of  Imam  Bakhsh 
deceased  is  Ghulam  Haider.    The  name  of 
father  of  Umair  Hayat  is  Ahmad  Hayat.  
Ramzan is the father of Ahmad Hayat” 
 
Perusal  of  aforementioned  statements  clearly  establishes 
that  Umair  Hayat  was  not  nephew  of  Imam  Bakhsh.  
Furthermore  if  accused  persons  had  got  registered  any 
case against Umair Hayat and nourished any grudge due 
to  said  case,  then  he  would  have  been  targeted  and 
murdered;  particularly  when  it  has  also  come  on  the 
record  that  house  of  Imam  Bakhsh  was  situated  within 
populated  area  from  all  the  four  sides,  which  was  a 
difficult  target,  whereas  house  of  Umair  Hayat  was 
situated  outside  the  village  in  agricultural  land  hence 
easy  to  target;  it  has  further  not  been  brought  on  record 
by the prosecution that when very same Umair Hayat has 
not  been  targeted,  then  what  was  the  reason  to  target 
Imam  Bakhsh  deceased  particularly  when  no  proof 
regarding  alleged  pursuit  of  case  by  Imam  Bakhsh  has 
come  on  record,  hence,  motive  has  not  been  proved  by 
the prosecution. 
18. 
Investigating  Officer  appeared  as  Court  Witness 
and  perusal  of  his  statement  reveals  that  it  was  the  very 
first version of Muhammad Iqbal appellant that he is not 
involved in the occurrence; many persons have appeared 
during  investigation  in  support  of  his  version,  which 
remained  the  same  throughout  investigation;  nothing 
incriminating  material  was  got  recovered  from  him  and 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
16 
CW-1 also deposed during his statement before the Court 
as under: - 
“Muhammad  Iqbal  and  Muhammad  Nawaz 
accused  joined  investigation  and  both  the 
accused  stated  that  they  are  innocent  and 
have  no  nexus  with 
the  occurrence 
--------------------------------------No  evidence 
was  produced  by  complainant  or  eye 
witnesses  regarding  the  rebuttal  of  first 
version  which  has  been  made  by  accused 
Muhammad  Nawaz  and  Muhammad  Iqbal 
---------------------------------------It also came 
into  my  knowledge  and  in  my  express 
investigation  that  it  was  the  month  of 
September  at  6.30  AM,  many  persons  woke 
up in village but no one has stated regarding 
the  coming  and  leaving  of  accused.    It  also 
came  into  my  knowledge  and  it  is  in  the 
tongue  of  the  town  that  Imam  Bux  was 
murdered  by  complainant  party  due  to 
domestic  difference.    It  transpired  during 
investigation 
that  accused  Muhammad 
Nawaz  and  Muhammad 
Iqbal  were 
implicated in the instant case due to enmity.  
I also made effort but no weapon of offence 
was  recovered 
the  possession  of 
accused 
(emphasis  added)------------------
The  investigation  conducted  by  me  was 
verified by the SHO” 
 
from 
So  the  investigation  conducted  in  this  case  has  also 
negated  the  version  of  complainant  party  and  has 
signalled  about  non-involvement  of  Muhammad  Iqbal 
appellant  in  the  alleged  occurrence.    Though  opinion  of 
police  is  not  binding  upon  the  Court  yet  in  the  peculiar 
facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case,  same  has  not  been 
found  as  biased  particularly  when  inspite  of  cross 
examination  over  Investigating  Officer  by  the  learned 
counsel  for  the  complainant,  nothing  could  be  pointed 
out,  which  could  make  same  as  “biased”.    Reliance  is 
placed  upon  the  case  of  “Sikandar  Shah  versus  Raza 
Shah  and  another”  (2015  SCMR  10),  the  relevant 
portion whereof is reproduced as under: - 
 
 
 
 
 Appeal No. 393-2010 
M.R No.140 of 2016 
Crl.Appeal No.481 of  2016 
17 
“Even otherwise in two successive inquiries 
by he CIA Raza Shah was found innocent on 
the basis of evidence having come on record 
that  he  was  not  present  at  the  spot  at  the 
time  of  occurrence.    In  such  circumstances 
the  statement  of  complainant  cannot  be 
relied upon for conviction of Raza Shah and 
the learned High Court had rightly acquitted 
him of the charge” 
 
In  view  of  above,  we  have  reached  at  the 
12. 
conclusion  that  prosecution  has  failed  to  prove  its  case 
against  the  appellant.    Thus,  instant  appeal  is  allowed, 
impugned  conviction  and  sentence  recorded  through  the 
impugned  judgment  dated  27.2.2016  passed  in  private 
complaint  arising  out  of  F.I.R  No.340/2012  dated 
14.9.2012 registered under Sections 302, 109, 34 PPC at 
Police Station Qadirpur, District Jhang, are set aside and 
the  appellant  is  acquitted  of  the  charge.   Appellant  shall 
be  released  forthwith  if  not  required  in  any  other  case.  
Murder Reference No.140/2016 is answered in negative 
and death sentence is not confirmed. 
 
 
(Shehram Sarwar Ch.)   
            Judge 
 
 
Naeem 
 
 
  (Farooq Haider) 
           Judge 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
            Judge 
 
 
 
           Judge 
