JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
           
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
M/s Imran Ali Lubricants 
Versus   
Federation of Pakistan and others 
 
 
Date of Hearing. 
PETITIONERS BY: 
J U D G M E N T 
08-03-2018 
 
M/s  Khubaib  Ahmad 
Advocates. 
and  Mohsin  Virk, 
RESPONDENTS BY:  Mr. Sarfraz Ahmad Cheema, Advocate. 
Mr. Tahir Mehmood Ahmad Khokhar, DAG. 
Shahid Karim, J:-  This 
petition 
challenges 
the 
constitutionality of rule 12 of the Sales Tax Rules, 2006 
(Rules,  2006).    Rule  12  has  been  enacted  in  pursuance 
of  the  provisions  of  section  21(2)  of  the  Sales  Tax  Act, 
1990 (Act, 1990).  The first challenge is on the basis of 
the  rule  vouched  by  the  respectable  authority  that  rules 
cannot  travel  beyond  the  mandate  of  the  primary 
enactment.  The second limb of the challenge is that rule 
12  offends  the  provisions  of  Article  10A  and  18  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (the 
Constitution)  and  impinges  upon  the  right  of  the 
petitioners  to  be  treated  in  accordance  with  law  and  by 
due  process  of  law  as  well  as  affects  the  right  of  the 
petitioners to conduct trade and business as enshrined in 
Article 18 of the Constitution. 
2. 
This 
judgment  shall  also  decide  connected 
petition  W.P  No.22691  of  2017  which  involves  a 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
2 
 
 
common  question  of  law  and  fact  and  challenges  the 
same show cause notice. 
3. 
Rule  12  of  the  Rules,  2006  is  at  the  heart  of  the 
controversy  raised  in  these  petitions  and  it  would  be 
appropriate to reproduce the said rule in extenso:- 
“12.  Blacklisting  and  suspension  of  registration.– 
Where  the  Commissioner  or  Board  has  reasons  to 
believe  that  the  registered  person  is  to  be  suspended 
or  blacklisted,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  LTUs  and 
RTOs  follow  a  uniform  policy  for  suspension  and 
blacklisting  of  sales  tax  registered  persons  under 
section  21(2)  of 
for  subsequent 
proceedings  in  such  cases,  the  following  procedure 
shall be followed, namely:- 
the  Act  and 
(a) SUSPENSION  
tax  or  committed 
(i)  Where  a  Commissioner,  having  jurisdiction,  is 
satisfied  that  a  registered  person  has  issued  fake 
invoices,  evaded 
fraud, 
registration of  such person may be suspended by the 
Commissioner  through  the  system,  without  prior 
notice,  pending  further  inquiry.  The  basis  for  such 
satisfaction  may  inter  alia  include  the  following, 
namely:–  
tax 
(A) non-availability of the registered person at 
the given address; 
to  allow  access 
(B)  refusal 
to  business 
premises  or  refusal  to  furnish  records  to  an 
authorized Inland Revenue Officer; 
(C)  abnormal  tax  profile,  such  as  taking 
excessive  input  tax  adjustments,  continuous 
carry-forwards,  or 
in 
turnover; 
increase 
sudden 
(D)  making  substantial  purchases  from  or 
making  supplies 
to  other  blacklisted  or 
suspended person; 
(E) non-filing of sales tax returns;  
(F)  on  recommendation  of  a  commissioner  of 
any other jurisdiction; 
(G)  any  other  reason  to  be  specified  by  the 
Commissioner; 
(ii)  the  suspension  of  registration  shall  take  place 
through  a  written  order  of 
the  Commissioner 
concerned, giving reasons for suspension. This order 
shall be endorsed to the registered person concerned, 
all other LTUs/RTOs, the FBR„s computer system, the 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
3 
 
 
STARR  computer  system  and  the  Customs  Wing 
computer  system  for  information  and  necessary 
action as per law; 
(iii)  a  registered  person  who  does  not  file  sales  tax 
return  for  six  consecutive  months  shall  be  caused  to 
be suspended through the system without any notice; 
(iv)  in  cases,  where  the  buyers  and  suppliers  of  any 
such  person,  whose  registration  is  being  suspended, 
belongs  to  another  LTU/  RTO,  and  these  buyers  / 
suppliers  are  also  required  to  be  suspended,  the 
Commissioner shall intimate the Chief Commissioner 
of the concerned LTU/RTO in whose jurisdiction such 
buyers/suppliers 
the 
complete  facts  of  the  case  and  the  reasons  on  the 
basis  of  which  these  buyers/suppliers  are  to  be 
suspended, 
proceedings 
for 
suspension/blacklisting of the buyers/suppliers; 
in  writing  explaining 
initiate 
fall, 
to 
(v) no input tax adjustment/refund shall be admissible 
to  the  registered  person  during  the  currency  of 
suspension. Similarly, no input tax adjustment/refund 
shall  be  allowed  to  any  other  registered  persons  on 
the  strength  of  invoices  issued  by  such  suspended 
person  (whether  issued  prior  to  or  after  such 
suspension), during the currency of suspension; 
(vi)  the  Commissioner  shall,  within  seven  days  of 
issuance  of  order  of  suspension,  issue  a  show  cause 
notice (through registered post or courier service) to 
the  registered  person  to  afford  an  opportunity  of 
hearing  with  fifteen  days  of  the  issuance  of  such 
notice clearly indicating that he will be blacklisted, in 
case– 
(A) there is no response to the notice; 
(B) he has not provided the required record; 
(C) he has not  allowed access  to his  business 
record or premises; and  
(D)  any  other  reason  specified  by 
Commissioner; 
the 
(vii)  in  case  show  cause  notice  is  not  issued  within 
seven  days  of  the  order  of  suspension,  the  order  of 
suspension shall become void ab-initio; 
(viii)  in  case  of  non-availability  of  the  suspended 
person at the given address, the notice may be affixed 
on the main notice Board of the LTU/RTO; 
(ix)  on  receipt  of  the  reply  to  the  notice  and  after 
giving  an  opportunity  of  hearing  to  the  registered 
person, if the Commissioner is satisfied, he may order 
for revoking of suspension of the registered person; 
(b) BLACKLISTING 
(i) in case, after giving an opportunity of hearing, the 
offence is confirmed, the Commissioner shall issue an 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
4 
 
 
appealable self-speaking order for blacklisting of the 
registered person, and shall proceed to take legal and 
penal action under the relevant provisions of the Act; 
(ii) the order of blacklisting shall contain the reasons 
for blacklisting, the time period for which any refund 
or  input  tax  claimed  by  such  person  or  by  any  other 
registered  person  on  the  strength  of  invoices  issued 
by  him  from  the  date  of  his  registration  shall  be 
inadmissible, any recovery to  be paid or penalties to 
be imposed; 
(iii)  the  order  of  blacklisting  shall  be  issued  within 
ninety days of the issuance of the notice of hearing. In 
case, the order of blacklisting is not issued within this 
time period the suspension of registered person shall 
become void ab-initio; 
(iv)  copies  of  the  order  shall  be  endorsed  to  the 
registered  person  concerned,  all  other  LTUs/RTOs, 
the  FBR/PRAL  computer 
the  STARR 
computer  system  and  the  Customs  Wing  computer 
system. Each LTU/RTO shall circulate all such lists to 
their  refund  sections,  audit  sections  and  other 
concerned  staff 
is 
the  order 
implemented in letter and spirit by all concerned; 
to  ensure 
system, 
that 
(v) all LTUs / RTOs shall further circulate the copies 
of the order along with a computer system-generated 
list  of  invoices  issued  by  the  blacklisted  persons  as 
referred  to  in  the  preceding  clause,  to  all  officers  of 
Inland  Revenue  having 
the 
registered  persons  who  have  claimed  credit  of  input 
tax or refund on the strength of the invoices issued by 
the said blacklisted persons; and 
jurisdiction  over 
(vi)  the  officer  of  Inland  Revenue  receiving  the 
aforesaid list under clause (v) shall issue show-cause 
notice under section 11 and sub-section (3) of section 
21 of the Act  to  a registered person for  rejecting the 
input  tax  or  refund  claimed  against  the  invoices  so 
circulated and further proceed to decide the matter as 
per law through a self-speaking appealable order and 
after  affording  a  reasonable  opportunity  of  being 
heard  to  such  person,  in  the  manner  as  provided  in 
the said sub-section (3).” 
4. 
As  can  be  seen  from  the  rule,  reproduced  above, 
that 
it  relates 
to  blacklisting  and  suspension  of 
registration  of  a  registered  person.    It  lays  down  the 
procedure  to  be  followed  as  a  uniform  policy  for  the 
purpose  of  suspension  and  blacklisting  of  sales  tax 
registration under Section 21(2) of the Act, 1990 and for 
subsequent  proceedings  in  such  cases.    The  structure  of 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
5 
 
 
rule  12  is  such  that  the  proceedings  of  blacklisting 
follow  an  order  of  suspension  by  the  Commissioner 
having jurisdiction in the  matter.  As a prefatory, it can 
be seen that the Commissioner has the power to suspend 
the  registration  of  a  registered  person  without  prior 
notice  and  pending  further  inquiry.    This  can  only  be 
done  by  the  Commissioner  if  he  is  satisfied  that  a 
registered person has issued fake invoices, evaded tax or 
committed  tax  fraud.    The  precise  challenge  of  the 
petitioners  is  to  the  enumeration  in  rule  12  which 
empowers the Commissioner to suspend the registration 
of a registered person  without prior notice.   This power 
to  suspend  without  prior  notice,  according  to  the 
petitioners,  is  ultra  vires  the  Constitution  and  also 
resides  in  the  Commissioner  concerned  an  unfettered 
and unbridled power. 
5. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  led  by 
Mr.  Sarfraz  Ahmad  Cheema,  Advocate,  on  the  other 
hand,  defended  the  said  rule  on  the  ground  that  the 
petitioners  and  other  registered  persons  who  are 
proceeded against by suspension of their registration are 
afforded  an  opportunity  of  hearing  by  service  of  show 
cause  notice  on 
them  within  seven  days  of 
the 
suspension  of  the  registration  and  a  right  of  hearing  is 
conferred  on  such  persons  which  takes  care  of  their 
constitutional and other statutory rights. 
6. 
At first blush, the power of the Commissioner to 
suspend  the  registration  of  a  registered  person  without 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
6 
 
 
prior  notice  is  an  unstructured  power  and  clearly  seems 
expropriatory  in  nature.    Although,  rule  12  envisages 
that the Commissioner prior to exercising the power has 
to be satisfied that the registered person has issued fake 
invoices, evaded tax or committed tax fraud, it does not 
enumerate  a  notice  to  be  given  to  the  registered  person 
and  for  an  opportunity  of  hearing  to  be  provided.    The 
concept of being satisfied on the part of a Commissioner 
clearly  entails  an  inquiry  to  be  undertaken  as  the 
Commissioner  cannot,  without  recourse  to  scrutiny  of 
the  relevant  record  and  making  an  inquiry  be  satisfied 
that a registered person has either issued fake invoices or 
has  committed  tax  fraud.    These  are  serious  allegations 
and  raise  a  presumption  that  there  has  to  be  necessarily 
cogent  and  material  evidence  before  the  Commissioner 
to  come  to  a  satisfaction  that  a  drastic  measure  such  as 
suspension  of  registration  is  called  for.    Therefore,  it  is 
clear  that  the  Commissioner  is  obliged  to  make  some 
sort  of  inquiry  before  proceeding  to  form  an  opinion  to 
suspend the registration.  It cannot therefore be said that 
the  Commissioner  does  not  have  ample  time  to  engage 
the  registered  person  in  that  inquiry  and  in  some  of  the 
instances, the Commissioner in order to be satisfied will 
require  certain  documents  to  be  furnished  by  the 
registered person himself and, therefore, it can safely be 
said that the  engagement of the registered  person  in  the 
entire  procedure  would  be  inevitable  in  most  of  the 
cases.    For  example,  rule  12(a)  spells  out  the  basis  for 
such  satisfaction  and  which  will  include  inter  alia  the 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
7 
 
 
refusal  by  the  registered  person  to  allow  access  to 
business  premises  or  to  furnish  record.    Some  of  the 
other factors which have been mentioned in the said rule 
would  also 
lend  credence 
to 
the  view 
that 
the 
Commissioner  will  have  to  have  material  evidence 
before him in order to be satisfied and thus to proceed to 
suspend  the  registration  of  a  registered  person.    It  is 
incredulous  and  iniquitous,  therefore,  on  the  part  of  the 
rule  making  authority 
to  have  provided  for 
the 
suspension of the registration without prior notice to the 
registered person.   
7. 
Although  Mr.  Sarfraz  Cheema,  Advocate  argued 
that 
the 
registered  person  will  have 
sufficient 
opportunity  to  rebut  the  allegations  in  response  to  a 
show  cause  notice  to  be  served  within  seven  days,  the 
service  of  notice  and  subsequent  proceedings  are 
nothing but the continuation of the proceedings that have 
been  set  in  motion  by  an  ex-parte  suspension  order.    It 
goes  without  saying  that  a  suspension  order  entails 
serious  and  debilitating  consequences  for  the  registered 
persons.    Some  of  them  have  been  listed  in  the  rule  12 
itself.    For  example,    no  input  tax  adjustment/refund 
shall  be  admissible  to  the  registered  person  during  the 
currency  of  suspension. 
  Similarly,  no 
input  tax 
adjustment/refund  shall  be  allowed 
to  any  other 
registered persons  on  the  strength  of  invoices  issued by 
such suspended person.  However, the Commissioner is 
under  a  duty  to  issue  a  show  cause  notice  within  seven 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
8 
 
 
days  of  the  issuance  of  order  of  suspension  and  that 
notice  will  mention  that  the  registered  person  will  be 
blacklisted in case he  does not respond to the notice  on 
any  of  the  grounds  mentioned  in  rule  12(vi).    If  the 
proceedings  are  initiated  by  the  Commissioner  within 
seven  days  of  the  order  of  suspension,  then  the 
proceedings  may  continue  for  a  period  of  ninety  days 
and for which time the suspension order shall remain in 
force.  
8. 
 This begs  the question: what if at the end of the 
ninety days either the proceedings are not concluded and 
the  suspension  order  becomes  void  ab  initio  or  that  the 
proceedings  end  in  favour  of  the  registered  person.    In 
both  these  cases,  the  petitioners  shall  have  by  then 
suffered  an  irreparable  loss  and  injury  which  cannot  be 
compensated  and  for  which  the  registered  person  does 
not  seem  to  have  a  remedy.    He  will  not  be  able  to  file 
proceedings  for  the  restitution  of  the  losses  occasioned 
to him on account of an order which had no basis in law 
or  which  may  have  been  issued  mala  fide  or  under  a 
misapprehension  of  fact.    Therefore,  plainly  although  a 
registered  person  has  ostensibly  been  afforded  due 
process of law, yet the initial order of suspension of his 
registration without notice has rendered illusory the due 
process  which  is  subsequently  sought  to  be  afforded  to 
that registered person.   
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
9 
 
 
9. 
Section  21(2)  of  the  Act,  1990  which  requires  a 
procedure  to  be  prescribed  by  the  Board  is  to  the 
following effect:- 
“21(2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this 
Act, in cases where the Commissioner is satisfied that 
a  registered  person  is  found  to  have  issued  fake 
invoices  or  has  otherwise  committed  tax  fraud,  he 
may blacklist such person or suspend his registration 
in accordance with such procedure as the Board may 
by notification in the official Gazette, prescribe.” 
10. 
Therefore, 
the  procedure 
is  required 
to  be 
prescribed  by  the  Board  on  the  basis  of  the  powers 
conferred  by  section  21(2).    However,  it  is  vouched  by 
respectable  authority  that  the  rules  made  and  the 
procedure  prescribed  under 
the  delegated  powers 
conferred by the primary registration have to conform to 
the  main  enactment  and  cannot  be  in  contravention 
thereof.  The Board has been empowered to  prescribe a 
procedure  but  the  power  conferred  on  the  Board  does 
not envisage a procedure which takes away the rights of 
a  registered  person  or  offends  the  principles  of  due 
process  of  law.   What  is  being  contemplated  by  section 
21(2)  is  that  a  Commissioner  may  have  an  ultimate 
power  to  either  suspend  a  registration  or  blacklist  a 
person but it cannot be culled out from section 21(2) that 
an  unbridled  and  unfettered  power  can  be  conferred  on 
the  Commissioner  concerned  to  suspend  a  registration 
for  a  period  of  ninety  days  without  notice  and  without 
affording  an  opportunity  of  hearing.    Thus,  in  my 
opinion,  rule  12  to  that  extent  travels  beyond  the 
mandate of the main enactment and cannot be sustained. 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
10 
 
 
11. 
It will be noticed upon reading of section 21 that 
the satisfaction of the Commissioner is relatable both to 
the  suspension  of  registration  as  well  as  to  blacklisting.  
In 
the  rule  12,  however, 
the  satisfaction  of 
the 
Commissioner  is  only  relevant  for  the  purposes  of 
suspension and the basis of the satisfaction has also been 
spelt  out  in  rule  12(a)(i).    It  is  really  a  contradiction  in 
terms  to  say  that  a  Commissioner  is  satisfied  that  a 
person  has 
issued  fake 
invoices,  evaded 
tax  or 
committed  fraud,  yet  a  further  inquiry  is  required  to 
confirm the offence.  The term „satisfaction‟ is a term of 
art and connotes that there is enough material to form a 
definite opinion.  A Commissioner can only be satisfied 
if he has conducted a deep and invasive inquiry praying 
into the records of a person.  The words “is satisfied that 
a  registered  person  has  issued  fake  invoices…”  do  not 
leave  anything  to  imagination  that  a  conclusive  opinion 
has  been  formed  and  the  show-cause  notice  is  a  mere 
eye-wash.    The  show  cause  notice  is  merely  for  the 
purpose of enabling the person to upend the satisfaction 
already arrived at by the Commissioner.  The rules have 
carved  out  a  two-tier  adjudicative  process  treating 
suspension  of  registration  as  an  interim  step  while 
section  21  does  not  lend  itself  to  any  such  intention  on 
the  part  of  the  legislature.    Therefore  it  cannot  be 
deemed  that  the  Board  can,  by  the  rules,  empower  a 
Commissioner 
to  suspend  without  notice  and 
to 
blacklist,  with  notice.    This  is  an  unreasonable  and 
confiscatory restraint on the right of a registered person 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
11 
 
 
and  cannot  be  sustained.    To  reiterate,  the  effect  of 
suspension is as unfair and financially burdensome as an 
order of blacklisting and it would be iniquitous to draw a 
distinction and to create a dichotomy. 
12.  Rule  12  is  irrational  and  unreasonable  on  the 
basis of the further ground that once a suspension order 
has  been  passed  ex-parte,  the  Commissioner  concerned 
is  not  required  to  review  that  order  till  the  proceedings 
of blacklisting are concluded nor has a registered person 
been  conferred  a  right  to  have  that  order  reviewed 
pending 
those  proceedings. 
  Article  10A  of 
the 
Constitution provides:- 
“10A. For the determination of his civil rights and 
obligations or in any criminal charge against him a 
person  shall  be  entitled  to  a  fair  trial  and  due 
process.” 
13. 
In  Shabbir  Ahmed  v.  Kiran  Khursheed  and  8 
others  (2012  CLC  1236),  learned  Single  Judge  of  this 
Court  had  the  occasion  to  dilate  upon  and  elaborate  the 
extent  and  sweep  of  Article  10A  in  the  following 
words:- 
“The  impugned  auction  also  offends  the  newly 
incorporated fundamental right under Article 10-A of 
the Constitution, which mandates that civil rights and 
obligations of the petitioners can only be determined 
through  fair  trial  and  due  process.  Article  10-A, 
morphs  Article  4  into  a  more  robust  fundamental 
right,  covering  both  substantive  and  procedural  due 
process.  While  substantive  due  process  provides  a 
check  on  legislation  and  ensures  the  protection  of 
freedoms  guaranteed 
the 
Constitution, procedural due process, which concerns 
me  here,  provides 
that  "each  person  shall  be 
accorded  certain  "process"  if  they  are  deprived  of 
life,  liberty  or  property….The  question  then  focuses 
on  the  nature  of  the  "process"  that  is  "due."…  The 
government  always has the obligation of providing a 
neutral  decision  maker  one  who  is  not  inherently 
biased  against  the  individual  or  who  has  personal 
interest  in  the  outcome."14  Due  process  is  now 
to  a  person  under 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
12 
 
 
available to every person as a fundamental right and 
underscores  procedural  fairness  and  propriety  in 
determining  his  civil  or  criminal  rights.  The 
procedure  adopted  in  determining  the  rights  of  the 
parties must at every step pass the test of fairness and 
procedural propriety and at all times must honour the 
law and the settled legal principles.15 Article 10-A  is 
not  limited  to  a  judicial  trial  in  its  strict  sense  but 
requires  fairness  from  any  forum  which  determines 
the  rights  of  a  person.  In  this  case  the  haughty 
indifference  of  TMA  to  ignore  the  petitioners  and 
their existing tenancy and to smugly proceed directly 
with auction of the lease hold right does not pass the 
test of fairness or due process under Article 10-A. In 
addition,  Articles  18,  23  and  24  of  the  Constitution 
are also offended as right to do business and right to 
enjoy property have also been impaired.” 
14.  Here  we  are  concerned  with  the  procedural  due 
process.  Its importance lies in this that it established the 
essential relationship between the constitutional right to 
be  heard  and  the  right  to  be  heard  by  a  counsel.    In 
Walker  v  Sauvinet  92  US  90  (1875),  Justice  Pitney, 
writing for the Court, thought in well-settled that: 
“a  criminal  prosecution  in  the  courts  of  a  State, 
based  upon  a  law  not  in  itself  repugnant  to  the 
Federal Constitution, and conducted according to the 
settled  course  of  judicial  proceedings  as  established 
by  the  law  of  the  State,  so  long  as  it  includes  notice 
and hearing, or an opportunity to be heard, before a 
court  of  competent 
to 
established  modes  of  procedure,  is  „due  process‟  in 
the constitutional sense.” 
jurisdiction,  according 
15.  Although  suspension  of  registration  can  be 
argued  to  constitute  impermissible  punishment  before 
trial,  but  this  in  itself  does  not  violate  substantive  due 
process.  However it does offend procedural due process 
in  that  it  must  still  be  implemented  in  a  fair  manner.  
And  a  suspension  without  notice  is  certainly  a  clog  on 
the  petitioner‟s  right  to  be  treated  fairly  and  with 
reasonableness.    Lord  Denning,  a  great  English  Judge 
and  jurist,  writing  in  his  book  “The  Due  Process  of 
Law”, describes “Due Process of Law”, as follows: 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
13 
 
 
“By „Due Process‟ I do not mean rules of procedure.  
They  are  far  too  dull.    I  mean  much  the  same  as 
Parliament  meant  when  it  first  used  the  phrase.    It 
was in 1352 in the statute of 28 Edw, III, Ch. 3: 
„That no man of what estate or condition that 
he  be,  shall  be  put  out  of  land  or  tenement, 
nor  taken,  nor  imprisoned,  nor  disinherited, 
nor  put  to  death,  without  being  brought  in 
answer by Due Process of Law‟. 
I  mean  also  much  the  same  as  Madison  meant  when 
he proposed an amendment to the Constitution of the 
United  States.    It  was  accepted  in  1791  in  the  Fifth 
amendment:  No  person…shall  be  deprived  of  life, 
liberty, or property, without Due Process of law. 
So,  by  „Due  Process  of  Law‟  I  mean  the  measures 
authorized  by  the  law  so  as  to  keep  the  streams  of 
justice pure: to see that trials and inquiries are fairly 
conducted;  that  arrests  and  searches  are  properly 
made, that lawful remedies are readily available, and 
that unnecessary delays are eliminated.  It is in these 
matters 
its 
undoubtful genius.” 
law  has  shown 
the  common 
that 
16.  We must bear in mind the difference that the right 
of  hearing  being  part  of  „fair  trial‟  and  “due  process” 
having  acquired  a  constitutional  status  has  made.    An 
ordinary  right  of  hearing  could  be  taken  away  by  an 
express  statutory  provision.    But  now,  the  right  cannot 
be  excluded  by  ordinary  legislation  (except  in  cases  in 
which  the  right  of  hearing  is  not  treated  as  an  absolute 
right).  In this case, the overwhelming view is that right 
of  hearing  is  part  of  due  process  of  law  and  thus  an 
absolute right at least in cases which impact a person to 
his utter detriment by affecting his right of property, life, 
livelihood  or  liberty.    The  language  of  rule  12(b)(i) 
starkly  brings  forth  the  criminal  nature  of  the  charge 
against a registered person.  It says that: 
“i)  in  case,  after  giving  an  opportunity  of  hearing,  the 
offence is confirmed….”. 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
14 
 
 
17.  Doubtless, the registered person is being charged 
with a criminal offence and the clear intent is to proceed 
against  him  as  such. 
  Even  before  the  stage  of 
blacklisting arrives, the satisfaction of the Commissioner 
while  considering  suspension,  relates 
to  seriously 
egregious  allegations  such  as  fake  invoices,  evasion  of 
tax and commission of fraud.  All of these are charges of 
a  criminal  nature  and  thus  the  registered  person  is,  a 
fortiori, entitled to the protection of Article 10-A and to 
a fair trial and due process.  Indubitably therefore, he is 
also  entitled  to  a  right  of  hearing  at  both  stages  of 
determination. 
18.  Also  Article  18  of  the  Constitution  confers  the 
right on a person to enter upon any lawful profession or 
occupation  and  to  conduct  any  lawful  trade  or  business 
and this is only subject to such qualifications as may be 
prescribed by law.  However, the conferring of power on 
the Commissioner under rule 12 is a clear impairment of 
the  right  under  Article  18  conferred  on  all  citizens  as 
clearly, the registered person against whom a suspension 
order has been passed is barred from conducting all kind 
of business for a period of ninety days at least.    
19.  Besides,  it  is  an  immutable  principle  that  in  all 
proceedings  whether  judicial  or  administrative,  the 
principles  of  natural  justice  have  to  be  observed  if  the 
proceedings  might  result  in  consequences  affecting  the 
person  or  property  or  other  right  of 
the  parties 
concerned.  Therefore, where a person is empowered to 
W.P No.39468 of 2016 
15 
 
 
take  decisions  after  factual  investigation  into  the  facts 
which  would  result  in  consequences  affecting  the 
person, property or other right of any other person, then 
the  courts  have  inclined  generally  to  imply  that  the 
power  so  given  is  coupled  with  a  duty  to  act  in 
accordance  with  the  principles  of  natural  justice  and 
fairness.    [The  University  of  Dacca  through  its  Vice-
Chancellor  and  the  Registrar,  University  of  Dacca  v. 
Zakir Ahmed (PLD 1965 Supreme Court 90)]. 
20.  Undoubtedly 
the  power  of  suspension  of 
registration  without  prior  notice 
is  unlawful  and 
impinges upon the rights of the petitioners to be treated 
in accordance with law and to be afforded due process of 
law. 
21. 
In view of the above, these petitions are allowed.  
The rule 12 to the extent that it provides for suspension 
of registration of a registered person without prior notice 
is  held  to  be  ultra  vires  the  Constitution  as  well  as  the 
main  enactment  and  is  struck  down.    As  a  consequence 
thereof,  the  Commissioner  concerned  can  only  proceed 
to  suspend  the  registration  of  a  registered  person  with 
prior  notice  and  upon  affording  an  opportunity  of 
hearing. 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID KARIM) 
     
 JUDGE 
Announced in open Court on 02.04.2018 
Approved for reporting 
             
   JUDGE 
                  * 
Rafaqat Ali` 
 
 
  
