FORM  No. HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
Shakeel Ahmed Bhatti  versus     Government of Punjab, etc.  
W.P.No.248029/2018 
Sr. No. of order/ 
Proceedings 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
Parties’ counsel, where necessary 
 
09.11.2018 
Rana Shahzad Khalid, Advocate for petitioner.  
Mr.  Aamir  Sana  Ullah,  Assistant  Advocate  General, 
Punjab, on Court’s call.  
 
Through this Constitutional petition, the petitioner, 
who  is  a  civil  servant  presently  posted  on  deputation  in 
the Lahore Development Authority (‘LDA’) has called in 
question  order  dated  07.11.2018  whereby  he  has  been 
transferred  from  the  post  of  Director  Administration 
LDA to Director C&I, LDA with immediate effect.   
2. 
At  the  very  outset,  learned  counsel  for  petitioner 
has  been  confronted  with 
the 
legal  position 
that 
Constitutional  petition  filed  under  Article  199  of  the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (‘the 
Constitution’),  seeking  the  enforcement  of  terms  and 
conditions  of  civil  servant  is  not  maintainable  as  having 
been  barred  under  Article  212  of  the  Constitution.  The 
learned  counsel  submits  that  although  the  petitioner  was 
appointed  in  BS-17  and  previously  posted  as  Section 
Officer in the establishment of S&GAD but he had been 
transferred  on  deputation 
to  LDA  as  Director 
Administration  at  the  request  of  Director  General  LDA 
with  the  approval  of  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan 
(‘ECP’) and as per sub-section (b) of Section 2 of Punjab 
Civil Servants Act, 1974 (‘the Act’) a person serving on 
deputation  does  not  fall  within  the  definition  of  civil 
servant and consequently the bar under Article 212 of the 
Constitution would not be applicable.    
 
W.P.No.248029/2018 
-:2:- 
3. 
 On  the  other  hand,  learned  Assistant  Advocate 
General has argued that if a civil servant is transferred to 
other  department  on  deputation  basis,  even  then  he  still 
remains 
to  be  governed  by 
terms  and  conditions 
applicable  to  him  as  civil  servant  and  consequently,  bar 
under  Article  212  of 
the  Constitution  would  be 
applicable.  
4. 
5. 
Heard, record perused.  
The petitioner, a civil servant posted on deputation 
basis  in  LDA,  is  aggrieved  of  his  transfer  from  the  post 
of  Director  Administration  LDA  to  Director  C&I  LDA 
vide order dated 07.11.2018 and has challenged the same 
through  this  constitutional  petition  under  Article  199  on 
the  basis  that  after  transfer  to  the  LDA  through 
deputation,  the  bar  of  Article  212  shall  cease  to  be 
operative against the petitioner as he no longer remained 
a civil servant as per exceptions provided in definition of 
civil servant provided in section 2(b) of the Act. Besides 
it also argued that a person serving on deputation cannot 
be transferred from the place where he was appointed or 
deputed to another post by borrowing the department.  
6. 
The question for determination before this Court is 
whether  a  civil  servant  ceased  to  be  a  civil  servant  if 
transferred through deputation to some authority (LDA in 
this case) and terms and conditions of service cease to be 
applicable to him in such circumstances. 
7. 
Every  civil  servant  is  bound  to  serve  anywhere 
within  or  outside  the  province  in  any  post  under  the 
Government  of  the  Punjab,  Federal  Government,  any 
other  provincial  government  or 
local  authority  or 
corporation  or  any  other  body  set  up  or  established  by 
any such Government, which is evident from Section 9 of 
the Act which is reproduced below for ready reference:- 
 
W.P.No.248029/2018 
-:3:- 
“9. 
Posting and transfers.  Every civil servant shall 
be  liable  to  serve  anywhere  within  or  outside  the 
province  in  any  post  under  the  Government  of  the 
Punjab  or  the  Federal  Government  or  any  Provincial 
Government or a local authority or a corporation or a 
body set up or established by any such Government:  
Provided that, where a civil servant is required 
to  serve  in  a  post  outside  his  service  or  cadre,  his 
terms and conditions of service as to his pay shall not 
be less favourable than those to which he would have 
been entitled if he had not been so required to serve.”  
(emphasis supplied) 
8. 
The  petitioner  relies  upon  definition  of  civil 
servant  provided  in  Section  2(b)(i)  of  the  Act  to  argue 
that  a  civil  servant  serving  on  deputation  is  excluded 
from the definition of civil servant and consequently bar 
of  Article  212  of  the  Constitution  would  not  be 
applicable, which is reproduced as under: -  
“2. Definitions. (1) In this Act, unless there is anything 
repugnant in the subject or context, -- 
(a)  ………………….. 
(b) 
‘Civil Servant’ means a person who is a 
member  of  a  civil  service  of 
the 
province  or  who  holds  a  civil  post  in 
connection with affairs of the province, 
but does not include-- 
(i) 
a  person  who  is  on  deputation  to 
the  province  from  the  Federation  of  any 
other province or authority;” 
(emphasis supplied) 
9. 
 To appreciate the said argument definition of civil 
servant as provided above has to be analyzed, wherein a 
‘civil servant’ is defined as a person who is a member of 
civil service of the province, or who holds a civil post in 
connection  with  affairs  of  the  province.  The  present 
petitioner is not only a member of the civil service of the 
province appointed in BPS-17 but also holds a civil post 
of Director in LDA, which is working in connection with 
the affairs of the province. Therefore, as to the extent of 
the  definition  of  civil  servant,  the  petitioner  is  a  civil 
servant  for  all intents  and purposes. As  regards  the limb 
 
W.P.No.248029/2018 
-:4:- 
of 
the  arguments 
that  having  been  appointed  on 
deputation he ceased to be a civil servant is concerned, it 
is observed that Section 3 of the Act provides that terms 
and  conditions  of  service  of  a  civil  servant  shall  be 
provided  by  this  Act  or  rules.  Chapter  II  of  the  Act 
provides  the  terms  and  conditions  of  service  of  civil 
servants,  which  includes  Section  9  reproduced  and 
discussed above which makes it clear that a civil servant 
may  be  posted  anywhere  in  the  province,  federal 
government, local authority etc., the only condition being 
that  as  per  proviso  of  the  said  section  the  terms  and 
conditions of service  as to his pay  shall not be less  than 
those  to  which  he  would  have  been  entitled  had  he  not 
been so required to serve. 
10.  The  exclusion  clause  attached 
to  definition 
provided  in  sub-section  (b)  of  section  2  of  the  Act 
provides that civil servant shall not include a person who 
is  working  on  deputation  to  the  province  from  the 
Federation  of  any  other  province  or  authority.  The 
conditions laid down in the said exclusion clause are that 
a person working on deputation in the province, shall not 
be a civil servant if sent to work on the said post from:- 
i. 
ii. 
the federation; 
any other province; or 
iii. 
any authority. 
None  of  the  afore-referred  conditions  are  applicable  to 
the  case  of  the  petitioner  as  he  has  not  been  sent  on 
deputation  to  work  in  the  province  of  the  Punjab  from 
any  of 
the  afore 
referred  departments/authorities; 
consequently  the  exclusion  clause  is  not  applicable  to 
him  and  he  continues  to  remain  a  civil  servant  for  all 
 
W.P.No.248029/2018 
-:5:- 
intents  and  purposes.  Even  otherwise,  deputation  is  an 
arrangement  whereby  Government  and  any  section  of 
Government  Authority  or  statutory  body  had  agreed  to 
lend  any  employees  of  such  Department,  institution  or 
Organization 
to  another  Department  on  mutually 
acceptable  conditions  between  lending    and    borrowing  
Authorities  and  law  protects  the terms and conditions 
of service relating to pay of civil servant. The borrowing 
department  LDA  borrowed  the  said  civil  servant  to  be 
posted  in  LDA  without  mentioning  as  to  against  what 
post  he  would  be  posted  on  deputation,  and  he  was 
posted  as  Director  Administration  from  which  he  has 
been  transferred  as  Director  C&I.  Transfer  which  is  one 
of the terms and conditions of service of the civil servant, 
could  only  be  challenged  through  remedies  provided  by 
service  laws  in  terms  of  Article  212  of  the  Constitution 
and  as  such  the  constitutional  petition  would  not  be 
maintainable simply for the reason that the services of the 
petitioner  had  been  given  to  LDA  on  the  basis  of 
deputation.  Without  prejudice  to  what  has  been  stated 
above,  even  if  the  petitioner  was  not  to  be  treated  as  a 
civil  servant  and  service  rules  of  LDA  were  held  to  be 
applicable to his case, the said Rules have been observed 
by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  to  be  non-
statutory in judgment reported as Haroon-u-Rasheed vs. 
Lahore Development Authority and others (2016 SCMR 
931)  and  resultantly  constitutional  petition  on  that 
account  would  also  not  be  maintainable.  In  these 
circumstances, the question relating to jurisdiction of the 
borrowing  department  to  transfer  an  employee  from  one 
post  to  another  within  its  jurisdiction  has  been  left  open 
to be decided in appropriate proceedings.   
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.248029/2018 
-:6:- 
11.  For what has been discussed above, this petition is 
dismissed  as  not  maintainable.  However,  the  petitioner 
may,  if  so  advised,  seek  appropriate  remedy  before  the 
proper forum, in accordance with law.  
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
(MUZAMIL AKHTAR SHABIR) 
JUDGE 
 
 
 
*KMSubhani* 
