 
 
 
          Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
    
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
 
 
 
 
          WP No.74381 of 2017     
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Muhammad Shahid 
Versus 
Punjab Environmental Tribunal, Lahore etc. 
 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
Petitioner By: 
Respondents By: 
 
    J U D G M E N T  
18.1.2018 
Hafiz Muhammad Saleem, Advocate. 
Kh. Salman Mehmood, AAG along with 
Nabila, Assistant Director Legal, 
Environmental Protection Agency, Lahore.  
 
Ayesha A. Malik J: Through this Petition, the Petitioner has 
impugned  order  dated  21.7.2017  issued  by  Respondent  No.1, Punjab 
Environmental Tribunal, Lahore. 
2. 
The  facts of  the  case  are  that the  Petitioner  was constructing a 
control  poultry  shed  under  the  name  of  Chaudhary  Protein  Farm 
Control  Shed  at  Chak  No.8/11-L,  Tehsil  Chichawatni,  District 
Sahiwal. A notice was issued to the Petitioner under Section 21(3)(b) 
of  the  Punjab  Environment  Protection  Act,  1997("Act")  on  1.3.2017 
stating  therein  that  construction  of  the  poultry  farm  is  illegal  and  in 
contravention to the provisions of the Act. The Petitioner responded to 
the  show  cause  notice  on  20.4.2017  denying  all  allegations.  In  the 
meanwhile,  Respondent  No.3,  Assistant  Director  Environment, 
Sahiwal carried out a site inspection of the poultry farm and issued its 
report  on  24.1.2017  in  terms  of  which  it  was  stated  that  the  land  on 
which  the  shed  is  being  constructed  is  agriculture  land  on  which 
commercial/industrial  activity  is  being  undertaken  without  any 
permission or conversion of the status of the land. It was also stated in 
the  report  that  within  100  meters  is  a  residential  colony  which  is  in 
WP No.74381/2017 
2 
violation of the requirements of the law which prescribes a minimum 
of 500 meter distance.  
3.  With  respect  to  the  environment  approval,  it  was  stated  in  the 
report  that  no  environment  approval  has  been  sought,  hence  it  was 
recommended that action be taken against the Petitioner. Notices were 
issued  to  the  Petitioner  by  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
("EPA"), however  the  Petitioner did not  respond.  Another  complaint 
was filed by Respondent No.4 before the Environmental Tribunal on 
23.5.2017. The Environmental Tribunal took notice of the matter and 
ultimately issued the impugned order dated 21.7.2017. In terms of the 
impugned order, the  EPA  was  restrained  from  granting  any  approval 
to  the  Petitioner  with  respect  to  the  poultry  farm  until  the  matters  in 
issue  raised  in  the  complaint  were  decided.  One  of  the  disputes 
pending  before  the  Environmental  Tribunal  is  with  respect  to  the 
value of the unit as the Petitioner alleged  that he was not required to 
take any environment approval since his unit fell under Regulation 3 
read  with  Schedule  1  of  the  Pakistan  Environmental  Protection 
Agency (Review of IEE and EIA) Regulations, 2000 ("Regulations"). 
Subsequent  thereof  the  EPA  in  compliance  with  the  order  issued  by 
the  Environmental  Tribunal  on  19.7.2017  again  carried  out  another 
site  inspection  to  determine  the  construction  cost  of  the  unit.  As  per 
the  report  90%  of  the  work  is  completed  and  the  unit  has  been 
converted  from  a  control shed  to  a  semi control shed  to  reduce  cost.  
Consequently 
the  estimated  cost  has  been 
reduced 
from 
Rs.120,000,000/-  to  Rs.5,000,000/-.  It  was  also  stated  in  the  report 
that  measures  should  be  adopted  to  prevent  adverse  effects  on  the 
environment  which  are  likely  to  be  caused  by  the  operation  of  the 
poultry  shed  and  that  there  should  be  some  plantation  as  well  to 
improve the environment of the area.  
4. 
Learned  counsel 
for 
the  Petitioner  argued 
that 
the 
Environmental  Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction in the  matter  as  it cannot 
WP No.74381/2017 
3 
hear  the  complaint  directly  when  the  matter  is  pending  before  the 
EPA. He also argued that no environmental approval was required as 
the  cost  of  the  project  was  less  than  rupees  one  million  which  is  the 
basic  cost  for  the  purposes  of  an  Initial  Environmental  Examination 
("IEE"). So  far  as the  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  ("EIA")  as 
per Section 12 of the Act, it is also not required as the project does not 
fall under Schedule II of the Regulations. Therefore it was argued that 
the impugned order is without jurisdiction and illegal.  
5. 
Report and parawise comments have been filed by Respondents 
No.2 and 3 and Respondent No.4. In terms of the arguments made by 
the  Counsel,  the  Environmental  Tribunal  acted  under  the  law  and 
passed a restraining order on 21.7.2017 directing Respondent No.2 to 
refrain from issuing an environmental approval until the next date of 
hearing  along  with  a  direction  to  the  Petitioner  for  not  making  his 
project  functional.  It  was  also  argued  that  in  terms  of  the  Punjab 
Poultry Product Act, 2016 (“Poultry Act”), a poultry farm must be at 
least  500  meter  away  from  nearby  human  settlement  and  that  the 
Petitioner's  poultry  farm  was  in  breach  of  this  requirement.  The 
Counsel argued that the Petitioner's farm  is located in an agricultural 
area  without any  permission  to do  commercial/industrial  activity  and 
the same would cause an adverse impact on the environment. Further 
that the poultry farm is being constructed in violation of the Poultry Act. 
6. 
The  basic  issue  in  the  instant  Petition  is  with  respect  to  the 
jurisdiction of the Environmental Tribunal and the requirement of IEE 
and  EIA  as  stipulated  in  Section  12  of  the  Act  read  with  the 
Regulations.  For  ease  of  reference  Section  12  of  the  Act  read  with 
Regulation 3 and 4 of the Regulations are reproduced below: 
12.  Initial  environmental  examination  and  environmental  impact 
assessment.—(1) No proponent of a project shall commence construction 
or  operation  unless  he  has  filed  with  the  Provincial  Agency  an  initial 
environmental  examination  or  where  the  project  is  likely  to  cause  an 
adverse  environmental  effect,  an  environmental  impact  assessment,  and 
has obtained from the Provincial Agency approval in respect thereof.  
(2)  
The Government Agency shall: 
WP No.74381/2017 
4 
(a)  review  the  initial  environmental  examination  and  accord  its 
approval,  or  require  submission  of  an  environmental  impact 
assessment by the proponent; or  
(b)  review  the  environmental  impact  assessment  and  accord  its 
approval  subject  to  such  conditions  as  it  may  deem  fit  to  impose, 
or  require  that  the  environmental  impact  assessment  be  re-
submitted  after  such  modifications  as  may  be  stipulated,  or  reject 
the project as being contrary to environmental objectives.  
(3)  
Every  review  of  an  environmental  impact  assessment  shall  be 
carried out with public participation and no information will be disclosed 
during the course of such public participation which relates to  
(i)  
(ii) 
trade,  manufacturing  or  business  activities,  processes  or 
techniques  of  a  proprietary  nature,  or 
financial, 
commercial,  scientific  or  technical  matters  which  the 
proponent has requested should remain confidential, unless 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Director General 
of the Provincial Agency is of the opinion that the request 
for confidentiality is not well-founded or the public interest 
in  the  disclosure  outweighs  the  possible  prejudice  to  the 
competitive position of the project or its proponent; or  
international  relations,  national  security  or  maintenance  of 
law and order, except with the consent of the Government; 
or  
(iii) matters covered by legal professional privilege.  
The  Provincial  Agency  shall  communicate 
(4)  
its  approval  or 
otherwise  within  a  period  of  four  months  from  the  date  the  initial 
environmental  examination  or  environmental  impact  assessment  is  filed 
complete  in  all  respects  in  accordance  with  the  prescribed  procedure, 
failing which the initial environmental examination or, as the case may be, 
the  environmental  impact  assessment  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been 
approved, to  the  extent to which it does not  contravene the provisions of 
this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
(5)  Subject  to  sub-section  (4)  the  Government  may  in  a  particular  case 
extend  the  aforementioned  period  of  four  months  if  the  nature  of  the 
project so warrants.  
(6)  
to such categories of projects and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
The Provincial  Agency shall maintain separate registers for initial 
(7)  
environmental  examination  and  environmental 
impact  assessment 
projects,  which  shall  contain  brief  particulars  of  each  project  and  a 
summary of decisions taken thereon, and which shall be open to inspection 
by the public at all reasonable hours and the disclosure of information in 
such  registers  shall  be  subject  to  the  restrictions  specified  in  sub-section 
(3).  
 
Regulation 3 and 4 
The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) shall apply 
A  proponent  of  a  project  falling  in  any  category  specified  in 
Schedule  I  shall  file  an  IEE  with  the  Federal  Agency  and  the 
provisions of section 12 shall apply to such project.  
A  proponent  of  a  project  falling  in  any  category  specified  in 
Schedule  II  shall  file  an  EIA  with  the  Federal  Agency  and  the 
provisions of section 12 shall apply to such project. 
3. 
 
4. 
 
WP No.74381/2017 
5 
 
In  terms  of  Section  12  of  the  Act,  no  project  shall  commence 
construction  or  operation  unless  it  has  obtained  permission  from  the 
Provincial  Agency  after  having  filed  either  an  IEE  or  EIA.  The 
Regulations  provide  for  the  instances  when  an  IEE  is  to  be  filed, 
however, Section 12 clearly mandates that if a project has an adverse 
impact  on  the  environment  an  EIA  must  be  filed.  Adverse  effect  on 
the  environment  has  been  defined  in  Section  2(i)  of  the  Act  as 
follows:- 
Impairment of, or damage to, the environment and includes: 
 
(a) 
impairment  of,  or  damage  to,  human  health  and  safety  or  to 
biodiversity or property;  
pollution; and 
any  adverse  environment  effect  as  may  be  specified  in  the 
regulations. 
(b) 
(c) 
 
In this case, the contention of the Petitioner is that  he is not required 
to file any IEE or EIA as his project falls below rupees one million, as 
given  in  Schedule  1  of  the  Regulations.  Schedule  I  provides  that 
poultry,  livestock, stud  and  fish  farms  with  a  total  cost  of  more  than 
rupees  one  million  requires  an  IEE.  However,  irrespective  of  the 
requirement given in the Regulations Section 12 clearly mandates that 
an EIA is to be filed if there is an adverse impact on the environment. 
The  question  therefore  is  whether  the  poultry  farm  will  have  an 
adverse impact on the environment. In terms of the complaint filed by 
Respondent  No.4,  there  are  two  major  grievances  which  show  that 
there  is  an  adverse  impact  on  the  environment.  The  first  is  that  the 
surrounding  area  is  an  agricultural  area  and  the  Petitioner  has 
commenced  construction  of  his  project  without  any  permission  from 
the competent authority. The second grievance is that the poultry farm 
is 100 meter from a human settlement and will have an adverse impact 
on the environment and compromise the health and  living conditions 
of  the  residents of  the  area.  There  is  merit  in  both  grounds however, 
the EPA did not consider any of the aspects of running a controlled or 
semi  controlled  poultry  shed  which  will  impact  the  environment.  In 
WP No.74381/2017 
6 
terms of the information provided by the Respondents, poultry farms 
are a source of odor and smell as well as flies, rodent and other pests. 
These can give rise to diseases such as cholera, typhoid, malaria and 
dengue. Furthermore improper disposal of waste water can pollute the 
water  and  soil.  The  proponent  of  a  project  must  provide  a  detailed 
dead  bird  management  plan  which  should  not  adversely  impact  the 
environment. Unfortunately both the site reports relied upon failed to 
consider  these  aspects  which  are  essential  for  the  establishment  of  a 
poultry  farm.  The  close  proximity  of  the  poultry  farm  from  human 
settlement  is  a  cause  of  great  concern.  Poultry  facilities  are 
undoubtedly  a  source  of  odor  and  smell  which  adversely  affects  the 
life  and health  of the  people  living  in  the vicinity. Flies, rodents  and 
other  pests  are  an  additional  menace  to  the  local  area,  its  health  and 
well  being.  Their  presence  is  mainly  related  to  the  manner  in  which 
the feed is managed and stored for which proper areas must be made 
and  control  mechanisms  put  in  place  to  avoid  flies  and  other  pests. 
Furthermore  water  pollution  and  use  of  pesticides  will  damage  the 
surface water and ground water and give rise to water borne diseases. 
Other  serious  impacts  on  the  environment  are  the  disposal  of  waste 
water  and  dead  birds.  Both  issues  call  for  proper  measures  to  be 
adopted  to  ensure  minimum  impact  on  the  environment.  Under  the 
circumstances the EPA must in the first instance look at the impact a 
project  has  on  the  environment,  before  it  considers  the  cost  of  the 
project. In such cases Section 12 of the Act is clear that the object of 
the  assessment  reports  is  to  ascertain  whether  there  is  an  adverse 
impact on the environment. This being mandatory in nature cannot be 
avoided.  
7. 
In the case cited at Ms. Imrana Tiwana and others v. Province 
of  Punjab  and  others  (2015  CLD  983),  a  Full  Bench  of  this  Court 
held: 
EIA  is  nature's  first  man-made  check  post,  nothing  adverse  to  the 
environment  is  allowed  to  pass  through.  It  is  for  this  reason,  that 
WP No.74381/2017 
7 
environmental assessment is an onerous function. It is through the tool of 
EIA that EPA gets to regulate and protect the environment and as a result 
the  life,  health,  dignity  and  well  being  of  the  people  who  inhabit  the 
environment.  Environmental  Assessment  is,  therefore,  a  substantive 
exercise  as  every  step  in  this  process  cautiously  guards  the  fundamental 
rights  of the people. Review of EIA is  not  inter  parties or an adversarial 
exercise but are inquisitorial proceeding carried out under the public gaze 
and  open  to  public  scrutiny.  The  review  process  is  incomplete  without 
effective public participation and technical advice of the experts.  
 
In  this  case  the  Petitioner  commenced  construction  of  his  project 
without an approval from the EPA. The EPA made two site visits but 
failed  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  project  and  its  impact  on  the 
environment  and  instead  recommended  in  a  cursory  manner,  that 
measures  be  adopted 
to  prevent  an  adverse 
impact  on 
the 
environment.  This  direction  was  given  without  any  mention  of  the 
probable  causes  of  the  impact  on  the  environment.  In  this  regard  a 
bare  review  of  the  Poultry  Act  reveals  that  the  establishment  of  a 
poultry  farm  has  a  direct  bearing  on  the  environment  and  therefore 
will  impact  the  environment.  Section  12,  13,  14  and  15  set  out  the 
requirements  for  establishment  of  a  poultry  farm  and  call  for  bio-
security measures, poultry waste management and reporting in case of 
poultry  disease.  All  these  requirements  are  directly  related  to  the  
well  being  of  the  local  inhabitants  and  the  environment.  These 
requirements  directly  impact  the  environment,  hence  the  Petitioner 
was required to file an EIA prior to the construction of his project. 
8. 
Furthermore, in this case the distance of the Petitioner's poultry 
farm is 100 meters from a human settlement which is in contravention 
to  the  requirement  of  Section  12  of  the  Poultry  Act  which  clearly 
stipulates  that  the  poultry  farm  must  be  500  meters  from  human 
settlements.  This  ground  in  itself  was  sufficient  to  restrain  the 
construction  of  the  poultry  farm  of  the  Petitioner  as  it  is  in 
contravention  to  the  law.  In  such  a  situation,  there  are  no  remedial 
measures  which  can  be  adopted  as  the  poultry  farm  is  in  close 
WP No.74381/2017 
8 
proximity  to  human  settlement  putting  the  health  of  the  residents  to 
risk and polluting the environment. 
9. 
The other ground urged by the counsel for the Petitioner is with 
respect  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Environmental  Tribunal  on 
proceeding with the complaint of Respondent No.4. Section 21 of the 
Act  provides  for  the  jurisdiction  and  powers  of  the  Environmental 
Tribunal.  As  per  Section  21  an  Environmental  Tribunal  can  take 
cognizance of any offence under Section 17(1) on a complaint filed by 
the  Provincial  Agency  or  an  aggrieved  person,  who  has  given  notice 
of  not  less  than  30  days  to  the  Provincial  Agency  of  the  alleged 
contravention and his intention to complain before the Environmental 
Tribunal. Section 17(1) provides for the penalties imposed if a person 
contravenes  any  provisions  of  Section  11,  12,  13  or  16  or  any  other 
order  issued  thereunder.  In  this  case  the  contravention  alleged  is  of 
Section  12  and  the  requirement  of  filing  an  IEE  or  EIA.  In  fact  the 
Petitioner  did  not  obtain  any  approvals  from  the  Environmental 
Protection  Agency  or 
the 
relevant  authority, 
to  carry  out 
commercial/industrial activity in an agriculture area. Respondent No.4 
issued  notice 
to 
the  Director  General,  Punjab  Environmental 
Protection Agency, Lahore clearly informing him that he will be filing 
a  complaint  before  the  Environmental  Tribunal  for  redressal  of  his 
grievance.  The  complaint  was  then  filed  on  23.5.2017.  Therefore  as 
per Section 21 of the Act, the Environmental Tribunal has jurisdiction 
to hear a complaint of an aggrieved person who has issued notice, as 
required, to the EPA.   
10.  Under  the  circumstances  no  case  for  interference  is  made  out. 
Petition is dismissed.   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Allah Bakhsh* 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
 
 
 
 (AYESHA A.MALIK) 
                JUDGE 
JUDGE 
