Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
   
 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
 
Muhammad Rafique, etc.  v.    Secretary Schools, Govt. of  
 
 
 
 
Punjab Lahore, etc. 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing 
26.09.2018. 
Petitioners by: 
Mr. Muhammad Iqbal Mohal and Malik 
Muhammad Zarar Iqbal Awan, Advocates 
in writ petition No.126194 of 2017 
Mr. Saif ur Rehman Jasra, Advocate in 
connected writ petition No.127099 of 2017 
Mr. Muhammad Nasir Umer, Advocate in 
connected writ petition No.115197 of 2017 
Respondents by: 
Mr. Amar Sanaullah, AAG. 
Mr. Imran Aslam Kharal, Advocate 
Malik Muhammad Zarar Iqbal Awan, 
Advocate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABID  AZIZ  SHEIKH-J.  This  judgment 
will also decide Writ Petition Nos.127099 and 115197 of 
2017 as common questions of law and facts are raised in 
these 
constitutional 
petitions. 
Through 
these 
constitutional  petitions 
the  petitioners  have  mainly 
challenged  the  condition  in  the  Recruitment  Policy, 
2017-2018  for  Educators  and  AEO  dated  13.10.2017 
(Policy), whereby in qualification eligibility criteria, it is 
prescribed that applicants having any 3rd division in their 
 
 
 
2 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
entire  career,  will  not  be  eligible  to  apply  against  the 
posts advertised under the said policy (the said condition 
herein after be referred as impugned condition).   
 
2. 
 
Because  of  commonality  of 
the 
legal 
questions  involved  in  these  writ  petitions,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  narrate  or  advert  to  the  facts  of  each  case 
separately. However, to illustrate the factual aspects upon 
which  these  petitions  are  founded,  facts  of  instant  writ 
petition  No.127099  of  2017  are  that  the  government  of 
the  Punjab  Schools  Education  department  advertised 
number  of  posts  of  SESE-PET  (BS.14)  in  daily  Jang  on 
19.11.2017  and 
invited  applications.  The  required 
qualification  for  the  said  post  was  M.A.  Physical 
Education.  The  petitioners  who  were  M.A.  (B.Ed)  in  1st 
Division  possessed  the  requisite  qualification  and  being 
eligible  applied  for  the  said  posts.  After  the  scrutiny  of 
documents, the applicants were intimated about NTS test 
through  SMS  but  surprisingly  subsequently  petitioners 
informed  that  they  are  not  being  called  for  NTS  test, 
being  3rd  divisioners  in  B.A.  under  impugned  condition 
of  recruitment  Policy,  2017-2018.  The  petitioners  being 
aggrieved  filed  these  constitutional  petitions.  This  Court 
 
 
 
 
3 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
as an interim measure allowed them to participate in NTS 
test  and  interview.  Resultantly,  petitioners  appeared  in 
NTS  test  and  interview  and  were  declared  successful 
both in NTS test and interview but their names were not 
shown in the final merit list due to the pendency of these 
writ  petitions  filed  against  impugned  condition  in  the 
recruitment policy. It is also pointed out that out of total 
115  candidates  appeared  in  NTS test  only  21  candidates 
including petitioners were declared successful. 
 
3. 
 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  argued 
that  the  impugned  condition  of  recruitment  policy  is 
violative  of  Articles  4  and  9  of  the  Constitution  of 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (Constitution),  as 
same  amounts  to  deny  the  petitioners  right  of  job  and 
livelihood,  which  is  also  part  of  right  to  life.  Learned 
counsel  submits  that  as  the  petitioners  fulfilled  the 
required  qualification  of  M.A.  Physical  Education 
through their degrees in 1st Division and also cleared the 
NTS  test  and  interview,  they  could  not  be  denied  the 
opportunity  to  apply  for  the  job  just  because  in  their 
entire  career  they  once  acquired  3rd  Division.  Learned 
counsel  submits  that  the  impugned  recruitment  policy  is 
 
 
 
 
4 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
unreasonable,  harsh,  arbitrary  and  offensive  to  human 
dignity.  Submits  that  if  once  the  petitioners  got  3rd 
Division in their entire career it does not means that they 
cannot improve their academic qualification in future and 
become  eligible 
for 
the  posts 
in 
the  Education 
Department.  Further  submits  that  this  condition  is 
introduced for the first time in year 2017-2018, when the 
petitioners  already  became  over  aged  and  cannot  retake 
the exam of B.A. to improve their academic qualification. 
Learned counsel submits that under Articles 25-A and 37 
of the Constitution, it is the responsibility of the State to 
provide  quality  education  to  the  students  but  this 
responsibility  is  not  fulfilled  by  the  State  and  by 
imposing  this  condition,  the  respondents  have  now  also 
deprived  those  students,  to  even  compete  for  the  job  in 
the  Education  Department,  which 
is  absolutely 
unjustified and irrational. Learned counsel finally argued 
that  the  fundamental  right  of  livelihood  and  to  compete 
for job in Government department is a vested right of the 
petitioners,  which  cannot  be 
taken  away 
through 
executive  order  by  way  of  policy  but  could  only  be 
effected through the  Act  of  Parliament.  Learned  counsel 
further  submits 
that 
the 
impugned  policy 
is  also 
 
 
 
 
5 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
discriminatory  as  this  policy  is  only  made  applicable  to 
the  Education  Department,  whereas 
in  no  other 
Government  department  the  impugned  condition  of  3rd 
Division in entire career has been applied. 
 
4. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the 
respondents argued that the impugned recruitment policy 
is  purely  a  policy  matter  and  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the 
department  to  frame  policies  as  per  its  job  requirement. 
Learned  counsel  further  submits  that  this  Court  has  no 
jurisdiction  to  interfere  in  the  policy  matters.  Further 
submits  that  no  fundamental  right  of  the  petitioners  has 
been  violated  under  the  policy,  as  there  are  other 
departments of the government where the petitioners can 
apply for recruitment.  
 
5. 
   
I  have  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  parties 
and  perused  the  record  with  their  able  assistance.  The 
moot legal issue involved in these cases is regarding the 
vires  of  impugned  condition  prescribed  under  clause 
4(a)(III)  of  the  Recruitment  Policy,  2017-2018.  For 
convenience  the  said  impugned  condition  is  reproduced 
hereunder;- 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
“Applicant having any 3rd division in his/her entire 
career  will  not  be  eligible  to  apply  against  the 
posts advertised under the policy ibid.”    
 
Plain reading of above impugned  condition shows that a 
restriction  has  been  imposed  against  recruitment  in  the 
Education  Department  for  the  applicants  having  3rd 
division in his/her entire academic career.  
6. 
Article  18  of  the  Constitution  guarantees  freedom 
of  lawful  trade,  profession  and  occupation,  which  for 
convenience is reproduced as under;- 
trade, business  or  profession.-
“Freedom  of 
Subject  to  such  qualifications,  if  any,  as  may  be 
prescribed  by  law,  every  citizen  shall  have  the 
right  to  enter  upon  any  lawful  profession  or 
occupation,  and  to  conduct  any  lawful  trade  or 
business: 
Provided that nothing in this Article shall prevent- 
(a)  the  regulation  of  any  trade  or  profession by a 
licensing system; or 
(b)  the  regulation  of  trade,  commerce  or  industry 
in the interest of free competition therein; or 
(c) the carrying on, by the Federal Government or 
a  Provincial  Government,  or  by  a  corporation 
controlled by any  such  Government,  of any  trade, 
business,  industry  or  service,  to  the  exclusion, 
complete or partial, of other persons. 
 
Plain reading of Article 18 of the Constitution shows that 
every  citizen  has  right  to  enter  upon  any  lawful 
 
 
 
 
7 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
occupation  or  profession  subject  to  qualification  as  may 
be  prescribed  by  the  law.  The  august  Supreme  Court  in 
Arshad  Mahmood’s  case  (PLD  2005  SC  193)  held  that 
the  restriction 
imposed  under  Article  18  of 
the 
Constitution  is  not  only  required  to  be  imposed  by  law 
but  the  said  restriction  must  also  be  reasonable.  The 
impugned  condition  which  restricted  the  applicants 
having 3rd division in their entire career, to even apply for 
the posts advertised under the policy, is not prescribed by 
any  Act  of  the  Parliament  nor  same  is  shown  to  be 
backed  by  any  provision  of  law.  The  said  condition  has 
been  prescribed  through  an  administrative  decision  by 
way of policy, which on the face of it is not permissible 
under Article 18 of the Constitution. 
 
7. 
 
The  next  question  is  whether  at  all  such 
restriction is a reasonable restriction. There are not strict 
standards  or  general  patterns  of  reasonableness,  while 
determining the reasonableness of a particular restriction 
under  law  or  policy.  The  Court  has  to  bear  in  mind  that 
the nature of the rights infringed through such restriction 
should be proportionate to the urgency of the evil sought 
to  be  remedied  by  said  restriction.  This  Court  in  case 
 
 
 
 
8 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
reported as  “City School Private Limited v. Government 
of the Punjab and others” (PLD 2018 Lahore 509) held 
that restriction on fundamental rights can only be upheld 
if  it  is  established  that  its  seeks  to  impose  reasonable 
restriction  in  the  interest  of  general  public  and  as  less 
drastic restriction will not have ensured the interest of the 
general public.  
 
8. 
 
The  above  test  of  reasonableness  when 
applied  to  the  impugned  condition,  the  same  is  not  only 
found  to  be  unreasonable  but  also  harsh  and  irrational. 
According  to  the  impugned  condition  an  applicant  who 
has  3rd  division  once  in  her/his  entire  career  will  not  be 
eligible to apply against the post advertised means that it 
is presumed that a candidate who has secured 3rd division 
once  in  his/her  life  time  can  never  improve  his/her 
educational career in future. This presumption is not only 
absurd  rather  against  the  dignity  of  such  candidates  and 
students.  By  way  of  illustration  even  in  the  present  case 
the petitioners who got 3rd division in B.A. have not only 
got first division in their M.A Physical Education, which 
was prescribed qualification  for the job but according to 
petitioners  they  also  stood  second  position  in  the  entire 
 
 
 
 
9 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
district  Sialkot  in  their  NTS  test.  The  situation  would 
have been different if the policy was that a person having 
3rd  division  of  prescribed  qualification  shall  not  be 
eligible  for  the  posts  advertised.  But  the  impugned 
condition  is  that  a  candidate,  who  had  3rd  division  in 
his/her entire career would not be eligible to apply for the 
posts advertised. This means that a candidate who due to 
some  unavoidable,  financial  or  family  circumstances  etc 
could not get 1st or 2nd division in his/her initial academic 
career,  will  not  be  able  to  improve  his/her  entire 
subsequent academic career of education.  
 
9. 
 
It  is  not  the  case  of  the  respondents  that  3rd 
division  amounts  to  fail  in  a particular academic  course. 
Once it is admitted that 3rd divisioner amounts to passing 
of a particular academic class and same also entitled the 
students  to  promote  in  the  next  class,  then  imposing  a 
condition that such candidate will not even be eligible to 
apply  for  the  post  is  absolutely  irrational  unreasonable 
and harsh.  
 
10. 
 
No  doubt  ordinarily  the  Courts  should  not 
interfere in the policy matters, however, if the policy is in 
conflict  with  any  provision  of  law  or  is  violative  of  the 
 
 
 
 
10 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
fundamental  right  of  the  citizens  the  same  can  be  called 
in question in constitutional jurisdiction of this Court. In 
this  context  the  august  Supreme  Court  in  judgment 
reported as “Al-Raham Travels and Tours (Pvt). Ltd. and 
others  v.  Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs,  Hajj,  Zakat  and 
Ushr through Secretary and others” (2011 SCMR 1621) 
held as under;- 
“As  regards the  contention of  the  learned  counsel 
that  the  High  Court  cannot  interfere  with  the 
policy  matters  in  its  jurisdiction,  we  have  some 
reservations, as if the policy is in conflict with any 
provision of law or is violative of the fundamental 
rights  of  a  citizen,  the  same  can  be  called  in 
question  before 
its  writ 
jurisdiction.  Reference  can  be  made  to  Watan 
Party  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  (PLD  2006 
Supreme  Court  697)  and  Shaheen  Cotton  Mills  v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 Lahore 120).” 
the  High  Court 
in 
 
 
Similarly,  in  judgment  reported  as  “Messrs  Shaheen 
Cotton  Mills,  Lahore  and  another  v.  Federation  of 
Pakistan,  Ministry  of  Commerce  through  Secretary  and 
another” (PLD 2011 Lahore 120) it was held that;- 
“However, it may not be correct to hold that there 
is an absolute bar to the exercise of judicial review 
by this Court in all. matters pertaining to a policy 
of the Government. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in the judgment reported as: Muhammad 
Iqbal Rafi v. The Province of Punjab (1986 SCMR 
680) was pleased to hold as follows:-- 
"Whatever be the thinking on either side, the 
Government has the right of laying down the 
policy and if it chooses to do so and there is 
 
  
 
 
 
 
11 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
no  law on  the  subject  which it  offends,  it is 
not  the  right  of  any  Court  to  throw  it  out, 
other  than  hold,  in  any  genuine  case,  that 
the same is unreasonable or arbitrary." 
In  Arshad  Mehmood's  case  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 
Court of Pakistan has observed as follows:-- 
If  any  law  is  promulgated  in  derogation  of 
fundamental  rights,  it  would  be  declared 
void  because  at  the  cost  of  fundamental 
rights  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution,  the 
executive  Government  is  not  empowered  to 
frame a policy. 
though 
intervene 
the  Constitution  or 
Thus,  in  cases  where  the  policy  collides  with  the 
Law  or 
it  arbitrary  or 
unreasonable,  this  Court,  in  view  of  the  afore-
quoted judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan,  can 
it  may  not 
substitute  the  policy  of  the  Government  by  laying 
down a new policy on the subject. Thus, this Court 
is not persuaded to hold that it has no jurisdiction 
to examine the offending Order/notification or the 
policy of the. Government that it manifests. Even in 
policy  matters,  this  Court  can  always  exercise  its 
powers  of  judicial  review  so  as  to  ascertain  that 
the  said  policy  does  not  violate  any  law  or  the 
Constitution and  that  the same is not arbitrary or 
unreasonable. 
------------------------ 
Policies  in  the  ultimate  analysis  tend  to  be 
translated  into  Executive  action.  It  is  equally 
settled law that Executive has no inherent power to 
pass  any  order  or  take  any  action,  as  has  been 
repeatedly  held  by  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  including  in  the  judgment  reported  as: 
Pakistan  Muslim  League  (N)  through  Khawaja 
Muhammad Asif, M.N.A. and others v. Federation 
of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Interior 
and  others  (PLD  2007  SC  642)  in  the  following 
terms: -- 
"There 
the 
Executive, except what has been vested in it 
inherent  power 
is  no 
in 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
12 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
by law, and that law is the source of power 
and duty." 
  
  
 
11. 
action 
executive 
Therefore, 
would 
necessarily have to be such that it could not 
possibly  violate  a  Fundamental  Right.  The 
only  power  of  the  Executive  to  take  action 
would  have  to  be  derived  from  law  and  the 
law  itself  would  not  be  able  to  confer  upon 
the  executive  any  power  to  deal  with  a 
citizen  or  other  persons  in  Pakistan  in 
contravention  of  a  Fundamental  Right. 
Functionaries  of  State,  are  to  function 
strictly  within  the  sphere  allotted  to  them 
and  in  accordance  with  law.  No  Court  or 
Authority  is  entitled  to  exercise  power  not 
vested  in 
it  and  all  citizens  have  an 
inalienable right to be treated in accordance 
with 
law.  Therefore,  an  action  of  an 
Authority  admitted  to  be  derogatory  to  law 
and  Constitution,  is  liable  to  be  struck 
down." 
 
In  case  reported  as  “Asaf  Fasihuddin  Khan 
Vardag  v.  Government  of  Pakistan  and  others”  (2014 
SCMR 676), Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under;- 
in 
the  Constitution.  Under 
terms  of  Article  184(3)  of 
“It is well settled by now that this Court has wide 
powers 
the 
Constitution  to  ensure  that  acts/actions  of  the 
other  organs  of  the  state,  namely,  Executive  and 
Legislature  do  not  breach  the  fundamental  rights 
guaranteed  by 
the 
principle of trichotomy of powers, the Judiciary is 
entrusted with the responsibility of enforcement of 
Fundamental 
for  an 
independent  and  vigilant  system  of 
judicial 
administration so that all acts and actions leading 
to 
infringement  of  Fundamental  Rights  are 
nullified and the rule of law  upheld in the society. 
The  discharge  of  constitutional  duty  by  the  State 
functionaries  in  deviation  to  the  spirit  of  the 
rights,  which 
calls 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
Constitution is anathema to the Constitution and is 
challengeable  on  diverse  grounds  including  mala 
fide  and  colourable exercise  of power for  ulterior 
motive.  It  is  not  possible  for  judiciary  to  confer 
validity and immunity to the acts or actions which 
suffers  from  mala  fide  in  exercise  of  power  of 
judicial review.”   
 
In  another  case  reported  as  “Salahuddin  Dharaj  v. 
Province of Sindh through Secretary, Local Government 
Department and 4 others” (PLD 2013 Sindh 236), it was 
held as under;- 
“We  may  endorse  here  that  there  can  be  no  cavil 
to  deny  the  legally  established  position  that 
dispensation of justice is not alone the function of 
the  Court  but  public  functionaries  are  equally 
responsible  to  act  fairly  and  keeping  in  view  the 
law, relevant rules, regulations, notification or the 
policy etc. in view because the public functionaries 
are  the  trustees  of  the  public  power  hence  are 
required  to  act  accordingly.  It  is  not  always  that 
each  and  every  affected  person  has  the  courage 
and  resources  to  approach  the  court  challenging 
the  vires,  implication  or  ramification  of  law,  rule 
etc. by an authority.  
------------------------ 
The Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan in the 
case  of  "M/s  Al-Raham  Travels  and  tours  (Pvt.) 
Ltd.  and  others  v.  Ministry  of  Religious  affairs", 
reported  in  2011  SCMR  1621,  in  paragraph  33, 
has held that :-- 
------------------------ 
In  the  same  case,  at  paragraph  50,  it  was  further 
held that:-- 
"If policy is in conflict with any provision of 
law or is violative of fundamental rights of a 
citizen  the  same  can  be  called  in  question 
before High Court in writ jurisdiction". 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
14 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
Bare  perusal  of  case  law  it  is  clear  that  even  a 
policy can be called in question in writ jurisdiction 
if the same is either in conflict with any provision 
of law or same is in violation of fundamental rights 
of a citizen.” 
 
12.  
 
There  is  another  important  aspect  of  the 
matter  which  relates  to  the  duty  of  the  State  relating  to 
the  education  and  academic  qualification.  The  right  of 
education  strictly  flows  from  right  to  life  guaranteed 
under Articles 9 and 14 of the Constitution. The right of 
education  is  also  guaranteed  under  Article  37(a)  and 
37(d)  of  the  Constitution  and  now  after  18th  amendment 
in the Constitution the right of education has been made 
as  an  independent  fundamental  right  under  Article  25A 
of the Constitution.  In view of the above Articles, every 
citizen has a right of quality education and State is under 
an  obligation to  establish  best  educational  institutions  to 
enable its citizens to ensure the said right. However, hard 
reality  is  that  State  is  neither  providing  best  educational 
institutions nor it is  in  a position to  meet  the  demand of 
quality  education 
in  entire  country.  In 
the  given 
circumstances  on  one  hand,  when  the  State/government 
is  not  in  a  position  to  provide  quality  education  to  the 
citizens  especially  in  rural  areas  then  there  is  no 
 
 
 
 
15 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
justification  to  impose  a  condition  that  a  candidate  who 
ever  secured  3rd  division  in  his/her  entire  educational 
career will not be eligible to even apply against the post 
advertised by the Education Department. Indeed the State 
could  impose  such  condition  if  it  could  show  that 
government  is  providing  best  academic  qualification 
throughout  the  country  or  province  of  Punjab,  with 
quality  educational  institutions  and  despite  the  said 
quality  education  the  particular  candidates  have  secured 
3rd division in his/her career.  
 
13. 
It is also admitted position between the parties that 
the  impugned  condition  has  only  been  imposed  in  the 
Education  Department,  whereas  apparently  in  no  other 
government department such condition is being imposed, 
which  amounts  to  violative  of  Article  25  of  the 
Constitution.  The  impugned  condition  also  violative  of 
right  of  livelihood,  which  being  part  of  right  to  life  as 
guaranteed  under  Article  9  of  the  Constitution,  a 
candidates  despite  having  prescribed  qualifications  will 
not be in a position to even apply for the posts advertised. 
Just  because  he/she  had  3rd  division  in  his/her  entire 
educational career.  
 
 
 
 
16 
Writ Petition No.126194 of 2017 
(Muhammad Rafique etc. v. Secretary Schools, Govt. of the Punjab, Lahore etc.) 
 
 
 
 
 
14. 
I  have  also  found  substance  in  the  arguments  of 
learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  that  imposing  such 
condition  at  this  stage  when  the  petitioners  are  not  in  a 
position to improve their past academic qualification due 
to over age or other circumstances beyond their control is 
harsh and unreasonable.  
 
15. 
 
In  view  of  the  above  discussion,  these 
constitutional  petitions  are  allowed  to  the  extent  that 
impugned condition in the recruitment policy, 2017-2018 
is  declared  to  be  ultra  vires  of  the  Constitution,  hence, 
struck down and petitioners shall be entitled to apply for 
the  posts  advertised.  However,  recruitment  shall  be 
subject  to  fulfilment  of  other  prescribed  conditions, 
qualifications and on open merit basis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (ABID AZIZ SHEIKH) 
 
         JUDGE 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sajid 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
