          Stereo. HCJDA.38. 
 Judgment Sheet. 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
  JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Case No. W.P.No.168260/2018 
       Versus  
Muhammad Nawazish Ali Pirzada   
     
Election Commission of Pakistan etc  
                                   
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
 
Date of hearing 
Petitioner by 
Respondents  by 
 
02.03.2018 
 
Mr. Farooq Amjad Meer, Advocate 
Petitioner in person. 
M/S    Salman  Aslam  Butt,  Muhammad 
Shoaib  Rashid,  Muhammad  Ahmed, 
Ahmed  Raza  Khalid,  Advocates 
for 
respondent No.4. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Zikria  Sheikh,  Deputy 
Attorney General. 
Mirza  Nasar  Ahmad,  Deputy  Attorney 
General. 
Mr.  Imtiaz  Ellahi,  Assistant  Attorney 
General. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Arshad  Virk,  Assistant 
Attorney General. 
Mr.  Umer  Hayat,  Director  Legal,  Election 
Commission of Pakistan. 
Hafiz Adeel Ashraf, Assistant Law Officer, 
Election Commission of Pakistan. 
 
Abid  Aziz  Sheikh,  J.-    This  constitutional  petition  has 
been filed with following prayer:- 
“The  impugned  order  dated  17.02.2018  may  very  kindly 
be  set  aside  and  the  order  dated  12.02.2018  passed  by 
Returning  Officer/respondent  No.3  may  very  kindly  be 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
2 
restored,  resultantly  the  nomination  papers  of  the 
respondent No.4 from the seat of Technocrat, Province of 
Punjab,  senate  Elections  2018  may  very  kindly  be 
rejected  and  respondent  No.3  may  be  directed  to  delete 
the  name  of  the  respondent  No.4  from  the  list  of  validly 
nominated contesting candidates”.  
2. 
Brief  facts  are  that  respondent  No.4  submitted  his 
nomination  papers  for  the  seat  of  technocrat  in  Senate  from 
Province  of  Punjab.  The  nomination  papers  of  respondent  No.4 
were objected on various grounds by objectors. Respondent No.3 
rejected the nomination papers of respondent No.4 on 12.2.2018. 
The  respondent  No.4  filed  appeal  against  rejection  of  his 
nomination  papers  which  was  accepted  vide  impugned  order 
dated  17.2.2018.  The  petitioner  who  was  neither  an  objector  to 
the  nomination  papers  of  respondent  No.4  nor  filed  formal 
application  before  Appellate  Tribunal  to  be  impleaded  as  party, 
appeared  before  Tribunal  during  course  of  arguments  on  appeal 
filed  by  respondent  No.4  seeking  right  of  audience.  However, 
through  impugned  order,  he  was  declined  right  of  audience  in 
appeal  being  not  an  objector  to  the  nomination  papers  of 
respondent  No.4  and  ultimately,  the  appeal  was  allowed.  The 
petitioner being aggrieved of order passed by Appellate Tribunal 
dated 17.2.2018 has filed this constitutional petition.  
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
3 
3. 
Learned counsel for the respondent No.4 at the very outset 
raised preliminary objection that petitioner being not an objector 
to  the  nomination  papers  of  respondent  No.4  during  scrutiny  is 
not  aggrieved  person,  therefore,  he  could  neither  file  appeal 
before  Appellate  Tribunal  (Tribunal)  nor  can  he  file  this 
constitutional petition challenging the order of Tribunal, whereby 
nomination papers of respondent No.4 were accepted. He submits 
that  petitioner  being  a  candidate  can  only  file  election  petition 
under  section  156  of  the    Election  Act,  2017  (Act)  in  the  post 
election  proceedings.  Learned  counsel  further  submits  that 
without  prejudice  to  the  question  of  maintainability  of  this 
petition,  even  otherwise,  respondent  No.4  could  file  appeal 
before Tribunal against rejection of his nomination papers under 
the  Act  despite  being  an  absconder  in  some  other  proceedings 
and  that  order  passed  by  the  Tribunal  is  legal  and  duly  justified 
on  merits.  He  finally  concluded  that  question  of  maintainability 
of  petition  is  required  to  be  decided  at  the  first  instance  as 
repeatedly  held  by  august  Supreme  Court 
in  number  of 
judgments  including  judgments  reported  as  Abbas  Hussain  vs. 
State (1992 SCMR 320) and Abdul Ali vs. Haji Bismillah (2002 
SCMR 203).  
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
4 
4. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner in response to the above 
preliminary  objection  on  the  maintainability  of  this  petition 
argued  that  no  doubt,  petitioner  was  not  an  objector  to  the 
nomination papers filed by respondent No.4 but he was aggrieved 
when appeal filed by a fugitive from law has been entertained by 
the  Tribunal  through  impugned  order  dated  17.2.2018.  He  
submits  that  petitioner  being  also  a  candidate  for  seat  of 
technocrat in Senate, has become aggrieved when appeal filed by 
respondent  No.4  was  entertained  and  allowed.  Learned  counsel 
submits  that  august  Supreme  Court  in  Gul  Hassan  and  another 
vs. The State (PLD 1969 Supreme Court 69) and Hayat Bakhsh 
and  others  vs. The  State  (PLD  1981  Supreme  Court  265)  held 
that fugitive from law cannot file appeal. He adds that same view 
was  expressed  by  this  Court  in  Ghulam  Mustafa  vs.  District 
Police  Officer  Kasur  and  3  others  (PLD  2014  Lahore  82).  He 
finally  argued  that  petitioner  can  file  this  constitutional  petition 
under Article 199(1)(a) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 (Constitution). 
5. 
Learned  Law  Officer  supported  the  arguments  of  the 
respondent No.4 and submits that that provision of section 13(5) 
and  13(6)  of  the  Senate  (Election)  Act,  1975  (Act  of  1975)  is 
identical to section 112 and 113 of the Act, under which only an 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
5 
objector  to  a  nomination  paper  is  an  aggrieved  person  to  file 
appeal  before  Tribunal  or  to  file  constitutional  petition  to 
challenge order of Tribunal.   
6.  We  have  heard  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the 
parties and perused the record with their able assistance. The law 
is  well  settled  by  august  Supreme  Court  that  an  objection 
pertaining to maintainability of petition should be decided at the 
first instance before touching merits of case which will otherwise 
a  futile  exercise.  Therefore,  we  intend  to  decide  question  of 
maintainability of this petition at the initial stage.  
7. 
The  main  argument  of  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent 
No.4 is that petitioner being not an objector during scrutiny to the 
nomination papers of respondent No.4, had no locus standi to file 
appeal before Appellate Tribunal, therefore, he is also not entitled 
to file this constitutional petition challenging the impugned order 
passed  by  Tribunal.  On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner is claiming that because appeal was entertained by the 
Tribunal illegally on behalf of fugitive of law, therefore, he being 
also  a  candidate  has  secured  a  locus  standi  to  challenge  the 
impugned judgment passed by the Tribunal. To better appreciate 
the  respective  contentions  of  the  parties  and  to  decide  the 
question of maintainability, it is necessary to go through relevant 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
6 
provision  of  the  Act  which  deals  with  filing  of  appeal  before 
Tribunal. Section 113 of the Act provide appeal before Tribunal 
against scrutiny order. For convenience, provision of section 113 
of the Act is reproduced hereunder:- 
113.  Appeal  against  scrutiny  order.—  (1)  A 
candidate  or  an  objector  may,  within  the  time 
specified  by  the  Commission,  file  an  appeal 
against  the  decision  of  the  Returning  Officer 
rejecting  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  accepting  a 
nomination  paper  to  the  Tribunal  constituted  for 
the purpose consisting of a person who is a Judge 
of a  High  Court,  appointed by  the  Commission in 
consultation  with  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  High 
Court concerned. 
(2)  An  appeal  filed  under  sub-section  (1) 
shall  be  summarily  decided  within  such  time  as 
may be notified by the Commission and any order 
passed on the appeal shall be final. 
(3)  If,  on  the  basis  of  information  or 
material coming to its knowledge by any source, a 
Tribunal constituted under sub-section (1) is of the 
opinion  that  a  candidate  whose  nomination paper 
has  been  accepted  is  a  defaulter  of  loans,  taxes, 
government  dues  and  utility  expenses  or  has  had 
any loan written off or has willfully concealed such 
fact or suffers from any other disqualification from 
being  elected  as  a  Member  of  the  Senate,  it  may, 
on  its  own  motion,  call  upon  such  candidate  to 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
7 
show cause why his nomination papers may  not be 
rejected,  and  if  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the 
candidate is actually a defaulter or has had a loan 
written  off  or  suffers  from  any  disqualification,  it 
may reject the nomination paper of the candidate. 
(4)  Announcement  of  the  day  and  time 
appointed  for  the hearing of an appeal under this 
section  over 
the  radio  or 
television  or  by 
publication in the newspaper shall be deemed to be 
sufficient notice of the day and time so appointed.”   
(emphasis supplied) 
8. 
The  plain  reading  of  section  113  of  the  Act  shows  that  a 
candidate  or  an  objector  can  file  appeal  against  the  decision  of 
Returning  Officer  rejecting  or  accepting  the  nomination  papers. 
The words “as the case may be”  used in section 113 of the Act 
postulates the intention of law makers that the candidate can only 
file appeal against rejection of his nomination papers whereas an 
objector  can  file  appeal  against  the  acceptance  of  nomination 
papers.  The  holistic  reading  of  section  113  of  the  Act  makes 
abundantly  clear  that  a  candidate  who  is  not  an  objector  to 
nomination  paper  during  scrutiny  cannot  file  appeal  against 
rejection  of  nomination  papers  of  another  candidate.  This 
interpretation  of  section  113  of  the  Act  is  also  supported  by  the 
fact  that  scrutiny    of  nomination  papers  before  the  Returning 
Officer  and  its  appeal  before  Appellate  Tribunal  are  in  the 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
8 
manner  of  summary  proceedings  and  therefore,  only  those 
persons  who  objected  to  nomination  papers  are  allowed  to  file 
appeals before Tribunal. Further under subsection (3) of Section 
113  of  the  Act,  the  suo  moto  power  of  Tribunal  on  basis  of 
information  or  material  coming  to  its  knowledge  by  any  source 
can only be exercised where nomination papers of candidate has 
been  accepted  and  not  when  same  are  rejected.  The  rejection  of 
nomination  can  only  be  challenged  under  subsection  (1)  of 
Section 113 of the Act by the candidate himself. However, under 
section 156 of the Act, any candidate whether he was objector or 
not can file election petition, in the post election proceedings  for 
seeking declaration of any election of returned candidate void, if 
the  nomination  of  returned  candidate  was  invalid  or  he  was  not 
qualified.  
9. 
The provision of section 105 to 112  in Chapter VII of the 
Act,  which  relates  to  conduct  of  election  of  senate,  also  support 
the  above  legal  position.  Section  112  specifically  relates  to  the 
scrutiny  of  nomination  papers.  Subsection  (1)  of  section  112  of 
the  Act,  provides  that  the  candidate, through  proposer,  seconder 
and  agent  authorized  by  candidate  may  attend  the  scrutiny  of 
nomination  papers.  Candidate  is  defined  under  section  2(vii)  of 
the Act means a person proposed and seconded as a candidate for 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
9 
seeking  election  as  a  member.  Subsection  (6)  of  section  112  of 
the  Act  provides  that  Returning  Officer  may  either  on  his  own 
motion  or  upon  objection  reject  the  nomination  papers  for 
grounds specified in the said subsection. This depicts the scheme 
of law under the Act, that unless a candidate appeared at the time 
of  scrutiny  and  object  to  the  nomination  papers  of  another 
candidate,  he  cannot  be  aggrieved  of  acceptance  or  rejection  of 
nomination papers of said candidate. Any other interpretation of 
these  provisions  will  not  only  change  the  entire  complexion  of 
scrutiny process under Chapter VII of the Act but will also render 
certain sub clauses of section 112 and 113 redundant.   
10.  The  same  view  was  also  expressed  by  this  Court  while 
interpreting  section  112  and  113  of  the  Act  in  writ  petition 
No.168265/2018  vide 
judgment  dated  01.3.2018.  Relevant 
observation is reproduced hereunder:- 
“Plain  and  holistic  reading  of  Section  113  of 
the  Act  shows  that  candidate  can  file  Appeal 
before  Appellate  Tribunal  if  his  nomination 
papers  are  rejected.    Where  an  objector  can 
file  Appeal  before  Appellate  Tribunal 
if 
nomination  papers 
are  accepted.  The 
candidate cannot file Appeal against rejection 
of  nomination  paper  of  another  candidate 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
10 
unless  he  was  objector  to  those  nomination 
papers. 
Although  the  objector  is  not  defined 
under the Act but as and when any objection is 
filed  by  an  objector  the  same  is  dealt  with 
under Section 112 of the Act.  
This  interpretation  is  also  inconsonance 
with  the  scheme  of  the  Act,  where  Section  112 
of  the  Act  clearly  depicts  that  the  Returning 
Officer shall examine the nomination papers of 
the candidates and decide any objection raised 
by any such person to any nomination.  Chapter 
VII of the Act deals with the conduct of Election 
to  the  Senate  in  which  under  Section  105  the 
Returning  Officer  and  Dealing  Officers  have 
been appointed with the functions under Section 
106.  Section  110  deals  with  the  nomination  of 
the  Election  and  the  entire  scrutiny  of  the 
candidates  is  stated  in  Section  112  (1)  of  the 
Act  in  which  the  Returning  Officer  shall  give 
the  candidates,  their  proposers  and  seconders, 
and  an  agent  authorized  in  writing  in  this 
behalf,  reasonable  opportunity  for  examining 
all 
the  nomination  papers 
including  any 
nomination  by 
the  objector.  Only 
the 
candidates  or  the  objectors  were  permitted  to 
file  an  Appeal  before  the  Appellate  Tribunal 
under Section 113 of the Act in case of rejection 
or acceptance of nomination papers as the case 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
11 
may  be,  therefore,  the  locus  standi  to  file  an 
Appeal  against  rejection  of  nomination  papers 
only  lies  with  the  objector.  Subsection  3  of 
Section 113 of the Act further clarifies that the 
Tribunal  can  also  deal  with  the  matters  of  the 
candidates. 
In  this  case  it  is  admitted  and  apparent 
from the record that the Petitioner had not filed 
any  objection as provided  under  Section 112 of 
the Act to the nomination papers of Respondent 
No.4,  therefore,  he  had  no  locus-standi  to  be 
heard before the Appellate Tribunal. It is further 
noted  that  the  only  remedy  available  to  the 
Petitioner being a candidate and not objector is 
under  Section  156  of  the  Act  in  post-election 
proceedings  where  the  Petitioner  will  have 
grounds  for  seeking  declaration  of  any  election 
of  returned  candidate  void  if  the  nomination  of 
the  returned  candidate  is  invalid  or  he  is  not 
qualified. 
11. 
In  the  present  case,  it  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that 
petitioner  though  was  a  candidate  but  he  never  filed  objection 
against  nomination  papers  of  respondent  No.4  at  the  time  of 
scrutiny.  It  is  also  not  disputed  that  petitioner  also  not  filed  any 
formal application before Appellate Tribunal for being impleaded 
as party. In the circumstances, the Appellate Tribunal had rightly 
held  in  para  3  of  the  impugned  judgment  that  petitioner  had  no 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
12 
right of audience being not an objector, however, he could place 
any information through counsel already representing respondent 
No.2 in appeal.    
12.  The  next  argument  that  petitioner  can  file  constitutional 
petition under Article 199 (1)(a) of the Constitution to challenge 
impugned 
judgment 
is  also  mis-conceived.  Under  Article 
199(1)(a)  of  the  Constitution,  only  an  aggrieved  party  can 
approach  this  Court.  The  petitioner  who  was  not  an  objector  to 
the  nomination  papers  of  respondent  No.4  cannot  be  treated  as 
aggrieved  party  against  acceptance  of  nomination  papers  of 
respondent  No.4,  specially  when  petitioner  own  nomination 
papers are already accepted and not affected at all in any manner 
by the impugned judgment passed by Tribunal.  
13.  The  question  whether  third  party,  who  is  just  an  informer 
like  petitioner,  can  file  writ  petition  against  the  acceptance  of 
nomination  papers  filed  by  a  candidate  has  been  dealt  with  by 
Full  Bench  of  august  Supreme  Court  in  Federation  of  Pakistan 
and others vs. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others  (PLD 
2009  Supreme  Court  644)  relating  to  similar  provisions  under 
Representation of People Act, 1976 (ROPA now repealed).  The 
august Supreme Court  in said judgment  held that such person is 
an informer and is not an aggrieved person within the meaning of 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
13 
Article  199  of 
the  Constitution.  Relevant  observation 
is 
reproduced as under:- 
 
 
 
informer 
is  simply  of  an 
standing  of  a  person  who 
The 
furnishes 
information under subsection (5-A) can in no way 
be  equated  with  that  of  the  appellant  under 
subsection  (5-A),  who  has  a  personal  interest  in 
the outcome of the proceedings. The status of such 
a  person 
laying 
information  before  the  Tribunal  of  certain  facts, 
which  he  believes  disqualifies  a  candidate  to 
contest  the  election.  He  has  not  been  bestowed 
with  any  vested  right  to  pursue  the  matter  on  a 
personal  level  to  get  a  candidate  disqualified. 
Needless  to  state  that  like  all  powers  exercisable 
suo  motu,  the  Tribunal  is  empowered  to  summon 
the informer, or for that matter anyone, to appear 
before  it  to  substantiate,  clarify  or  throw  light 
upon  the  contents  of  the  show  cause  notice.  The 
informer  however  does  not  become  a  party  in  the 
legal  sense  of  the  term  to  the  proceedings  before 
the  Tribunal.  The  Tribunal’s  order  rejecting  the 
information 
candidate 
concerned qualified cannot be termed as an order 
adverse  to  the  interest  of  the  informer.  Such 
informer,  therefore,  would  not  be  an  aggrieved 
person  within  the  meaning  of  Article  199  of  the 
Constitution  entitling  him  to  file  petition  for 
issuance of a writ of Certiorari or Mandamus.  
 
(emphasis supplied) 
declaring 
and 
the 
 
The  same  view  was  expressed  by  this  Court  in  Aziz  Masood  vs. 
Khawaja Ahmad Hassan and 5 others (2016 CLC 706), where it 
is held as under:- 
Therefore, a baseline question arises in the instant 
matter.  Whether  the  petitioner  was  present  at  the 
time  of  the  scrutiny  and  did  raise  an  objection 
validly and properly before the Returning Officer? 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
14 
is  able 
to  cross 
the  petitioner 
Unless, 
this 
threshold, it will be deemed that his appeal before 
the  Appellate  Authority  was  not  competent  and, 
therefore,  the  Appellate  Authority  was  correct  in 
concluding  that  there  were,  in  fact,  no  objections 
and thus an appeal was not competent.     
In  Faisal  Mir  vs.  Election  of  Pakistan  and  others  (2018  CLC 
page 1), the Full Bench of this Court held as under:- 
 
The  only  exception  given  in  this  judgment  for 
entertaining  a  constitutional  petition  by  the  High 
Court  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  is  that  if 
anyone is being disfranchised and no legal remedy 
is  available  to  any  aggrieved  party  during  the 
process of election or after its completion.  
14.  The solitary principle of law settled in above judgments is 
that  a  person  who  is  not  an  objector  during  the  scrutiny  of 
nomination papers but only wants to passed on some information 
will  not  be  an  aggrieved  party  against  the  acceptance  of 
nomination  papers  of  another  candidate,  unless 
through 
impugned  order,  he  has  been  disfranchised  or  any  of  his  own 
right has been affected. In the present case, neither petitioner has 
been  disfranchised  through  impugned  order  nor  his  right  to 
contest  election  has  been  affected  in  any  manner.  Therefore, 
having  not  filed  any  objection 
to  nomination  papers  of 
respondent  No.4,  the  petitioner  cannot  be  treated  as  aggrieved 
person.  
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
15 
15.  Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued  that 
petitioner  is  aggrieved  because  respondent  No.4,  being  fugitive 
from law could not file appeal before Appellate Tribunal in view 
of law laid down by august Supreme Court in Hayat Bakhsh and 
Gul  Hassan  cases  supra.  We  have  carefully  considered  this 
argument. The provision of section 113 of the Act ibid deal with 
appeal  before  Appellate  Tribunal  against  the  scrutiny  order. 
Under  said provision  of  section  113,    a  candidate or  an objector 
may file appeal before Appellate Tribunal against the rejection or 
acceptance  of  nomination  papers  as  the  case  may  be.  In  the 
present case, admittedly, respondent No.4 was a candidate whose 
nomination  papers  were  rejected  by  the  Returning  Officer, 
therefore,  under  section  113  of  the  Act,  he  was  entitled  to  file 
appeal  against  order  of  Returning  Officer  rejecting  his 
nomination  papers.  We  have  also  noted  that  nomination  papers  
of  respondent  No.4  were  not  rejected  on  the  ground  that 
respondent No.4 was as absconder or fugitive from law. This plea 
was  also  not  raised  before  Appellate  Tribunal  by  the  objector 
who was respondent No.2 in the said appeal. 
16.  The case law relied upon by petitioner is not applicable to 
the facts and circumstances of this case. In case of Hayat Bakhsh 
supra,  appeal  arose  out  of  a  murder  case  and  august  Supreme 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
16 
Court held that when a convicted become a fugitive before filing 
of appeal, he will be dis-entitled to a relief unless he surrenders. 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in said judgment also observed that this 
finding  is  in  accordance  with  the  basic  principles  governing 
administration  of  criminal  justice  and  would  apply  to  other 
proceedings, only subject to the law applicable thereto. In case of 
Gull Hassan supra, again the matter arose out of criminal appeal 
and  same  principle  was  applied  by  august  Supreme  Court.  In 
present  case,  matter  is  not  relating  to  any  criminal  proceedings 
against  respondent  No.4,  rather  he  had  filed  an  appeal  against 
order  passed  by  Returning  Officer  rejecting  his  nomination 
papers  under  section  112  of  the  Act  before  the  Appellate 
Tribunal.  Further  the  applicable  law  is  section  113  of  the  Act, 
which  authorizes  a  candidate  to  file  appeal  before  Tribunal. 
There  is  no  specific  requirement  under  the  Act  that  appellant 
must be present and cannot file appeal through authorized person.  
17. 
Indeed a person who is fugitive of law, will have no right 
of  criminal  appeal  in  the  matter,  in  which  he  has  been  declared 
absconder  unless  he  surrenders,  as  held  by  august  Supreme 
Court, in administration of criminal justice. However, it will be a 
fallacy  to  hold  that  a  person  who  is  declared  absconder  has  no 
right  to  file  any  appeal  before  any  forum,  in  respect  of  matters 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
17 
which  have  no  nexus  and  relation  to  proceedings  in  which,  he 
was  declared  absconder.  By  way  of  illustration,  this  will  mean 
that  a  person  who  is  absconder  in  a  criminal  case,  cannot  be 
allowed to file appeal even in any civil matters including banking 
matter,  family  matters  etc  before  any  Court  of  law.    This  will 
practically  means  that  all  fundamental  rights  of  said  person  for 
their enforcement through Court of law will be suspended, which 
is  neither  the  intention  of  legislation  under  the  Act  nor  same  is 
permissible under the Constitution. 
18. 
We  also  found  substance  in  argument  of  learned 
counsel  for  the  respondents  that  under  Article  225  of  the 
Constitution,  election  is  to  be  challenged  through  election 
petition.  In 
the  present  case  when  neither  petitioner 
is 
disfranchised  nor  any  of  his  right to  contest  election  is  effected, 
the challenging of election process through constitutional petition 
will  circumvent  the  intention  of  legislation  under  Article  225  of 
the  Constitution.  Further  interference  in  constitutional  petition 
will  also  be  against    the  scheme  of  the  Act,  where  against 
acceptance  of  nomination  papers,  only  objector  can  file  appeal, 
whereas a candidate has right under section 156 of the Act to file  
election  petition  in  the  post  election  proceedings.  In  this  regard, 
reliance is placed on Election Commission of Pakistan through its 
W.P.No.168260 of 2018 
 
 
18 
Secretary  v.  Javaid  Hashmi  and  others  (PLD  1989  Supreme 
Court  396),  Ghulam  Mustafa  Jatoi  v.  Additional  District  & 
Sessions Judge/Returning Officer, N.A. 158 Naushero Feroze and 
others (1994 SCMR 1299) and Muhammd Raza Hayat Hiraj and 
others v. The Election Commission of Pakistan and others (2015 
SCMR 233). 
19.  The  above  discussion  leads  us  to  ineluctable  conclusion 
that  the  petitioner  has  no  locus  standi  to  file  this  constitutional 
petition  being  not  an  objector  to  the  nomination  papers  of 
respondent  No.4  before  the  Returning  Officer.  Resultantly,  this 
petition is dismissed, with no order as to cost.           
 
 
(JAWAD HASSAN) 
JUDGE 
 
 
 
             (ABID AZIZ SHEIKH) 
 
     JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rizwan         
 
 
 
 
 
