w.P.No.1251 of 2014
Judgment  Sheet
Stereo. HCJDA3g.
IN TI{E LAHORE HIGH COURT
BAHAWALPUR  BE}ICH BAHAWALPUR
JUDICIAL Dtr]I'ARTMENT
Writ Petition  Np.1251  of 2014
Saif-ur-Rehman  and others
Versus
District  Judge and others
JUDGMEI{T
Date of hearing:
12.01.2017
Petitioners  by:
Abdul Majeed Bhatti, Advocate.
Respondents  by: Mian Ahrnad  l.ladeem Arshad and Malik
Muharnmad  Latif Arain, Advocates.
MUJAHID MUSTA()EEM  AHMED.  J:  By this
constitutional petition, the petitiorrers  have assailed the impugned
orders dated  24.04.2013 and 29.10.2013,  passed by learned Special
Judge (Rent) Rent Tribunal,  Bahawalpur  and learned Additional
District Judge, Bahawalpur respectively, by which  ejectment  petition
fiied by respondents/landlord  stood  allowed.
2. 
It is second round of litigatior,, in ejectment petition  regarding  a
shop situated at 'Addah  Pul Noor pu;: Noranga,  Bahawalpur, filed by
Muhammad  Latif and Khalid Mehmood Arain-respondents  No.3 & 4,
C-I
W.P.No.7257  of 2074
under The Punjab Rented  Premises Act, 2009, against the
petitioner/tenant  Saif-ur-Rehman  and  and Muhammad  Naeem
(respondent No.5 before this Court).  The grounds  of ejectment  taken
in ejectment petition  are non-payment  of rent since 15.05.2007, partial
subletting of shop by Saif-ur-Rehman to Muhammad Naeem-
respondent  No.5 and damage to the shop.  saif-ur-Rehman,  present
petitioner No.1 and Muhammad  ]rlaeem-respondent  No.5 contested
the ejectment petition and denied  relationship of landlord  and tenant.
During pendency of ejectment petition,  Khalid Mehmood Khawaja
deceased (now  represented  through legal heirs)  and wajid  Mehmood
(petitioner No.2 & 3 in writ petition,  both brother in law/sala  of Saif-
ur-Rehman)  at their instance were impleaded  as respondents and they
took the plea that Khalid Mehmoocl  Khawaja  was owner of 1 Marla
shop, purchased from original owner-Muhammad  Ismail vide
mutation of sale No.1540  Exh.Al, afiested  on25.02.2006,  on the basis
of registered  sale deed dated 12:..1,r.2005  (copy of sale deed  not
produced).
3' 
Rent (Rent Tribunal) framed follovring issues:-
To iesolve the factual controversy,  rearned  special Judge
ISSUES
' 
1.  Whether  their e>,:ists relationship of land lord and
tenant between  the parties? Op parties.
1-A. whether respondents No.3 & 4 are in possession  of
the tenancy  shop and the petitioners  have no nexus
with it? OpR (Respondents  No.3 and 4)
4. 
After recording evidence  of the parlies,  vide impugned
order dated 24.04.2013, passed b.r the learned special  Judge  Rent,
Bahawalpur,  these issues were answered against the present
petitioners  and ejectment  order was passed in  favour  of
respondents/land  lords. Only petiticner-Saif-ur-Rehman  assailed this
w.P.No.t2S7  of 20t4
judgment before the learned  Additional District Judge,  Bahawalpur,
who vide judgment dated 29.10.2013,  dismissed the appear. As such
the petitioner  alongwith  his brothers-in-law  i.e Khalid Mehrnood and
wajid Mehmood, has assailed trrese orders/judgments in this writ
petition mainly  on the grounds  that the salxe suffer from misreading
and non-reading  of evidence and as such not sustainable.
5. 
Heard. Record perusecl.
6' 
The randlords  to prove issue No.1 have produced Aw-
1/N{asood-ul-Haq,  Starnp  vendor, who deposed that sramp paper was
purchased  by present petitioner-Saif-ur-Rehman  for execution of rent
deed. AW-2/Muhammad  Ibrahim sheikh, Advocate/Notary pubric,
proved his verification  on rent deecl (Exh.Ar). Aw-3/AnahBachaya,
deed writer has supported executio'of  rent deed and attestation of the
sa're by petitioner No.1 and witness;es. AW-Sa4'harnmad  Latif and
AW-6/Muharnmad  Amin are rnarginal witnesses of rent deed
(Exh.A1) and they proved their sig'ertures on it. They were not cross
examined by petitioner No.1 and un,ler  law it will be presumed  that he
has accepted their testimony basecl on truth. one of the landlords
Muhamrnad  Latif as AW-4 proved his affidavit Exh.A2,  wherein  he
supporled the case taken in ejectrnent  petitio'. He r.vas cross exarnined
at length but without any premium t. rhe defence  set up by the present
petitioners.  In rebuttal,  petitioner-saif,ur-Rehman  as Rw_1 proved  his
affidavit  Exh.Rl, r'eiterating his cosr) sot in written statement. He
conceded that Kharid  Mehrnood  an,J wajid Mehmood Khawaja are
his'Phupizad'  and. their sister  has been ma*ied  with him. RW_2/syed
Naeem Akhtar  (respondent No.5 in rvr:it petition) proved his affidavit
Exh.R2' During cross  examination he admitted that he was running
make shift shop of vegetabres i'  fic,nt of rented shop.  He conceded
that the shop was previousry  owned by Muhammad  Ismail and
petitioner-saif-ur-Rlhman was runni'g a book  shop in it. None from
tLr
W.P.No.7257  of 2014
Khalid Mehmood and wajid Mehmood  Khawaja (respondents in
ejectment petition claiming ownersrrip of shop) has put appearance  in
witness  box inspite  of the fact that their affidavits  are on record. As
such their right of evidence  has been closed by the learned Special
Judge Rent vide orders dated  22.0:j.2012.  Their omission  to appear in
witness box or produce  any evidence leads to draw the inference  that
they have  rniserably failed to prove  issue  No.2. Exh.Al is rent deed
dated 28.a3.2007 executed by present  petitioner No.l in favour  of
landlords/respondents, duly attested by AW-2a{otary public.  The
photocopy of c.N.I.c. of the present petitioner  No.1 is also annexed
with it.
7. 
Learned  counsel for the petitioners  Mr. Abdul Majeed
Bhatti Advocate,  has vehemently  argued  that vide mutation of saie
No.1540  Exh.Al attested  on 25.02.2006  on the basis of sale deed,
Muhammad  Ismail/original  owner had sold away 1 Marla  tand
situated in Khata No.301,  Mouza  Noor pur Noranga, Bahawalpur to
Khalid Mehmood  Khawaja.  As such he is co-sharer  and against  co-
sharer  ejectment  petition is not maintainable  and only remedy
available  to the landlord  is to file a suit for partition. To substantiate
this legal preposition  reliance  has been placed on pLD 2009 supreme
Court 7l'Mst.  Sanohor ,\ulfnn nmrJ nrho.c '[/o-oo,n  r1A^;)",11^t^  r.t----
and others' and 1992 SCMR l3S2 ,
versus Mian Abdur Rahman and q:hers'. To my view, the facts of
reported cases are quite distinguishable as in those cases, the tenant
has purchased the rented  property  and as such it has been laid down
that he did cease to be a tenant under the landlord. Whereas  in the
instant case,  Saif-ur-Rehman-petit:oner  has not purchased  the shop
and as such his status is still of ;enant.  Learned counsel  for the
petitioners has further rnaintained  i:hat the ejectment  proceedings  are
based on malafide and the Couris below have acted in arbitrarv
manner,  in violation^of  law and as, such ir:respective of the fact that
W.P.No.t2,t of 2OI4
petitioners  No.2 and 3 have not filed appeal and availed arternate
remedy against ejectment order, still they are competent  to file writ
petition' Reliance  has been praced on 20r1 yLR 2gs0 (Lahore) ,sft.
,. To my view
this contention  is devoid of any legal force. As noticed earlier,  the
ejectment petition was filed on 30.09.2009  and it is second round of
litigation  and fair opportunity of defence has been afforded to the
petitioner No.2 and 3 and they havt: failed to establish any malafide or
abuse of power by the rower fo'a as rightly obseryed by rearned
Additio'al District Judge i' i'rpugned  j'dg'rent. petitioners No.2 and
3 after withdrawal  of writ petition No.i29 of 2013 on r1.0i .2013,
become inactive/donaant  as such th.ey cannot legaily  fire writ petition,
without  availing  alternate  rernedy.
8' 
I  have exarnined  the irnpugned orders passed by he
leamed Speciai  Judge Rent and learned Additionar District Judge,
Bahawalpur. Both of thern have fully scanned, discussed the oral as
well as documentary  evidence led by the parlies  and fairly decided  the
respective  preas i of the contestinp,  parties and as such irnpugned
judgments do not suffer for misrea<ling  and non-reading of evidence.
In view of principle of estoppel ancr rule of forfeiture of tenancy,  the
courts below have varidly  passed an ejectment order. In precedents
PLD 2007 Supreme Court aS  , i]
Siddique  and 2 others,  and Z00g yLR 2234 (Karachi) ,Muhammad
, it has been
laid down that High Court in exercise  of its Constitutional Jurisdiction
is not supposed to interfere  in findings ol1 controversial  question of
facts based on evidence,  even if such finding  was erroneous  ancr it is
not proper for the High court to cristurb findings of facts through
reappraisal of evidence in constiturionar  jurisdictio'  or to exercise
such jurisdiction  as a substitute of re,rision  or appeal.  Thus I am of the
view,  the irnpugned  orders have bee.r  passed in accordance  with law,
drr\l
W.P.No.72S1 of 2014
call for no interference  by this Court in its Constitutional jurisdiction.
consequently,  the instant writ petition is dismissed. In the instant
case, after recording  findings of existence  of relationship  in between
real contesting parties  i.e petitioner No.1 and respondents  No.3 & 4, it
was mandatory for the learned  Spe:cial Judge Rent, to pass the final
order regarding the amount of re't due to landlord,  which petitioner
No.1 being tenant  is bound  to pay and such order shall be executable
against defaulting tenant. so, to this extent only, matter  is remanded  to
the learned Special Judge Rent, Bahawalpur  for further proceedings
under Section  24 of the punjab  R.ented  premises  Act (vII of 2009).
The parties and their respective  counsel  will appear before the learned
District  Judge, Bahawalpur on 10"02.2017,  who i.vill entrust  the case
file to any competent court to proceed further in this case, as,directed
supra.
(MUJAHID MUSTAQBEM  AHMED)
Judge
Approved for reporting.
/o.' sl"t-a"t*u"o,
l'>lttt'z
Judge
