FORM  No. HCJD/C-121 
 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.472 of 2018 
 
Muhammad Azam Khan  Versus  Mst. Armeen Ahmed 
 
 
Sr.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties of counsel, where 
necessary 
12.2.2019. 
  Mr.  Tariq  Zulfiqar  Ahmad  Chaudhary,  Advocate  for  the 
petitioner. 
 
  Nemo for the respondent. 
This  judgment  will  dispose  of  the  instant  civil 
revision as well as civil revision nos.  473, 474, 475, and 
476 of 2018 as common questions for determination arise 
therein.  
2.  Facts  from  which  these  petitions  arose  are  that  the 
petitioner  Muhammad  Azam  Khan  filed  five  suits  of 
preemption to preempt the sale transactions on the ground 
of  having  superior  right  of  preemption,  claiming  that  on 
20.3.2015 at 3.00 p.m. (Friday), Muhammad Jamil son of 
Abdul  Shakoor, informed him about  the sales in question 
whereupon,  in  the  presence  of  Muhammad  Iqbal  Shahid 
son  of  Malik  Wahid  Bakhsh,  Muhammad  Nasir  son  of 
Abdur Rasheed, Muhammad Ismail son of Abdul Shakoor, 
he  allegedly  pronounced  his  intention  to  file  the  suit  for 
preemption  and  that  thereafter,  he  purportedly  issued 
notice  of  Talb-e-Ishhad  which  was  followed  by  the 
institution of the suits for preemption. 
3.  The  suits  were  resisted  with  the  assertion  that  the 
petitioner was fully aware of the transaction of sale well in 
 
Civil Rev. No.472 of 2018  
 
 
 
Page-2 
time and that his plea of  receiving information of sale on 
20.3.2015 as alleged was factually untrue and also that the 
petitioner  having  failed  to  make  the  requisite  Talbs  in 
accordance with the mandate of law and otherwise having 
no  superior  right  of  preemption,  his  suit  was  liable  to  be 
dismissed.  After  receiving  evidence,  hearing  both  sides, 
the  learned  Civil  Judge  dismissed  the  suit,  returning 
findings on issue No.2 to the effect that the petitioner has 
failed  to  fulfill  the  requisite  Talbs  as  required  under  the 
Punjab  Preemption  Act,  1991.  As  regards  issue  No.1, 
relating the plea of superior rights, the finding was that the 
status of the petitioner as also the purchaser was on equal 
footing  and  that  the  petitioner  did  not  have  any  superior 
right. 
4.  Petitioner  assailed  the  judgment  of  the  learned  trial 
court in appeal which was dismissed by the learned Addl. 
District Judge Bahawalpur vide judgment dated 23.2.2018, 
re-affirming  the  findings  of  the  learned  trial  court  to  the 
extent of  Talbs, and concluded that  petitioner was unable 
to prove the requisite Talbs; and that they are not entitled 
to a decree of preemption. 
5.  Learned counsel submitted that the evidence recorded 
in  one  case  was  reproduced  verbatim  in  the  other  cases 
and  in  doing  so  the  learned  trial  court  had  committed 
illegality, therefore, the judgment be set aside and the case 
remanded  for  re-recording  of  the  evidence  and  decision 
afresh.  Further  submitted  that  the  learned  trial  court  mis-
used  the  powers  as  vested  in  the  court  under  C.P.C.  and 
that the recording of evidence in one case and carrying the 
same in other cases was a material irregularity. 
 
Civil Rev. No.472 of 2018  
 
 
 
Page-3 
6.  On  due  consideration  of  the  submissions  made  by 
learned  counsel,  in  the  light  of  the  copies  of  the  record 
annexed  with  these  petitions,  it  is  observed  that  the 
petitioner  filed  five  suits  for  preemption  to  preempt  the 
sales made by the vendors on the plea of having superior 
right  of  preemption.  The  case  set  up  by  the  petitioner  in 
the  plaints  of  all  the  cases  was  that  on  20.3.2015  at  3.00 
p.m.  Muhammad  Jamil  son  of  Abdul  Shakoor  allegedly 
informed  the  petitioner  about  the  sales  and  at  that  time 
Muhammad  Iqbal,  Muhammad  Nasir  and  Muhammad 
Ismail  were  present  and  also  that  in  their  presence,  the 
petitioner  allegedly  pronounced  his  preemptory  right  and 
intention  to  file  the  suit.  This  significant  to  note  that  the 
petitioner  also  alleged  in  para  3  of  the  plaint  in  the  suit 
“Muhammad  Azam  Khan  v.  Asfaah  Ahmad”  that  same 
Muhammad  Jamil  allegedly  informed  him  of  the  other 
sales, also at the same time i.e. 3.00 p.m.; and also on the 
same date i.e. 20.3.2015 and also in the presence of same 
persons  as  mentioned  herein  above.  In  this  view  of  the 
matter  the  petitioner  produced  these  persons  as  witnesses 
It  is  therefore  manifest  that  the  petitioner  did  not  claim 
that he was informed of the alleged sales in the other cases 
by  a  different  person  at  a  different  time  or  on  a  different 
date.  The  evidence  when  recorded  on  behalf  of  the 
petitioner  and  thereafter  the  evidence  of  respondents  was 
recorded, at no point of time the petitioner appears to have 
objected to the procedure adopted by the court as alleged 
now  by  the  petitioner.  Petitioner  does  not  claim  that  any 
objection  was  raised  before  trial  court  till  the  conclusion 
of trial or at the time of final arguments. It is also observed 
that  even  in  the  ground  of  first  appeal  before  the  learned 
 
Civil Rev. No.472 of 2018  
 
 
 
Page-4 
Addl.  District  Judge  the  petitioner  did  not  raise  any  plea 
qua  the  recording  of  the  evidence  in  one  case  and 
reproducing  the verbatim  copy thereof in the other cases. 
Even the judgment of the appellate court does not indicate 
if  any  argument  on  the  procedure  of  recording  evidence 
was  ever  raised  or  the  petitioner  ever  claimed  any 
prejudice  on  this  account.  In  “Ch.  SAIFULLAH.  vs.  ALI 
SALEEM  and  another”  (2015  MLD  247)  while  dealing 
with  the  plea  of  recording  evidence  in  one  case  and 
reproducing in another case it was observed by this Court 
as follows: - 
this  court 
 
“11.       The  said  view  has  further  been  affirmed 
by 
in  another  case  reported  as 
Muhammad Ramzan v. Muhammad Jahangir and 
another  (2012  CLC  844),  wherein,  it  was  held 
that  'unnecessary  technicalities  should  not  be 
allowed to deter the due process of law on trifling 
grounds, particularly where no prejudice is likely 
to be caused to any litigant, meaning thereby, the 
procedural environment must be made conducive 
to facilitate the flow of the stream of justice.' The 
identical  controversy  was  also  clinched  in  many 
other  cases  by  this  court  as  well  as  the  august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan.  Reference  can  be 
made on the cases reported as Muhammad Sharif 
v.  Muhammad  Yousaf  (2008  MLD  307)  and 
Khushi Muhammad v. Muhammad Yousaf (2008 
YLR  362).  After  placing  reliance  upon  the  case 
reported  as  Salehon  Muhammad  and  another  v. 
Allah  Yar  (1989  SCMR  540)  this  court  is  of  the 
firm  view 
the 
appellant/plaintiff  that  evidence  recorded  in  one 
case  copied in verbatim over the other  file in the 
peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  instant 
case 
the 
appellant/plaintiff  could  have  objected  the  mode 
of  recording  of  evidence  before  the  learned  trial 
court, if he was prejudiced in any manner, but he 
having  failed  to  do  so,  at  this  stage  before  the 
third 
forum  such  an  objection  cannot  be 
considered.  Even  today,  the  learned  counsel  for 
the  appellant  has  not  been  able  to  point  out  that 
how  the  appellant  was  prejudiced  by  the  alleged 
mode  adopted  by  the  learned  trial  court  in 
recording the evidence of the parties and that how 
cannot  be  declared 
raised  by 
the  plea 
fatal 
that 
and 
 
 
Civil Rev. No.472 of 2018  
 
 
 
Page-5 
the evidence of one case has damaged the  stance 
of  the  appellant  in  the  other  case  and  how  the 
same were different from each other. It is not the 
case of the appellant that there were different sets 
of  witnesses  in  both  the  cases  and  separate 
witnesses  were  to  be  examined,  whose  mind  set 
would  vary  from  each  other.  There  could  be 
substance  in  the  argument  of  learned  counsel  for 
the  appellant  that  the  evidence  of  a  witness 
recorded  in  one  case  was  copied  in  verbatim  in 
the other case of a different witness on the similar 
issue. Even otherwise, the appellant has been non-
suited  on  his  own  omissions  and  commissions 
made during the proceedings of the cases, but  he 
is  not  aggrieved  of  any  procedural  defect  on  the 
part  of  the  learned  trial  court  in  losing  the  cases 
on  merits.  Hence,  after  the  elapse  of  about  12 
years, I do not find any good ground to throw the 
parties  in  another  round  of  litigation  in  a  suit  for 
pre-emption, which is a feeble right.” 
Similar  view  was  taken  in  “MUHAMMAD  SHARIF  v. 
MUHAMMAD  YOUSAF”  (2008  MLD  307)  where  it  was 
observed as funder: - 
 
“8…I  also  find  that  evidence  of  the  parties  was 
recorded  in  suit  titled  as  "Khushi  Muhammad  v. 
Muhammad  Yousaf"  and  was  reproduced  in  the 
other  two  cases.  The  petitioner  did  not  object  to 
the  course  adopted  by  the  trial  Court  which 
exercise appears to have been undertaken with the 
concurrence  of  the  parties  and  their  counsel.  The 
petitioner  could  not  point  out  any  prejudice 
caused to his right by the complained activity and 
this  defect,  if  any,  being  of  procedural  nature, 
does  not  affect  the  findings  of  the  Courts  or  trial 
of  the  suit.  The  petitioner  having  acquiesced  to 
the  procedure  adopted  is  now  estopped  to  turn 
back  and  say  that  evidence  in  all  three  suits 
should  have  been  recorded  separately.  I  find  that 
the objection of the petitioner is only of technical 
nature and does not defeat the ends of justice.” 
 
In  “KHUSHI  MUHAMMAD  v.  MUHAMMAD  YOUSAF” 
(2008 YLR 362) also the proposition supra was reiterated. 
In  “MUHAMMAD  ASLAM  and  another  v.  IMAM 
BAKHSH and two others” (1980 SCMR 879), the August 
Supreme Court was pleased to observe as below:- 
 
Civil Rev. No.472 of 2018  
 
 
 
Page-6 
 
“5…Facing  this  difficulty  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioners firstly argued that the three suits in this 
case were not tried in accordance with any correct 
legal  procedure.  He  submitted  that  evidence  was 
recorded  only  in  one  suit,  and  copies  of  the 
statements of the witnesses were then placed in the 
other  two  suits  after  initials  of  the  learned  civil 
Judge.  He  submitted  that  each  suit  should  have 
been  separately  tried;  the  evidence  in  each  suit 
should  have  been  independently  recorded;  the 
witnesses in each case should have been separately 
examined  three  times,  and  the  consolidation  of 
evidence in one file in the manner above explained 
was all illegal. The contention raised has no merit. 
The  trial  continued  for  a  period  of  about  three 
years, and during all that long period no objection 
of  the  present  kind  was  raised  before  the  learned 
civil  Judge.  This  implies  that  the  procedure 
aforesaid  was  adopted  with  the  consent  of  the 
parties  who  were  duly  represented  by 
their 
respective counsel. The point was not raised either 
in  the  memorandum  of  appeal  or  at  the  time  of 
arguments  before  the  learned  Additional  District 
Judge  and  in  these  circumstances  the  High  Court 
refused  to  attach  any  importance  to  the  same.  We 
agree  with  the  High  Court  that  on  the  facts  in  the 
peculiar circumstances of this case, it was too late 
to  raise  this  plea  before  the  High  Court  and  we 
should  say  now  before  this  Court,  when  in  the 
relevant  Courts  below  the  mode  of  recording 
evidence  and  maintaining  the  record  was  not 
objected  to  at  any  stage.  The  defendants  cross--
examined  the  witnesses  of  the  plaintiffs;  they 
produced  their  own  witnesses  in  rebuttal  and  also 
led documentary evidence in support of their case 
and  at  no  stage  expressed  any  grievance  of  the 
technical kind, which is now being pressed before 
us.  The  contention  raised  in  the  circumstances 
cannot be accepted.” 
 
In  the  present  cases,  it  is  discernable  from  the  record  of 
the  trial  court  and  also  the  appellate  court  annexed  with 
these  petitions,  that  the  evidence  of  the  petitioner  was 
recorded; the evidence of respondent was recorded which 
was  cross-examined  by  the  petitioner;  the  trial  continued 
for  considerable  time,  but  petitioner  did  not  raise  any 
objection  to  the  procedure  adopted  by  the  court  in  the 
matter  of  recording  of  evidence  so  much  so  that  in  the 
 
Civil Rev. No.472 of 2018  
 
 
 
Page-7 
grounds  of  first  appeal  before  the  learned  District  Court, 
no such plea was raised nor it appears from the impugned 
judgment  that  it  was  ever  urged  before  the  first  appellate 
court. Being so, following the rule laid in the above cases, 
it  is  concluded  that  the  petitioner  at  this  stage  has 
acquiesced  to  the  procedure  and  is  estopped  from  raising 
any objection to the procedure adopted by the court below. 
Even  otherwise,  the  contents  of  the  pleadings  in  all  the 
cases  manifestly  show  that  the  petitioner  did  not  claim  a 
different  source  of  information,  different  timing  or  dates 
for receiving information of sale or making alleged Talbs. 
In fact, the position taken by the petitioner was that at one 
time, on the same date, by the same alleged informer, the 
information of different sales was communicated and that 
the alleged Talbs were made in the presence of same set of 
witnesses at one time. This being so, the petitioner cannot 
claim to have been prejudiced at this stage by the mode of 
recording of evidence as adopted by the learned trial court. 
The  objection  is  lacking  substance  which  is  accordingly 
rejected. 
7.  Both  the  courts  below  on  in-depth  scrutiny  of  the 
evidence on record have recorded the findings of fact that 
the  petitioner  did  not  prove  having  made  the  requisite 
Talbs. It was noted that the plea of alleged information on 
20.3.2015 was unworthy of any credence inasmuch as the 
petitioner  as  PW1  in  his  cross-examination  did  not  deny 
having moved an application for obtaining the copy of the 
sale  deed  on  14.3.2015  and  stated  that  perhaps  he  had 
moved the application which might have been misplaced. 
It  was  also  observed 
that 
there  were  material 
contradictions  in  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses.  On 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Mian M. Rabbani*   
 
Civil Rev. No.472 of 2018  
 
 
 
Page-8 
analysis  of  the  evidence,  the  findings  recorded  are  to  the 
effect  that  the  requisite  Talbs  i.e.  Talb-e-Muwathibat  and 
Talb-e-Ishhhad  were  not  established  in  result  the  suit  as 
also  the  appeals  were  dismissed.  In  the  course  of 
arguments,  the  learned  counsel  could  not  point  out  any 
misreading  or  non-reading  of  the  evidence  by  the  courts 
below  nor  having  gone  through  the  evidence,  any 
misreading  or  non-reading  was  observed  by  this  Court. 
The  learned  courts  below  have  rightly  concluded  that  the 
petitioner could not prove the requisite Talbs in result the 
right 
to  claim  preemption  stood  extinguished.  The 
impugned  judgments  do  not  suffer  from  any  error  of  law 
nor call for any interference. 
8.  For the reasons herein above there is no substance or 
merit  in  these  revision  petitions  which  are  accordingly 
dismissed.  
   
 
      (RASAAL HASAN SYED) 
        
 
 
 
JUDGE 
Approved for reporting. 
   
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
