HCJDA-38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
LAHORE  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
                           Criminal Revision No.9027/2017. 
Muhammad Jawad Hamid 
Versus  
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc. 
------------------- 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017  
“Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera  
Versus  
Judge ATC-II, Lahore and another” 
JUDGMENT 
Dates of hearing: 
Petitioners in 
Crl.Rev.No.9027/2017 by: 
19.04.2018,  23.04.2018,  25.04.2018,  11.05.2018,  15.05.2018, 
16.05.2018,  17.05.2018,  21.05.2018,  22.05.2018,  23.05.2018, 
24.05.2018,   26.06.2018,  27.06.2018. 
Rai  Bashir  Ahmad,  Muhammad  Azhar  Siddique,  Mirza 
Naveed Baig, S. Parveen Mughal, Naeem ud Din Chaudhry, 
Abdullah  Malik,  Sardar  Ghazanfar  Husain,  Mr.  Adeel 
Hassan  and  Syed  Umair  Abbas,  Ch.  Naeem  ud  Din 
Chaudhry, Advocates for the petitioner in Crl.Rev.No.9027/ 
2017. 
Petitioners in 
Crl.Rev.No.7067/2017 by: 
Mr.  Azam  Nazir  Tarrar  with  Imran  Arif  Ranjha  &  Imran 
Nazir  Chatha,  Advocates  for  petitioner 
in  Criminal 
Revision.No.7067/2017. 
State represented by: 
Syed  Ehtisham  Qadir,  Prosecutor  General  Punjab  assisted 
by  Mr.  Muhammad  Amjad  Rafiq,  Additional  Prosecutor 
General  and  Rai  Akhtar  Hussain,  Deputy  Prosecutor 
General.  
Mr.  Muhammad  Hammad  Khan  Rai,  Assistant  Advocate 
General. 
 
MUHAMMAD  QASIM  KHAN, J:-     By  this  single  judgment,  I 
propose  to  decide  two  matters  i.e.  Criminal  Revision  No.9027/2017  titled 
“Muhammad  Jawad  Hamid  versus  Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif,  etc, 
and  Criminal  Revision  No.7067/2017  titled  “Mushtaq  Ahmad  Sukhera 
versus Judge ATC-II, Lahore and another”, as both have arisen out of one 
2  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
complaint,  one  order  of  the  same  date  and  carry  similar  facts,  which  in 
brief are that:- 
A  private  complaint  was  filed  by  Muhammad  Jawad  Hamid 
(petitioner)  under  section  190(1)(a)  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 
Procedure (Act V of 1898 (hereinafter to be called as ‘Code’) and 
section  19(3)  of  the  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997,  (hereinafter  to  be 
called as “ATA”) for offences under sections 302/324, 295-B/452, 
395/427,  365/506,  120-B,  148/149,  337-F(vi),  337-C,  337-F(iii), 
337-A(v), 337-L(ii), 337-F(i), 337-A(i) Pakistan Penal Code (Act 
XLV of 1860) read with Section 7 of the ATA and section 155-C 
of  the  Police  Order, 2002  before  Special  Court  constituted  under 
the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, at Lahore (hereinafter to be called 
as “ATC”) , wherein, 139 persons were cited as accused; the case 
of  Shahid  Aziz  Butt  (respondent  No.139)  was  separated;  in  the 
separate trial he was finally convicted and sentenced and the court 
has  been  informed  that  he  is  now  out  after  serving  out  his  entire 
sentence. After recording cursory evidence, the respondents No.13 
to  138,  vide  order  dated  07.02.2017,  were  summoned  and  the 
learned trial court also opined that there is no evidence to prove a 
prima  facie  case  against  respondents  No.1  to  respondents  No.12, 
as  such, they  were  not  summoned  and  their  names  were  directed 
to  be  deleted  from  the  list  of  respondents.  (See  para-41  of  the 
impugned  order.).  The  order  dated  07.02.2017  to  the  extent  of 
non-summoning of respondents  No.1  to  12  is  under  challenge 
by  the  petitioner/complainant  through  the  Criminal  Revision 
No.9027/2017  “Muhammad  Jawad  Hamid  versus  Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others”, 
Whereas,  
Mushtaq  Ahmad  Sukhera,  the  then  Inspector  General  of 
Police,  Punjab  (respondent  No.16  in  the  complaint),  has 
assailed  the  same  order  to  the  extent  of  his  summoning 
3  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
through  Criminal  Revision  No.7067/2017  titled  “Mushtaq 
Ahmad  Sukhera  versus  Judge  Anti-Terrorism  Court,  and 
others”. 
2. 
Before proceeding further it is made clear that petitioners before us 
in both the petitions had initially filed respective writ petitions to raise their 
grievances,  but  this  Court  vide  a  short  order  dated  11.05.2018  (detailed 
reasoning dated 06.07.2018) held that against an interim order passed by a 
Court  under  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997,  during  proceedings  of  a  case, 
including  an  order  of  summoning/non-summoning  the  accused,  writ 
petition 
is  not  maintainable,  as  under  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997, 
applicability of sections 435 and 439 of the Code. has not been restricted, 
except  under  section  21(d)  to  the  extent  of  bail, hence,  criminal  revisions 
were  competent,  therefore,  on  our  direction  the  writ  petitions  were 
converted into criminal revision, were numbered accordingly and thus are 
being decided as such. 
3. 
This  case  involves  multiple  complex  legal  questions.  Hence,  the 
learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners,  the  learned  Prosecutor  General,  the 
learned  Additional  Prosecutor  General  and  learned  Assistant  Advocate 
General  were  called  upon  to  assist  this  court  on  these  legal  propositions. 
For the sake of convenience, these questions may be placed and addressed 
in the following sections:- 
SECTION-I 
1.  Whether  an  order  passed  under  section  204  Cr.PC  (for  summoning 
of the accused to face the trial) is an adverse order affecting the right 
of the accused? 
2.  What is the effect of an order passed under section 203 Cr.P.C? 
3.  What  is  the  nature  of  the  order  when  a  few  accused  have  been 
summoned  under  Section  204  Cr.PC  and  few  have  not  been 
summoned in a private complaint? 
4  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
4.  What  is  the  remedy  available  against  the  order  of  dismissal  of 
private complaint under Section 203 Cr.PC or against summoning of 
the accused under Section 204 Cr.PC? 
5.  Whether it is mandatory to afford hearing to the persons complained 
against  in  case  order  of  dismissal  of  complaint  (under  Section  203 
Cr.PC) is impugned in the Revisional/Constitutional jurisdiction? 
6.  What  is  the  scope  of  revisional  jurisdiction  against  an  order  passed 
under section 203/204 Cr.P.C? 
SECTION II 
1.  What  are  the  guiding  principles  for  summoning/non-summoning  of 
accused in a private complaint? 
2.  What is the effect of delay in filing a private complaint? 
3.  Under  what  circumstances  at  the  preliminary  stage,  a  private 
complaint can be declared as frivolous, vexatious and malicious? 
4.  Whether “political rivalry” is reasonable ground to declare a private 
complaint frivolous, vexatious, malicious and liable to be dismissed 
under Section 203 Cr.PC? 
5.  What  is  the  scope  of  “inquiry”  and  “investigation”  under  Section 
202(1) Cr.PC? 
6.  Whether police file and the material collected by the I.O during the 
process  of investigation  for  the  same  offence, which is  also  subject 
matter  of  the  FIR/State  case,  can  be  considered  and  examined  for 
summoning or non-summoning of the person complained against? 
7.  When in a case the  person complained against is not summoned on 
the  basis  of  insufficient  grounds,  whether  complainant  can  move 
application for further inquiry when he receives information of fresh 
ground/evidence/material  against  such  a  person  who  had  not  been 
summoned,  or  he  can  file  a  fresh  complaint  by  producing  fresh 
material  against  the  accused,  in  addition  to  the  one  which  was 
already available with him and produced before the court? 
SECTION-III 
1.  Whether  statement  of  a  witness  recorded  in  an  inquiry  under 
Commissions  of  Inquiry  Act/  The  Punjab  Tribunals  of  Inquiry 
Ordinance, 1969 can be used against the person making it or any 
other person? 
5  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
2.  Whether  the  statement  of  a  witness  recoded  in  an  inquiry  under 
The  Punjab  Tribunals  of  Inquiry  Ordinance,  1969  can  be  used 
against the other witness? 
SECTION IV 
1.  What constitutes “criminal conspiracy”?  
2.  How the criminal conspiracy and abetment can be differentiated? 
3.  Whether  statement  of  a  conspirator  can  be  used  against  another 
conspirator? 
4.  What is scope of “design” in the light of section 6 ATA? 
4. 
A plethora of case law from our own, Indian and other jurisdictions, 
for  and  against  the  above  legal  propositions  was  placed  before  us  by  the 
learned counsel for the respective sides as well as Research Centre of this 
Court.  For  the  sake  of  brevity  and  preciseness,  I  do  not  consider  it 
appropriate  to  reproduce  excerpts  from  all  such  cited  judgments  and 
reference  sources.  The  relevant  case  law  and  references  would  be 
mentioned where immediate reference is required.  
5. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  deal  the  questions  mentioned  in  Section-I  of 
this judgement without reproducing the same to avoid repetition. The order 
passed  for  the  summoning  of  the  “person  complained  against”  under 
Section  204  of  Cr.PC  modifies  the  status  of  said  person  to  an  “accused” 
and offer him/her an opportunity to respond to the charges levelled against 
him. Therefore, any such order does not tantamount to infringement of any 
right  of  that  person  and  cannot  be  treated  or  deemed  as  an  adverse  order 
(reliance  placed  on  “Noor  Muhammad  V.  the  State”  (PLD  2007  SC  9). 
When  a  private  complaint has  been  filed under  Section 200 of  Cr.PC,  the 
court  concerned,  after  recording  the  statement  of  complainant  (if  not  a 
court complaint or made by the public servant in the official capacity), may 
directly  summon  the  persons  complained  against  as  accused  or  it  may 
postpone  the  summoning  process  and  opt  inquiry/investigation  under 
Section  202  of the  Code. After  the  conclusion  of  inquiry  or  investigation, 
as  the  case  may  be,  the  court  may  “dismiss”  the  complaint  under  Section 
6  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
203 of the Code or summon the accused under Section 204 of the Code. In 
certain  cases,  the  court  may  summon  only  a  few  accused  and  refuse  to 
summon  certain  number  of  accused  persons.  In  case  where  some  of  the 
“persons  complained  against”  are  not  summoned,  the  said  order  to  that 
extent  also  amounts to  partial  dismissal of  the complaint.  (Reference  may 
be made to “Dhondu Bapu Gajar Vs. Emperor” (AIR 1929 Bombay 436). 
The order passed under Section 203 and 204 of the Code is a judicial order 
(Reliance  is  placed  on  “Muhammad  Farooq  Versus  Ahmed  Nawaz 
Jagirani and Others” (PLD 2016 SC 55). However, the order passed under 
Section 203 of the Code cannot be held as autrefois or statutory acquittal 
“Mst.  Robina  Rashid  Vs.  Farrukh  Amin”  (PLD  2011  FSC  121);  Ibrar 
Hussain Shah Vs. Syed Waris Shah (2015 PCrLJ 784); “Tariq Javed Vs.  
Hom Purkash” (2018  PCrLJ  771  Karachi). At the most, dismissal of the 
complaint  as  a  whole  or  non-summoning  of  some  of  the  persons 
complained against may have the effect of discharge.  The complainant, at 
his own option, may file a subsequent fresh complaint on same allegations 
by  adding 
some  new 
facts/grounds  and  mentioning  any  new 
material/evidence  which  earlier  were  not  in  his  knowledge  or  the 
complainant was not in a position to bring them on record.   
6. 
Now  moving  to  the next  question  as  to  the  right  of  audience  of  the 
“persons  complained  against” in case  where  complaint  is  dismissed under 
Section 203 of the Code as a whole or to the extent of some of the persons 
complained  against.  It  is  well  settled  law  that  until  process  is  issued,  the 
person complained against does not have the status of an accused and  has 
no  right of  audience  before  the trial  court or  before a superior  Court 
at  the  pre-process  stage.  (Mst.  BASHIR  BEGUM  AND  2  OTHERS 
versus  GHULAM NABI AND ANOTHER” (PLD 1972 Lahore 185); Somu 
alias  Somasundaram  and  others  v.  The  State  and  another  (1985  Crl.L.J. 
1309, (Madras) and Sivasankar v. Santhakumari” (1993 (1) KLT (Madras). 
Moreover,  even 
in 
the  pre-partition 
jurisprudence, 
in  cases  of 
“Mannupsingh  Vs.  Sahadeo  Sadhu”  (AIR  1929  Patna  230)  and  “Abdulla 
7  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
Jan Vs. Totigul” (AIR 1935 Pesh 14) it was held that in case of dismissal of 
complaint by the Magistrate under Section 203 of the Code accused has no 
right  to  appear  before  the  Sessions  Judge  when  he  orders  further  inquiry 
and no notice need, therefore, be given in such case. Thus, the argument of 
learned  Prosecutor  General  and  Mr. Azam  Nazir  Tarrar,  Advocate  for the 
petitioner 
in  connected  Criminal  Revision  No.7067/2017  regarding 
providing  audience  to  the  respondents,  does  not  sound  well.  (Further 
reference may be made to the cases of Major Subodh Shukla v. Major R.S. 
Dudee (Madhya Pradesh) (2007(1) MPHT 431); “Somu @ Sumasundaram 
and others v. The State and another” (1985 Cr.LJ 1309).  
7. 
 It  has  already  been  held  by  this  Full  Bench  in  order  dated 
11.05.2018  (detailed  reasoning  dated  06.07.2018)  that  Anti-Terrorism 
Court is one of the other courts mentioned in Section 6 of the Code and its 
orders, inter alia, for dismissal of complaint or summoning of the accused 
are amenable to the Revisional jurisdiction of this Court as provided under 
the Code. There are three sections in the Code. (i.e. Sections 435, 436 and 
439) which provide for the revisional powers. However, Section 436 of the 
Code would not attract in this case for the reasons that it places an embargo 
upon  the  powers  of  Revisional  Court  when  an  order  for  the  dismissal  of 
complaint under Section 203 has been challenged. It may be noted that in 
Section  203  of  the  Code  the  word  ‘Court’  was  substituted  for  the  word 
‘Magistrate’ by Law Reforms Order, 1972 and in Section 436 of the Code, 
word  “any  Magistrate”  was  substituted  by  Ordinance  XXXVI  of  2001, 
hence,  if  may  be  inferred  that  the  legislature  in  its  own  wisdom,  has 
deliberately  not  used  term  ‘any  court’  in  the  amended  Section  436(a)  and 
this Section would apply only when the impugned order under section 203 
of  the  Code  has  been  passed  by  the  ‘Magistrate’  and  not  any  other  court. 
Moreover, the power  of  the  High  Court under section 439,  of the  Code is 
very  wide  and  it  could  revise  the  proceedings  or  orders  passed  by  any  of 
the inferior criminal courts in the exercise of its Revisional jurisdiction in 
an  appropriate  case  (Reference  may  be  made  to  “Muhammad  Ashraf 
8  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
Versus Khair Muhammad” 1979 P.Crl.L.J. 372, “Haleem Shah versus The 
State” (PLD 1996 Karachi 306 DB).  
8.  While  exercising  jurisdiction  under  section  435,  439  of  the  Code 
High Court can examine the record of any proceedings before any inferior 
criminal  court  within  its  territory  and  within  its  local  limits  and  having 
jurisdiction  on  it,  to  satisfy  correctness,  legality  or  propriety  of  any 
findings, etc, and in these provisions the word “accused” has been used and 
under  section  439  of  the  Code,  it  can  exercise  the  powers  of  appeal 
available to it  under section  423, 427, 428  or  by  Section 338  of  the Code 
Subsection  (2)  of  Section  439  of  the  Code  is  important  with  reference  to 
the question in issue, the same is reproduced hereunder:- 
“No  order  under  this  section  shall  be  made  to  the  prejudice  of  the 
accused  unless  he  has  had  an  opportunity  of  being  heard  either 
personally or by pleader in his own defence.” 
Whether  the  private  respondents  can  be  equated  with  accused  or  not,  we 
need to examine  Sections 202  to 204  of the  Code.    Legislature  in  Section 
202 for the person against whom allegations are levelled, has  used the term 
“person complained against”, and has not equated him with an “accused” 
because  this  is  the  stage  where  only  a  complaint  of  commission  of  an 
offence  has  been  made  and  the  court  has  yet  to  ascertain  the  truth  or 
falsehood  of  the  complaint  and  for  this  purpose  the  court,  under  section 
202, has to satisfy itself  by holding an inquiry or directing any inquiry or 
investigation  to  be  made  by  any  Justice  of  Peace,  Police  Officer  or  a 
Magistrate.  The  court  can  dismiss  the  complaint  after  examining  the 
statement  of  the  complainant,  the  witnesses  and  considering  the  result  of 
inquiry and investigation. The word “accused” has been used in section 204 
when  summons  or  warrants  as  the  case  may  be,  for  the  attendance  of  the 
person  complained  against  is issued  and  this  is  the stage  when  the person 
complained against has been considered as accused.  
9. 
It  is  settled  principle  of  law  that  in  the  proceedings  under  Section 
202 the person complained against has no right to appear and participate in 
9  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
these  pre-trial  proceedings.  At  this  preliminary  stage  the  court  ascertains 
the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  allegations  levelled  in  the  complaint.  The 
complainant  has  to  establish  a  prima  facie  case,  because  the  word 
“sufficient  ground”  has  been  used  for  proceedings  against  the  person 
complained against. 
10. 
In the Indian Criminal Procedure Code 1973 Section 401 is parallel 
to Section 439 of our Code and it is important to be noted that in the Indian 
Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1973,  Section  401(2)  has  been  added  “other 
person”  besides  accused.  The  said  part  of  the  provision  is  reproduced  as 
under:-  
“(2)  No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice 
of the accused or other person unless he has had an opportunity 
of  being  heard  either  personally  or  by  pleader  in  his  own 
defense.” 
Therefore,  in  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  1973  Indian  jurisprudence 
affords  right  of  audience  to  every  person  whose  right  is  likely  to  be 
affected  by  the  order  of  Revisional  Court  and  the  same  remedy  is  not 
provided in our Code. 
11. 
 In  this  case  certain  respondents  were  not  summoned  and  to  their 
extent  the  complaint  was  dismissed,  as  such  these  persons  complained 
against had no right of audience before the trial court and even before this 
court.  I, therefore, hold that issuance of notice to them is not required.  I 
am  mindful of the fact that under section 440 of the Code  the  revisional  
court has the power to allow any person to be heard in person or through a 
pleader,  but  as  the  court  has  to  decide  the  issue  in  the  light  of  material 
available before the learned trial court at the time of passing of order under 
section  203  where  respondents  are  not  legally  permitted  to  appear  or 
participate  in  the  proceedings,  therefore,    I  hold  that  the  respondents  in 
Criminal  Revision  No.9027/2017  have 
the  status  of  “persons 
complained  against”,  as  such,  they  are  not  entitled  or  required  to  be 
heard in these proceedings. 
10  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
SECTION-II 
12.  Prior  to  moving to  the  questions  referred in  Section-II, it  would be 
appropriate  to  reproduce  relevant  provisions  of  Code  of  Criminal 
Procedure 1898:- 
“200.  Examination  of  complainant:  A  Magistrate  taking, 
cognizance of an offence on complaint shall at once examine the 
complainant  upon  oath,  and  the  substance  of  the  examination 
shall  be  reduced  to  writing  and  shall  be  signed  by  the 
complainant, and also by the Magistrate: 
Provided as follows: 
(a)  when  the  complaint  is  made  in  writing,  nothing  herein 
contained shall be deemed to require a Magistrate to examine the 
complainant  before  transferring  the  case  under  Section  192  [or 
sending it to the Court of Session]; 
(aa)  when  the  complaint  is  made  in  writing  nothing  herein 
contained  shall  be  deemed  to  require  the  examination  of  a 
complainant  in  any  case  in  which  the  complaint  has  been  made 
by a Court or by a public servant acting or  -purporting to act in 
the discharge of his official duties; 
(b) [Omitted A.O., 1949,Sch.]; 
(c) when the case has been transferred under Section 192-and the 
Magistrate  so 
the 
complainant, the Magistrate to whom it is so transferred shall not 
be bound to re-examine the complainant. 
it  has  already  examined 
transferring 
202. Postponement of issue of process:  
(1) Any Court, on receipt of a complaint of an offence of which 
it  is  authorised  to  take  cognizance;  or  which  has  been  sent  to  it 
under Section 190, sub-section (3), or referred to it under Section 
191  or-Section  192,  may,  if  it  thinks  fit,  for  reasons  to  be 
recorded, postpone the issuance of  process for compelling the 
attendance  of  the  person  complained  against,  and  either  inquire 
into the  case  itself or  direct  any inquiry or  investigation  to  be 
made  by  [any  Justice  of  the  Peace  or  by]  a  police  officer  or  by 
such  other  person  as  it  thinks  fit,  for  the  purpose  of 
ascertaining the truth or falsehood of file complaint: 
11  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
Provided  that  save,  where  the  complaint  has  been  made  by  a 
Court,  no  such  direction  shall  be  made  unless  the  complainant 
has been examined on oath under the provisions of Section 200. 
(2) A Court of Session may, instead of directing an investigation 
under the provisions of sub-section (1), direct the investigation to 
be  made  by  any  Magistrate  subordinate  to  it  for  the  purpose  of 
ascertaining the truth or falsehood of the complaint. 
(3) If any inquiry or investigation under this section is made by a 
person not being a Magistrate [or Justice of the Peace] or a police 
officer,  such  person  shall  exercise  all  the  powers  conferred  by 
this Code on an officer-in-charge of a police station, except that 
he shall not have power to arrest without warrant. 
(4) Any Court inquiring into a case under this section may, if it 
thinks fit, take evidence of witnesses on oath]. 
203.  Dismissal  of  complaints:  [The  Court],  before  whom  a 
complaint  is  made  or  to  whom  it  has  been  transferred,  [or  sent] 
may dismiss the complaint, if, after considering the Statement 
on  oath  (if  any)  of  the  complainant  and  the  result  of  the 
investigation  or  inquiry  (if  any)  under  Section  202  there  is  in 
his judgment no sufficient ground for proceeding. In such cases 
he shall briefly record his reasons for so doing. 
204. Issue of process:  
(1) If in the opinion of a [Court] taking cognizance of an offence 
there  is  sufficient  ground  of  proceeding,  and  the  case  appears 
to be one in which, according to the fourth column of the Second 
Schedule, a summons should issue in the first instance, [it] shall 
issue his summons for the attendance of the accused. If the case 
appears to be one in which, according to that column, a warrant 
should issue in the first instance, [it]  may issue a warrant, or, if 
[Court] or if [it] thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused to 
be brought or to appear at a certain time before such [Court] if as 
if  it  has  no  jurisdiction  itself  some  other  Court  having 
jurisdiction. 
(2)  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  deemed  to  affect  the 
provisions of Section 90. 
(3) When by any law for the time being in force any process-fees 
or other fees are payable, no process shall be issued until the fees 
are paid, and if such fees are not paid within a reasonable time, 
the Court may dismiss the complaint.” 
(Emphasis added) 
12  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
13. 
In  a  complaint  case,  trial  Court  is  not  required  to  examine  material 
minutely and or in depth, but has merely to see that prima facie a case has 
been made out to proceed further with the matter for issuance of warrant or 
summons (as the case may be) under Section 204 of the Code. (Muhammad 
Farooq  Versus  Ahmed  Nawaz  Jagirani  and  Others  (PLD  2016  SC  55); 
Muhammad  Fiaz  Khan  Versus  Ajmer  Khan 
and 
another 
(2010 SCMR 105). The two expressions i.e. existence of sufficient ground 
and prima-facie case (used in Section 204 of Cr.PC) have interchangeably 
been construed by the Courts (Noor Muhammad Vs. State” (PLD 2007 SC 
9);  “Abid  Shah  Vs.  Additional  Sessions  Judge  Sheikhupura”  (PLD  2009  
Lahore  444).  In the case of “Sher Singh v. Jatendranath Sen” (AIR 1931 
Cal.  607),  it  was  observed  "a  prima  facie  case  only  means  that  there  is 
ground  for proceeding  (same  view  has been  adopted in the  case  of  “Noor 
Muhammad  Vs.  State”  (PLD  2007  SC  9).  August  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan, to further clarify the proposition  observed that it is to be kept in 
view  that  initiation  of  process  'under  sections  202  and  204  of  the  Code 
depends  upon 
the  availability  or  non-availability  of 
sufficient 
incriminating  material  (2010  SCMR  194).  It  is  settled  principle  of  law 
that the provisions as contained in sections 202 to 204 of the Code, if read 
together,  would  show  that  a  proper  safeguard  has  been  provided  by  the 
Legislature by using the words "if any" and "sufficient grounds for any" in 
section  203  of  the  Code  and  accordingly  the  frivolous  and  vexatious 
complaints  must  be  buried  at  their  inception  where  no  prima  facie  case is 
made out “Abdul Wahab Khan Versus Muhammad Nawaz and 7 others” 
(2000 SCMR 1904).  At the stage of consideration of the private complaint 
the  court  is  not  expected  to  see  whether  the  allegations  are  likely  to  be 
proved by the materials produced before court. (Sreekumar S. Menon 
v. State of Kerala, (2004 (2) KLT 53). 
14.    The analysis of  relevant provisions of law and case law on the point 
of  grounds  of  summoning  or  non-summoning  of  the  accused  in  a  private 
complaint, I have gathered the following main aspects which may be  taken 
13  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
into  consideration  by  the  courts  while  taking  cognizance  of  the  private 
complaint:- 
a)  Mere summoning a necessary party to explain the allegations levelled 
against him, does not tantamount to infringement of any right; rather 
opportunity is afforded to him to explain his position. 
  
b)  In  a  complaint  case  at  pre-trial  stage,  trial  court  is  not  required  to 
examine  the  material  minutely  or  in  depth  but  is  merely  to  see  that 
prima facie case has been made out to proceed further in the matter of 
issuance of process or summons. 
 
c)  High  Court  cannot  strangulate  the  trial  by  over  stretching  its 
jurisdiction and embark upon to examine adequacy or inadequacy of 
evidence,  which  stage  will  only  reach  after  charge  is  framed  and 
complainant  is  given  opportunity  to  prove  his  case  beyond  any 
reasonable doubt. 
d)  At  the  stage  of  consideration  of  private  complaint,  the  court  is  not 
expected to see whether the allegations are likely to be proved by the 
material produced before the court. 
 
e)  Until  the  process  is  issued  to  the  accused  a  person  shown  as  person 
complained against in the complaint does not have a status of accused 
and  has  no  right  of  audience  before  the  trial  court  or  before  the 
superior courts at pre-process stage. 
 
f)  To take cognizance of offence in complaint case, burden of proof in 
preliminary  enquiry  for  the  issuance  of  process  or  summons  as  the 
case may be is much lighter on the complainant and he is required to 
establish prima facie case, whereas, the burden of proof placed on the 
prosecution during regular trial is much stringent and the prosecution 
is required to establish and prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. 
 
g)  The scope of section 202 is to separate founded from unfounded. The 
court has to satisfy itself as to the truth or falsehood of the complaint 
before  issuing  of  process  to  the  persons  complained  against.  The 
object and scope of Section 202 of the Code is:- 
 
i. 
To  allow  free,  fair  and  full  opportunity  to  complainant 
to  produce  some  material  to  make  out  grounds  for  issuing 
processes against accused.  
ii) 
To ascertain the truth or falsehood of the allegations, the 
court  is  bound  not  only  to  scrutinize  contents  of  complaint, 
nature  of  allegations  made  therein  and  material      in      support      
of  accusation  but  also  to  call  for  record,  report  or    summon    
any  person,  who  in  the  opinion  of  the  court,  is        acquainted   
with  facts  of 
court to “satisfy itself” in terms of Section 202 of the Code or 
the  case  and  may  be  helpful 
to 
the                   
14  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
may  enquire  or  investigate  the  matter  as  provided  in  this 
Section. 
intended 
to  be  achieved,  possibility  of 
iii)  Object 
victimization and harassment, if any, to ensure himself that no 
innocent  person  against  whom  all  allegations  are  levelled 
should  suffer  ordeal  of  protracted,  time  consuming  and 
cumbersome process of law.  
 
h)  Possibility  of  accusations  turning  out  to  be  false  or  frivolous  at  the 
trial  should  not  overbear  the  court  from  issuing  the  process  if 
material  available  prima  facie  disclosed  the  case  against  the  person 
complained. At this stage protracted inquiry or full dress rehearsal of 
trial is not required. 
 
i)  At  the  stage  of  summoning  the  accused,  court  is  not  to  determine 
guilt  or  innocence  of  the  accused  on  the  criteria  of  evaluating  the 
evidence  as  to  whether  prosecution  has  been  able  to  prove  its  case 
beyond  reasonable  doubt  or  not  and  while  giving  such  benefit 
accused  ought  to  be  acquitted,  which  is  beyond  the  scope  of 
proceedings  at  the  stage  of  issuance  of  process  after  making 
complaint visualized under section 202 to 204 of the Code.  
 
j)  For deciding  the question as to whether a prima facie case has  been 
made  out  in  an  inquiry  under  section  202  of  the  Code  the 
consideration  should  be  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  complainant 
without  adverting  to  any  defence  which  the  accused  may  have.  At 
this  stage  the  accused  has  no  locus  standi  and  is  not  entitled  to  be 
heard  on  the  question  whether  process  should  be  issued  against  him 
or not.  
15.  Provisions  of  Section  202,  203  and  204  of  the  Code  when  read 
together make it clear that on one side fair opportunity to the complainant 
to produce material to make out grounds for issuance of process against the 
person  complaint  against,  has  been  provided;  and  on  the  other  hand,  a 
proper safeguard has been provided by the Legislators showing its intention 
in this regard by using the word “if any” and “sufficient grounds” if any in 
Section  202  of  the  Code,  in  order  to  burry  a  baseless  complaint  at  initial 
stage and to protect innocent persons. To establish truth or falsehood, these 
provisions provide vast powers to the court taking cognizance, to ascertain 
the  allegations  levelled  in  the  complaint.  For  this  purpose  the  court  shall 
record  statement  of  the  complainant  on  oath,  after  recording  statement  of 
the complainant and examining the material produced before it, if the court 
15  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
finds reasons for not issuing the process for procuring the attendance of the 
persons  complained  against,  in  this  situation  the  court  has  vast  powers  to 
inquire into case itself or may direct an inquiry or investigation to be made 
by any Justice of Peace, or by police officer or  by such other person as it 
thinks  fit  to  ascertain  the  falsity  or  truthfulness  of  the  complaint.  This 
power  has  been  given  for  two  reasons  i.e.  (i)  no  person  who  has 
committed an offence under any law should be let free and unpunished 
as  provided  in  the  relevant  statute and (ii)  no innocent  person should 
face the agony of trial and shall be saved from harassment. This option 
is left with the court which has taken the cognizance to decide as to what 
procedure  it  is  to  adopt.  Anyhow,  the  court  must  not  only  opt  for  the 
procedure  carefully,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  to  adopt  the  process  of 
inquiry or investigation by applying its judicious mind considering the facts 
and  the  circumstances  of  each  case  before  it.  When  the  court  can  direct 
investigation of a case by Justice of Peace or any police officer or any other 
person as it thinks fit, the word “as it thinks fit” bound to the court to apply 
its  mind  judiciously.  While  appointing  any  police  officer  or  any  other 
person  as  Investigating  Officer  the  court  has  to  observe  that  such 
person/police officer shall not have any interest in the cause. The Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in “Mst. SUGHRAN BIBI Versus The STATE” 
(PLD 2018 SC 595), with reference to Section 202 of the Code held that:- 
“25.  During  the  course  of  hearing  of  this  petition  we  had  inquired 
from the petitioner as to why she was insisting upon registration of a 
separate FIR in respect of her version of the incident especially when 
she had already instituted a private complaint containing her version 
of the incident and the accused persons in her private complaint had 
already been summoned by the trial court to face a trial and a Charge 
had been framed against them. In response to that query the petitioner 
had  categorically  stated  that  she  wanted  the  accused  persons  in  her 
version  of  the  incident  to  be  arrested  and  recoveries  to  be  affected 
from  them  which  was  not  possible  through  the  medium  of  a  private 
complaint. Such understanding of the law on the part of the petitioner, 
which  understanding  is  also  shared  by  a  large  section  of  the  legal 
community in our country, has been found by us to be erroneous and 
fallacious.  By  virtue  of  the  provisions  of  section  202(1),  Cr.P.C.  a 
court  seized  of  a  private  complaint  can  “direct  an  inquiry  or 
investigation  to  be  made  by  any  Justice  of  the  Peace  or  by  a  police 
16  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
officer or by such other person as it thinks fit”. If in a given case the 
court seized of a private complaint deems it  appropriate to direct an 
investigation to be carried out in respect of the allegations made then 
the  powers  available  during  an  investigation,  enumerated  in  Part  V, 
Chapter  XIV  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898  read  with 
section  4(1)(l)  of  the  same  Code,  include  the  powers  to  arrest  an 
accused  person  and  to  affect  recovery  from  his  possession  or  at  his 
instance. Such powers of the investigating officer or the investigating 
person  recognize  no  distinction  between  an  investigation  in  a  State 
case and an investigation in a complaint case.” 
16.  The purpose of inquiry as contemplated in section 202 of the Code or 
investigation by  a  police  officer or by  “any other person”, is only  to  help 
the court to decide whether or not there is any sufficient ground to proceed 
further  on  facts  of  which  cognizance  had  already  been  taken  by  it  of  the 
offence  disclosed  in  the  complaint  but  issuance  of  process  had  been 
postponed.  Section  202  of  the  Code,  confers  all  powers  available  to  a 
police  officer  in  charge  of  a  police  station  for  purposes  of  investigation 
except the power to arrest without warrant. Reference be made to the cases 
“Ramdev  Food  Products  Private  Limited  v.  State  of  Gujarat”  (SC)  2015 
AIR  (SC)  1742;  Smt.  Nagawwa  v.  Veeranna  Shivalingappa  Konjalgi  & 
Ors.,  (1976)3  SCC  736);  Dilawar  Singh  v.  State  of  Delhi,  (SC)  2007(12) 
SCC 641);  Mr. Bhagat Ram v. Surinder Kumar,  (2004(11)  SCC 622)  and 
Raj  Kumar  Adalkha  v.  State  of  U.P.  (Allahabad)”  (2014(8)  ADJ  410). 
There is difference between investigation carried out after registration 
of  FIR  u/s  154  of  the  Code  or  investigation  as  initiated  under  section 
156 of the Code and investigation carried out under section 202 of the 
Code.  In  the  former,  Investigation  Officer  has  vast  powers  even  to 
arrest an accused without warrants and in the later he has to proceed 
with limited scope under  the  control and  direction of  the court which 
had    taken    cognizance    of    the    case    and    he  is  only  to  submit  his 
report 
  for 
  the 
  purposes  of  assistance  whether  the  person    
complained  against  to  be  summoned  or  not  and  he  (Investigation 
Officer)    could  not  arrest  without  the  permission  of  the  court.      The 
word    “any  other  person” has been defined in “ABDUL GHAFOOR and   
17  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
4 others  versus  GHULAM HUSSAIN and 4 others”  (1993  P.Cr.L.J.  1988) 
and it was held that:- 
“A  Civil  Judge  or  a  Judicial  Magistrate  of  his  status  can  be 
included in the definition of ‘such other person’. This word ‘such 
other person’ is wide enough and has been used in the context of 
a person with reference to any person other than a police officer 
or a Magistrate and a Civil Judge if not enjoying the powers of 
Magistrate falls within the definition of such other person.” 
In view of the above situation, the court is empowered under Section 202 to 
direct, within the limits circumscribed by that section, an investigation for 
the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  or  not  there  is  sufficient  ground  for 
proceedings. Thus, the object of  an  investigation under  section 202  of the 
Code is not to initiate a fresh case on police report but to assist the Court in 
completing proceedings already instituted upon a complaint before him. 
17.  The  question  arises  that  when  the  court  has  itself  inquired  into  the 
matter  and  recorded  statements  of  some  of  the  witnesses,  in  such  an 
eventuality whether the same court could direct for investigation or further 
inquiry,  or  not?  The  same  question  came  under  consideration  before  a 
Court  in  India  in  the  case  “Mr.  Bhagat  Ram  v.  Surdinder  Kumar  &  Ors. 
(2004 (11) SCC 622), wherein, a complaint was filed before the Additional 
Chief  Judicial  Magistrate,  after  examining  the  complainant  and  his 
witnesses, the Magistrate directed the investigation to be done by the police 
and  referred  the  matter  for  investigation/inquiry  by  the  police.  The  said 
action of the learned Magistrate was challenged before the High Court on 
the  ground  that  the  court,  after  having  taken  cognizance  and  holding  the 
inquiry under Section 202 of the Code, could not have referred the matter 
for inquiry/investigation by the police at all and  it should have to proceed 
in  the  matter  himself.  The  High  Court  set  aside  the  order  passed  by  the 
Magistrate. Thereafter, the appeal by special leave was presented before the 
Apex Court, where, it was laid down that:- 
“It  is  clear  from  a  perusal  of  the  order  made  by  the  learned 
Magistrate  that  he  has  not  done  anything  other  than  to  comply  with 
18  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
the  provisions  of  Section  202(1)  proviso  (b),  Code  of  Criminal 
Procedure, that after examining the complainant and his witnesses he 
found  that  it  was  necessary  to  further  probed  into  the  matter  and, 
therefore, directed investigation to be done by the police and after the 
investigation  was  done  by  the  police  and  on  report  being  filed  by 
them, he heard the matter afresh and directed issue of summons.” 
The  Supreme  Court  of  India  found  that  the  procedure  adopted  by  the 
learned Magistrate was perfectly in order. Similarly, in another case  “RAJ 
KUMAR ADALKHA and others vs. STATE OF U.P and another” (2014 (8) 
ADJ  410),  it  was  held  that  if  after  recording  the  evidence,  the  Magistrate 
finds  it  necessary  for  proper  decision  to  find  out  the  truth  that 
inquiry/investigation  is  required  by  the  police,  then  Magistrate  is 
empowered under Section 202(1) of the Code to issue such direction which 
is  entirely  different  form  the  investigation  on  the  direction  issued  under 
section 156(3) of the Code. 
18.  A careful analysis of law on the  point leaves no room to doubt that 
investigation report under section 202(1) of the Code alone cannot be made 
basis  for  decision  of  complaint.  The  object  of  investigation  under  section 
202 of the Code is to enable the Court to scrutinize carefully the allegations 
with a view to protect a person complained against from being summoned 
to  face  frivolous  accusations.  Section  202  of  the  Code,  in  fact,  is  an 
enabling provision so as to empower the Court to hold an effective inquiry 
into  the  truthfulness  or  otherwise  of  the  allegations  levelled  in  the 
complaint  for  the  purposes  of  forming  an  opinion  whether  there  exist 
sufficient 
grounds 
to 
proceed 
further 
or 
not.  Therefore, 
inquiry/investigation under section 202 of the Code is not a futile exercise 
and is to be taken into consideration by the  Court while deciding whether 
process is to be issued or not. 
19.  The court is not a silent spectator at the time of recording of cursory 
evidence  before  summoning  of  the  person  complained  against.  The  Court 
has  to  carefully  examine  the  evidence  produced  on  record  and  may  even 
put questions to the complainant or the witness to elicit answers to find out 
19  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
truth  or  otherwise  and  if  he  feels  that  further  material  is  required  to 
establish  the  truth  or  falsehood  he  can  further  inquiry  into  matter  or  may 
direct an investigation as provided in section 202 of the Code. 
20.  There is difference between investigation under Chapter-XIV of the 
Code  by  the  police  and  that  ordered  by  the  Court  under  Section  202,  as 
former  investigation  is  at  pre-cognizance  stage  whereas  inquiry  or 
investigation  under  section  202  of  the  Code  is  at  post  cognizance  stage. 
Furthermore, inquiry or investigation under section 202(1)  of the Code by 
the  police  or  by  any  other  person  is  for  limited  purposed  i.e.  to  help  the 
court to decide whether or not there is sufficient ground to proceed further 
on account of the fact of which cognizance had already been taken by him 
of the offence disclosed in the complaint but issuance of process had been 
postponed.  The  court  may  entrust  the  investigation  to  any  person 
considered  fit  for the  said  purpose, but  it would be  improper  to  select  the 
one  who  is  or  may  be  interested  in  the  matter.  Except  arrest  without 
warrant, such person can exercise all powers as conferred on Incharge of a 
police station.  
21.  Now  coming  to  the  grounds  agitated  by  the  learned  Prosecutor 
General and Mr. Azam Nazir Tarrar, Advocate (representing the petitioner 
in  Criminal  Revision  No.7067/2017)  advancing  the  reasons  why  the 
respondents  in  Criminal  Revision  No.9027/2017  may  not  be  summoned 
and  summoning  order  against  the  petitioner  in  Criminal  Revision 
No.7067/2017, be recalled, much emphasis has been put on the aspect that 
first  FIR  No.510/2014  was  registered  on  17.6.2014  on  the  complaint  of 
Rizwan  Qadir,  SHO  Police  Station  Faisal  Town,  Lahore,  second  FIR 
No.696/2014  was  registered  on  28.8.2014  at  Police  Station  Faisal  Town, 
Lahore,  on 
the  complaint  of  Muhammad  Jawad  Hamid,  Director 
Administration,  Minhaj-ul-Quran  and  private  complaint  was  filed  on 
16.3.2016;  hence,  this  complaint  was  filed  after  a  period  of  one  year  and 
nine months and this inordinate delay is fatal to the complaint. Relied upon 
20  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
2010 SCMR 1816, 2001 SCMR 1783, 2000 SCMR 1904, 2017 YLR 533, 
2015 MLD 1145 and 2013 P. Cr. L.J. 1144. 
22.  Although, by  careful  perusal  of  the  order  passed  by  the  ATC  dated 
07.02.2017  under  section  203  Cr.PC  vide  which  he  dismissed  the 
complaint  against  private  respondents,  the  Court  has  discussed  the  delay 
and  rightly  observed  that  no  limitation  for  filing  of  complaint  has  been 
provided  in  the  Limitation  Act,  1908  and  considering  the  number  of 
injuries,  material,  other  evidence  in  the  shape  of  videos  and  footage,  etc. 
held that the complaint has to be examined on the material available on file. 
As  the  complaint  has  not  been  dismissed  only  and  only  on  the  ground  of 
delay;  hence,  no  much  emphasis  is  required,  however,  as  issue  was 
discussed  at  length  by  relying  upon  the  judgments  of  apex  Court,  it  is 
appropriate to discuss the same in some detail.  
23.  August  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  “Muhammad  Fiaz  Khan  Vs 
Ajmer  Khan  and  another”  (2010  SCMR  105)  in  the  context  of  delay  in 
filing of private complaint observed: 
that 
depict 
clearly 
hereinabove 
“6.  It  is settled  proposition  of law  that  each  and  every  case  is  to  be 
decided  on  its  own  peculiar  circumstances  and  facts.  Facts 
highlighted 
respondent 
No.1/complainant  had  filed  the  complaint  after  a  considerable  delay 
after  availing  different  remedies  mentioned  hereinabove.  It  is  a 
settled' law that no limitation is provided in criminal law for lodging 
a complaint. See Queen Empress v. Ajudhia Singh and others 10 All. 
350.  In  spite  of  the  aforesaid  general  principle  of  law  when  the 
complaint  was  filed  after  a  considerable  delay  which  was  not 
explained  by  the  complainant  then  in  such  a  situation  it  raises 
suspicion as to its truthfulness meaning thereby that delay in filing 
complaint 
itself  fatal  except  under  very  special 
circumstances. The complaint looses its truthfulness with the length 
of  delay,  more  particularly  when  it  is  based  on  oral  evidence.  This 
proposition of law was considered in Mst. Shamim's case 2003 SCMR 
1466 and laid down the following principles:-- 
is  not  by 
"Be  that  as  it  may,  unexplained  delay  in  setting  the 
machinery  of  law  in  motion  prima  facie  points  to 
fabrication  of  the  prosecution  story,  therefore,  we  would 
like  to  observe  that  if  the  complainant  hibernates  after 
cancellation  of  the  F.I.R.  and  makes  a  delayed  private 
21  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
complaint  the  prosecution  evidence  must  be  sifted  and 
weighed with' great care and caution." (Emphasis added) 
24. 
In  the  case  of  “ZAFAR  and  others  Vs.  UMER  HAYAT  and  others” 
(2010 SCMR 1816) it was observed:- 
therein  supporting  material 
“It  is  also  settled  principle  of  law  that  although  no  such  thing  as 
limitation is prescribed in criminal prosecutions, but yet on the other 
hand the longer complaint is delayed the less becomes the chance of 
believing  in  its  truth,  more  particularly  when  it  is  based  upon 
entirely  oral  evidence.  It  is  also  settled  principle  of  law  that  all  the 
laws of the land must wear in the sleeves of the Judge. It is basic and 
fundamental principle of law that it is duty and obligation of the trial 
Court  to  scrutinize  the  contents  of  the  complaint,  nature  of 
allegation  made 
in  support  of 
accusation,  the  object  intended  to  be  achieved,  the  possibility  of 
victimization  and  harassment,  if  any,  to  ensure  itself  that  no 
innocent person against whom allegations are levelled should suffer 
the ordeal of protracted time consuming and cumbersome process of 
law. It is also settled principle of law that the provisions as contained 
in sections 202 to 204, of the Code if read together would show that a 
proper safeguard has been provided by the Legislature which showed 
its such intention by using the words "if any" and "sufficient grounds 
for any" in section 203, of the Code and accordingly the frivolous and 
vexatious  complaints  must  be  buried  at  their  inception  where  no 
prima  facie  case  is  made  out.  See  Abdul  Wahab  Khan's  case  (2000 
SCMR  1904).  It  is  also  settled  principle  of  law  that  everyone  has  a 
right to approach the court for redress of grievances but the same is 
subject to condition that sufficient grounds for issuance of process is 
made out. (emphasis added) 
25.  The  Supreme  Court  of  India,  in  the  case  of  “Assistant  Collector  of 
the Customs, Bombay v. L.R. Melwani” (1970 AIR (SC) 962) observed: 
“10. This takes us to the contention whether the prosecution must be 
quashed  because  of  the  delay  in  instituting  the  same.  It  is  urged  on 
behalf of the accused that because of the delay in launching the same, 
the  present  prosecution  amounts  to  an  abuse  of  the  process  of  the 
Court. The High Court has repelled that contention. It has come to the 
conclusion  that  the  delay  in  filing  the  complaint  is  satisfactorily 
explained. That apart, it is not the case of the accused that any period 
of limitation is prescribed for filing the complaint. Hence, the Court 
before which the complaint was filed could not have thrown out the 
same  on  the  sole  ground  that  there  has  been  delay  in  filing  it.  The 
question of delay in filing a complaint may be a circumstance to be 
taken into consideration in arriving at the final verdict. But by itself 
it affords no ground for dismissing the complaint. We, therefore, see 
no substance in the contention that the prosecution should be quashed 
22  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
on  the  ground  that  there  was  delay  in  instituting  the  complaint. 
(Emphasis added) 
26.   There  has  been  consistent  approach  of  our  courts  that  the  delay 
simpliciter  is  of  no  significance  and  only  unexplained  delay  matters  in 
administration  of  justice  in  criminal  cases.    It  is  also  to  be  noted  that 
consideration of “delay” in filing of private complaint at the pre-trial stage 
(of  Section  202,  203,    of  Cr.PC)  is  only  relatable  to  the  sufficiency  of 
grounds  for  summoning  and  standard  of  explanation  to  prove  this  delay 
would  not  be  that  which  is  expected  at  trial  stage.  In  this  regard,  further, 
reference may be made to the case of “ABDUL GHAFFAR and another Vs. 
Syed SHABBIR SHAH GILLANI” (2013 P Cr. L J 1544);  “MUHAMMAD 
DIN  and  another  Vs.  BASHIR  AHMAD  NASIR  and  another”  (2007  YLR 
2195);  “Mst. SHAMIM GHAFFAR Vs.  GHULAM SHABBIR”  (2007  YLR 
2195); “Mst. NASREEN BIBI Vs. ABDUL WAHEED” (2006  YLR  2934); 
“MUHAMMAD  AFZAL  Vs.  HAJI  AHMED”  (2005    PCRLJ    979); 
“SALEEM  Vs.  THE  STATE”  (2004    MLD    424);  HAIDRAN  BIBI  Vs. 
MUHAMMAD  IBRAHIM”  (1986    MLD    2454);  JAIRAM  Vs.  JAGDISH 
(1980    PCRLJ    243);  “Pir  ALLY  IMMRAWAN  SAHAR  ESSAPHEL  Vs. 
JUDGE  ANTI-TERRORISM  COURT”  (2012    P.Cr.L.J    498);  IMTIAZ 
RUBBANI  alias  BILLU  Vs.  State  (2008    PLD    441);  “NOOR  KHAN  Vs. 
THE STATE  (1993  PCRLJ  511); “MUHAMMAD ARSHAD Vs. STATE”  
(1989    PCRLJ    389);  “S.M.  YAQOOB  Vs.  TALAT  HUSSAIN”  (1987  
PCRLJ    1624);  “SHER  ALI  Vs.  THE  STATE”  (1985    PCRLJ    349)  and 
“JODAT ALI Vs. THE STATE” 1969  PCRLJ  1532). 
27.  The learned Prosecutor General along with his team, the learned law 
officers  as  well  as  Mr.  Azam  Nazir  Tarrar,  Advocate  assisted  by  his 
Associates  pressed  a  hard  that  when  the  accusations  against  the  persons 
complained, are frivolous, malicious and vexatious then the complaint must 
be dismissed  at  very  inception. From  the  tenor  of  arguments  advanced  by 
learned  Prosecutor  General  it  appeared  that  he  was  of  the  view  that  order 
qua  non-summoning  of  respondents  No.1  to  12  has  rightly  been  passed. 
23  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
The  argument  was  that  it  is  duty  and  obligation  of  the  trial  court  to 
scrutinize the contents of the complaint, nature of allegations made therein, 
material in  support of  the  accusations,  the  object  intended to  be  achieved, 
possibility of victimization and harassment and accordingly vexatious and 
frivolous  complaints  must  be  dismissed.    Cases  of  “ZAFAR  and  others 
versus UMER HAYAT and others” (2010 SCMR 1816), “ABDUL WAHAB 
KHAN  versus  MUHAMMAD  NAWAZ  and  7  others”  (2000  SCMR  1904), 
2017  YLR  533,  2010  P.Cr.L.J.  575  and  2017  YLR  57),  were  referred  in 
support of their contentions. 
28.  The  terms  “frivolous”,  “malicious”  and  “vexatious”  have  not  been 
defined  anywhere  in  the  Code,  therefore,  we  need  to  explore  their  lexical 
meanings and use in the judicial context.  
“Frivolous” 
The  expression  (frivolous)  was  used  in  case  of  “RIASAT  ALI  versus 
ELECTION  TRIBUNAL”  (PLD  1961  B.J  11)  to  the  effect  that  it  means 
unworthy  of  credence  on  face  of  it,  impossible  to  be  substantiated  and 
requiring  no  proof  to  expose  it.  In  HANDBOOK  OF  LEGAL  TERMS  & 
PHRASES (Judicially defined), with reference to the same citation, it was 
defined as “An allegations is frivolous if on the face of it, it is unworthy of 
credence and impossible to be substantiated and does not require any proof 
to  expose  it  as  such.  WEBSTER’s  unabridged  dictionary  (SECOND 
EDITION), defines it as:- 
“1.  Characterized  by  lack  of  seriousness  or  sense,  2.  Self-
indulgently  carefree;  unconcerned  about or lacking any  serious 
purpose,  3.  (of  a  person)  given  to  trifling  or  undue  levity,  4.  of 
little  or  no  weight,  worth,  or  importance; not  worthy of serious 
notice.  
“Malicious” 
 
WEBSTER’s  unabridged  dictionary  (SECOND  EDITION),  defines 
it as:- 
24  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
“1.  Full  of,  characterized  by,  or  showing  malice;  malevolent; 
spiteful: malicious gossip, 2. Vicious, wanton, or mischievous in 
motivation or purpose.” 
In  ENCYCLOPEDIC  LAW  DICTIONARY  3rd  EDITION  2008,  the 
phrase “malicious prosecution” has been defined as:- 
“A malicious prosecution is an abuse of the process of the Court 
by wrongfully setting the law in motion on a criminal charge. To 
be  actionable  as  a  tort  the  process  must  have  been  without 
reasonable and probable cause and must have been instituted or 
carried on maliciously.”   
“Vexatious” 
 
In  HANDBOOK  OF  LEGAL  TERMS  &  PHRASES  (Judicially 
defined), with reference to case law “ABID Y. KHAN versus MUHAMMAD 
BASHIR” (1965 PLC 22), provides.” 
“The  word  vexatious  indicates  an  accusation  merely  for  the 
purpose  of  annoyance  and  the  word,  frivolous  means  an 
accusation which is futile not serious or without foundation.” 
WEBSTER’s unabridged dictionary (SECOND EDITION), defines it as:- 
“troublesome;  annoying,  instituted  without  sufficient  grounds 
and  serving  only  to  cause  annoyance 
to  the  defendant, 
disorderly; confused; trouble.” 
29.  After  examining  the  dictionary  meanings  of  the  above  phrases  and 
the judgments on the proposition,  I am of the view that in order to  hold a 
complaint  as  frivolous,  malicious  or  vexatious,  following  elements  must 
exist:- 
I)  Where the allegations made in the complaint, even if they 
are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, 
do  not  prima  facie  constitute  any  offence  or  make  out  a 
case against the accused. 
 
II)  Where  the  uncontroverted  allegations  made  in  the  FIR or 
complaint  and  the  evidence  collected  in  support  of  the 
same  do  not  disclose  the  commission  of  any  offence  and 
make out a case against the accused. 
 
25  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
III)  Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so 
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no 
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there 
is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. 
IV)  Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the 
provisions  of  the  Code  or  any  other  law  (under  which  a 
criminal  proceeding  is  instituted)  to  the  institution  and 
continuance  of  the  proceedings  and/or  where  there  is  a 
specific  provision  in  the  Code  or  the  concerned  Act 
providing  efficacious  redress  for  the  grievance  of  the 
aggrieved party. 
 
V)  Where a criminal proceeding manifestly tainted with mala 
fide  and/or  where the  proceeding is  maliciously  instituted 
with  an  ulterior  motive  for  wreaking  vengeance  on  the 
accused  and  with  a  view  to  spite  him  due  to  private  and 
personal  grudge  and  also  having  no  sufficient  material  in 
support of allegations. 
 
VI) 
If  the  acts  of  accused  or  person  complained  against  are 
protected by the Constitution or any other relevant law for 
the time being in force. 
 
VII)  If the accused or person complained against discharges his 
legal  duties  and  also  obeys  the  direction,  command  or 
order  of  his  superior  or  any  court,  legal  authority  or 
tribunal. 
 
VIII)  Where  the  concerned  court  has  fully  satisfied  after 
examining  all  material  aspects  that  in  all  probability  the 
complainant  may  not  succeed  in  bringing  charge  home 
against the accused. 
 
IX)  Where 
the  averments/contents  of 
the  complaints/ 
allegations  from  any  angle  are  reflecting  to  the  abuse  of 
process of law. 
30.  Now, combined reading of sections 203 and 204 of the Code in the 
light  of  definitions  of  words  “frivolous,  malicious  and  vexatious”,  makes 
clear  that  the  complaint  could  be  dismissed  either  as  a  whole  or  to  the 
extent  of  some  persons,  firstly  when  the  court  would  conclude  that  no 
sufficient ground is available to proceed, and secondly there is no material 
available for issuing the process from the material available on the file, the 
complainant  has  moved  baseless  complaint  without  any  material  just  to 
26  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
harass, victimize, pressurize or blackmail the person complained against or 
there is civil dispute and no criminal offence is made out. It is duty of the 
state and the court being organ of the state to see that no criminal should go 
unpunished, if the arguments advanced by the other side are appreciated it 
means that the crime which is governed under any statute and is punishable 
even  if  there  is  some  material  for  summoning  of  the  persons  complained, 
the  complaint  be  buried  on  the  argument  that  it  has  been  made  against 
senior  officers,  it  is  based  on  political  or  religious  rivalry  and  meant  to 
harass  or  pressurize  the  opponents.  To  declare  a  complaint  as  such  at  the 
stage of Section 203 of the Code, is only possible if the court conclude that 
no material whatsoever is available against the person complained against 
and  if  there  is  material  then  such  declaration  can  be  made  that  the 
complaint  is  frivolous,  malicious  or  vexatious  only  at  the  time  when 
acquittal of the person complained against is recorded and then the remedy 
is provided in Section 250 of the Code. While observing so, I am fortified 
by  a  three  member  Bench  judgment  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  in  the  case  “NOOR  MUHAMMAD  versus  THE  STATE  and 
others”  (PLD  2007  Supreme  Court  9).  We  have  also  gone  through  the 
judgment  “ABDUL  WAHAB  KHAN  versus  MUHAMMAD  NAWAZ  and  7 
others” (2000 SCMR 1904) and observe that in para-5 of this judgment is 
in  line  with  the  above  referred  judgment  “Noor  Muhammad  Vs.  State” 
(PLD  2007  SC  9)  to  the  extent  that  frivolous  and  vexatious  complaints 
must  be  buried  in  its  inception  where  no  prima  facie  case  is  made  out  or 
where no sufficient grounds for issuing the process exist. 
31.  By careful perusal of the judgment passed by the superior courts on 
the   principle  of vexatious  and  frivolous prosecution  it  is  observed  that  at 
least  it  has  been  held  that  the  prosecution  was  launched  without  probable 
grounds     and     no   material  or  evidence was produced before the court.  
 
27  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
Hence,  if  any  material  is  available  on  the  file  against  the  “person 
complained  against”,  then  at  the  stage  of  summoning  of  the  “person 
complained against”, it cannot be said that the complaint is frivolous, 
malicious, vexatious or baseless.  
32.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argued  that  as  the  court  is  to 
draw  an  inference  of  the  conspiracy  from  the  circumstances  and  in  this 
respect newspaper clippings and video clips were produced before the court 
as  Mark.C/1-59,  D/1-14,  P/3-9  which  is  important  and  corroborative 
evidence,  therefore,  the  trial  court  wrongly  brushed  aside  the  same  by 
ignoring the law on the subject.  Further argued that at the stage of passing 
an  order  under  section  203  or  204  of  the  Code  only  it  was  sufficient  to 
place the material before the court and during trial the relevant Reporters, 
Photographers or  media  anchors  could  have been  summoned. The learned 
counsel in support of his arguments placed reliance on the case “Mohtarma 
BENAZIR BHUTTO AND ANOTHER versus PRESIDENT OF PAKISTAN 
and others” (PLD 1998 SC 388).  
33. 
In  reply  to  the  arguments  of  learned  Prosecutor  General  and  the 
learned Additional Prosecutor General, submitted that when news clips had 
been  placed  before 
the  court 
then 
the  names  of 
the  Reporters, 
Photographers  or  anchors  could  be  submitted  later-on  and  even  the  court 
had ample jurisdiction under section 540 of the Code to summon them as it 
will  not  amount  to  filling  the  lacunae.  The  learned  Prosecutor  General 
submitted that news clipping is not admissible in evidence in criminal cases 
unless  reporter/author  is  examined  in  the  court  as  a  witness.  He  placed 
reliance on the case PLD 2016 SC 17 and 1996 SCMR 1747. The learned 
Additional  Prosecutor  General  with  reference  to  section  265  of  the  Code 
argued  that  list  of  witnesses  had  to  be  provided  with  the  complaint  itself, 
which  has  not  been  done  in  this  case,  therefore,  the  newspaper  clippings 
should be ignored from consideration and put into dust bin, as the same do 
not have evidentiary value. Added that many statements are given only for 
28  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
political  purposes  and  they  could  not  create  a  legal  right  or  obligation, 
hence  no  evidentiary  value  could  be  attached  to  such  press  report.  In 
support of his arguments, placed reliance on 2010 YLR 975 and PLD 2004 
SC 583. 
34. 
It  may  be  observed  that  the  case  of  Mumtaz  Qadri  (PLD  2016  SC 
17)  and  “Muhammad  Ashraf  Khan  Tareen  and  another  v.  The  State  and 
another”  (1996  SCMR  1747)  referred  by  the  learned  Prosecutor  General 
pertain  to  the  “admissibility”  of  evidence,  whereas,  this  Court  at  the 
moment is not sitting as an appellate court upon the final judgement of trial 
court. It has already been held that during inquiry under Section 202 of the 
Code the Court has to consider “material” and not the evidence in terms of 
QSO 1984. Therefore, at this stage, critical element is “relevance” of such 
material  and  not  the  admissibility  or  evidentiary  value,  which  is  to  be 
established at trial stage.   
35.  The  case  “Mohtarma  BENAZIR  BHUTTO  AND  ANOTHER  versus 
PRESIDENT  OF  PAKISTAN  and  others”  (PLD  1998  SC  388)  pertains  to 
exercise  of  powers  of  the  President  under  Article  58(2)(b)  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  1973.  The  said  case  may 
hardly  be  treated  as  precedent  in  the  present  case.  However,  the  parallels 
may  be  drawn  that  in  both  cases  powers  is  to  be  exercised  after 
“satisfaction”  and  to  reach  such  satisfaction  the  trustee  of  such  powers, 
inter  alia,  may  consider  news  items  and  press  clippings.  In  both  cases, 
Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984 is not applicable.      
36.  As regards the argument that petitioner/complainant has not attached  
list  of  witnesses,  I  am    of  the  view  that    it  is  not  the  requirement  of 
proceedings  under  section  200,  201  or  202  of  the  Code  that  lists  of 
witnesses must be appended with the complaint or all the documents must 
be  mentioned  or  appended  therewith.  The  stage  of  section  265-C  of  the 
Code  comes  afterwards  when  trial  commences.  Although  in  Section  265-
C(2),  the  word  “shall”  has  been  used  but  it  is  settled  proposition  that 
29  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
sometimes the word “shall” may be read as the word “may” and further the 
same has no penal clause, therefore, this sub-section is directory in nature, 
therefore,  at  this  stage  not  attaching  the  list  of  witnesses  along  with  the 
complaint or non-mentioning the names of reporters, photographers, anchor 
persons, is not an illegality and on this score alone the press clippings, etc. 
could not be ignored. 
37.  During  arguments,  a  question  arose  that  as  in  this  case  two  FIRs 
were  registered  i.e.  FIR  510/2014  at  police  station  Faisal  Town  on  the 
complaint of Rizwan Qadir SHO and FIR No.696/2014 on the complaint of 
Jawad  Hamid,  Director  (Admn)  Idara  Minhaj  ul  Quran  at  police  station 
Model  Town,  whether  while  examining  the  material  before  this  court, 
the court could examine police files and JIT reports of above referred 
FIRs? 
38.  The learned counsel for the petitioner/complainant argued that as the 
complainant was not satisfied with the conduct of the police officers and a 
large  number  of  police  officials  were  the  persons  complained  against  and 
they  have  been  summoned  including  the  I.G,  Police  Punjab,  in  such 
circumstances these reports should not be considered as they were prepared 
by  biased  officers  and  may  prejudice  the  mind  of  the  court.  On  the  other 
hand,  learned  PG  assisted  by  his  team  and  Mr.  Azam  Nazir  Tarrar 
Advocate,  argued  that  court  has  powers  to  examine  all  such  material.  He 
submitted  further,  under  Section  202  of  the  Code  while  inquiring  into 
truthfulness  or  falsehood  of  the  complaint,  the  court  has  ample  powers  to 
examine the police files, final reports prepared by the police or JIT reports 
in  order  to  reach  at  a  final  conclusion.  Both  of  the  parties  have  placed 
reliance on 1984 P.Cr.L.J. 2545 and 1968 P.Cr.L.J 1526. 
39.  Section  202  of  the  Code  bestows  vast  powers  upon  the  court  to 
ascertain  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  complaint  and  in  this  respect  as    it 
could  direct  any  inquiry  or  investigation  and  during  inquiry    it  could 
examine the police file and final reports including report of JIT to come to 
30  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
a definite conclusion, as it is covered under the definition of material and if 
felt necessary may examine the members of JIT, I.O in a private complaint 
or  any  other  witness  recorded  during  investigation  of  said  case  so  that 
complete picture of the occurrence supported by relevant material must be 
before  him  while  passing  an  order  under  section  204  (for  summoning  the 
accused),  so  that  no  innocent  person  should  face  agony  of  trial  and  no 
culprit should go unpunished. Reference may be made to the judgement of 
august  Supreme  Court  in  case  of  “S.  M.  H.  Rizvi  v.  Abdus  Salam  and 
another” (PLD 1960 SC 358) wherein it was observed:- 
“We are conscious of the importance of allowing to each Court how‑
low‑so  ever  full  scope  to  exercise  its  powers  within  the  law  in  the 
discharge  of  its  functions.  In  a  case  where  the  initial  complaint  or 
report  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  a  prima  facie 
case of the offences alleged is made out, a Magistrate would be fully 
within  his  rights  in  calling  for  evidence  before  deciding  that  the 
complaint or report should be rejected.” 
It is pertinent  to note  that the use of police  report  in case of  “Muhammad 
Ismail v. The State and 3 others” (1984 P Cr. L J 2545) the court observed 
that  police  report  cannot  be  read  to  detriment  of  the  complainant  (for 
dismissing complaint under Section 203 of Cr.P.C) but it may be read and 
considered in favour of the complainant (for issuing process under Section 
204 of Cr.P.C).   
In  the  case  of  “Allah  Yar  v.  The  State”  (1968  (P.Cr.L.J  1526)  similar 
observations were made by the learned single judge of Sindh High Court in 
the following terms:- 
“4.  There  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  for  the  trial  Magistrate  during  a 
preliminary  enquiry  to  sift  the  truth  and  that  his  discretion  for 
arriving  at  the  truth  on  the  record  before  it  is  unfettered  but  the 
further consideration in the peculiar circum stances of this case in the 
context of Muhammad Ashraf v. Zafar Muhammad alias Master Khaki 
Zaman and others  is that even though justice has to he administered 
without  fear  or  favour  regardless  of  the  parties,  it  should  appear  to 
have  beers  done  arid, 
the  Court  concerned  must 
nevertheless  guard  against  any  suspicion  of  the  "assumption  of  the 
role either of a  prosecutor or of acting in favour of the defence. The 
order  of  the  learned  trial  Magistrate  dated  the  16th  of  June  1967, 
stated  that  it  was  necessary  to  have  the  Police  papers  to  be  made 
therefore, 
31  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
available to him. At the stage of the impugned order all the witnesses 
of the complainant had been examined in the preli minary enquiry. At 
that juncture the counsel for Pir Shamsuddin applied for examination 
of witnesses who are obviously only defence witnesses on the point of 
his alibi and had nothing to state for the complainant case. In that one 
respect  the  order  to  examine  Pir  Ghulam  Hyder  as  a  witness  does 
appear to be unjustifiable and to savour as an act advancing the case 
of  the  defence  setting  it  at  motion  at  that  stage.  Process  in  law  can 
only issue after a proper enquiry and in the interests of justice and on 
the  ground  that  Inspector  Muhammad  Pinjal  had  made  the  final 
investigation  and  submitted  the  challan  and  that  the  papers  of  the 
investigation  contained  documents  referring  to  the  movements  of  Pir 
Shamsuddin  on  the  day  previous  to  and  the  day  of  the  incident,  in 
which this applicant was a complainant, his examination at that stage 
in  a  preliminary  enquiry  on  the  other  hand  was  fully  justified.  A 
reference  with  advantage  may  also  be  made  to  the  following 
observations of Farooqi, J., in Syed Wahid Bux Shah v. the State and 
another  where  section  202,  Cr.  P.  C.  and  its  purpose  in  law  was 
under discussion: 
"The  whole  purpose  of  the  preliminary  inquiry  under  sec tion  202, 
Cr. P. C. 1898 is to avoid the issue of process to the accused person 
in a case, and it is not to be held as if it was a full‑dress rehearsal for 
the  trial.  If,  therefore,  the  purpose  of  section  202  of  the  Code  is  to 
enable Magistrate to postpone the issue of process, how then can that 
purpose  be  allowed  to  be  frustrated  when  the  Magistrate  decides  to 
hold  a  preliminary  inquiry  in  which  he  issues  notice  to  the  accused 
and "allows most of the things to be done which, properly, must wait 
until  the  issue  of  process.  Therefore,  though  there  may  be  no 
contravention  of  any  specific  provision  of  the  Code  it  appears  to  be 
clear  that  it  was  not  intended  that  in  a  preliminary  inquiry,  under 
section 202 of the. Code, the accused should be summoned by notice 
and  allowed  to  have  the  prosecution  witnesses  cross‑examined  and 
produce  his  own  side  of  the  case  either  orally  or  in  writing.  In  the 
case  the  purpose  of  inquiry  ostensibly  was  to  determine  whether 
process  should  be  issued  or  not,  and,  therefore,  the  Magistrate  did 
not  act  properly  in  permitting  accused  to  be  present  by  notice, 
allowing them to be represented by counsel and have the prosecution 
witnesses cross‑examined." 
40.  The  contention  that  if  the  complaint  is  filed  against  any  officer  or 
group  of  officers  or  department  then  examination  of  such  report  may 
prejudice  the  mind  of  the  court,  has  no  wisdom  at  all  because  judicial 
officers are trained to examine the material from both the sides during trial 
or  during  other  proceedings  and  then  without  being  prejudiced  always 
apply their independent judicious mind to come to a definite conclusion on 
material in issue. There is no intention of legislature in Section 202 of the 
32  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
Code  to  bind  the  court  only  to  the  extent  of  complaint  and  the  evidence 
produced by him, as the court has vast powers of inquiry and investigation, 
therefore, unambiguously the court is not bound by only and only evidence 
of  the  complainant,  therefore,  power  of  the  court  cannot  be  curtailed  and 
court  can  examine  the  police  file,  report  under  section  173  or  JIT  report, 
prepared in a state case registered about the same occurrence. 
41.  This  has  become  a  trend  in  our  courts  that  at  the  time  of  recording 
cursory  evidence  in  complaint  cases  they  take  the  matter  without 
considering  its  importance  and  only  rely  upon  the  evidence/material 
produced  by  the  complainant  before  the  court.  In  routine  matter  this 
procedure  may  be  sufficient  to  establish  the  truthfulness  or  falsehood  of 
complaint but in number of cases any material may be beyond the control 
of  the  complainant  or  he  may  not  be  aware  whether  such  witness  will 
appear  and  support  the  complaint  or  not  or  there  is  official  record  to  be 
placed  on  the  file  and  there  is  requirement  of  recording  of  statements  of 
different  officers  including  senior  officers  or  high  political  figures  then 
either  the  court  should  broaden  its  canvass    of  inquiry  and  summon  all 
concerned  and  also  direct  relevant  material/documents  to  be  submitted  on 
record, relevant documents or may investigate the case and for the purposes 
of  investigation  the  court  has  again  vast  powers.  It  could  get  the  matter 
investigated through Magistrate or Ex-Justice of Peace or through police or 
any other person. The word “any other person” used in this section carries 
vast  impression.  As  discussed  earlier,  it  includes  officer(s)  of  any  rank  of 
any  government,  agency  or  even  a  retired  officers  and  this  investigation 
would  be  under  the  direct  control  and  direction  of  the  court  and  to  the 
extent of scope provided in Section 202 of the Code. At this stage we are 
mindful  of  the  fact  that  court  in  this  case  is  performing  its  functions 
under  the  relevant  law  but  as  per  separation  of  powers  between  the 
province  and  the  federation  within  the  limits  of  province,  but  for  the 
purposes of justice if court feels necessary it may approach the federal 
government  to  get  the  services  of  any  of  its  employees  or  agency  like 
33  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
FIA,  etc,  or  any  officer  of  any  agency  or  officer  related  to  federal 
establishment  division  or  federal  agency  and  performing  duty  in  the 
control  of  any  province  but  that  too  with  the  permission  of  both,  but 
the court shall while appointing any officer as inquiry or investigation 
officer  shall  ensure  that  no  person  should  be  appointed  as  inquiry  or 
investigation  officer  who  has  any  direct  or  indirect  interest  in  the 
complainant or the person complained against. 
SECTION III 
42.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argued  that  one-man  tribunal 
under  the  Punjab  Tribunal  of  Inquiries  Ordinance  1961  was  headed  by 
Hon’ble  Judge  of  High  Court  with  the  approval  of  the  Hon’ble  Chief 
Justice and they were trying to get report of this commission in support of 
their stance and also to produce evidence recorded by the Hon’ble Tribunal 
to be placed before the court under proceedings in the complaint. On court 
question  whether  the  report  of  the  commission  and  witnesses  could  be 
considered  as  material  under  section  202  of  the  Code,  learned  counsel 
submitted  that  evidence  recorded  by  the  commission  could  be  used  as 
material. 
43.  On  the  other  hand,  learned  PG  submitted  that  the  report  of  the 
commission  could  not  be  used  in  any  subsequent  proceedings  and  same 
protection  has  been  provided  to  the  witnesses  who  appear  before  the 
tribunal  and  their  statements  could  only  be  used  for  the  purposes  of 
prosecuting  for  giving  false  evidence  before  the  tribunal,  hence  both  i.e. 
report of the commission as well as evidence recorded by the commission 
could not be  considered  as  material under  section  202  of  the  Code, hence 
the  same  could  not  be  produced.  Further  submits  that  even  evidence  of 
CW-18  (Muhammad  Shakil)  is  not  admissible  in  evidence  at  all  because 
this  relates  to  the  statement  of  a  witness  before  the  tribunal  and  as  the 
evidence  by  the  witness  has  been  protected  in the statute not to be used  
34  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
against  him,  hence,  any  such  evidence  before  the  tribunal  is  irrelevant 
material  for  the  purposes  of  inquiry  or  investigation  under  section  202  of 
the Code. 
44.  Subject  to  certain  exceptions,  it  is  settled  principle  of  criminal 
jurisprudence that, evidence of  one case cannot be read into  another  case. 
Reference may be  made to “Natho v. The State PLD 1986 SC 146, Akbar 
Ali v. Qazi Javed Ahmad and others” (1986 SCMR 2018), Ali Sher v. The 
State” (PLD 1987 Kar. 507), “Umer Hayat v.  Additional Sessions Judge-
III, Khushab and 2 others” (2008 P Cr. L J 523) and Malik Aman v. Haji 
Muhammad  Tufail”  (PLD  1976  Lah.  1446)  However,  the  analysis  of 
Article  140,  151  and  153  of  QSO  clearly  indicates  that  there  are  two 
purposes for  which  a  previous  statement  of  a  witness  can be used. One is 
for cross- examination and contradiction and the other is for corroboration.  
Section 6 of the Punjab Tribunals of Inquiry Ordinance, 1969 puts embargo 
upon 
the  use  of  statement  recorded  before  Tribunal/Commission 
established under the said Act, against the witness except to prosecute him 
for giving false evidence before the Tribunal. 
45. 
It may be important to note that Section 6 of the Punjab Tribunals of 
Inquiry  Ordinance,  1969  is  pari  materia  with  Section  16  of  Pakistan 
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 2017, Section 6 of the Pakistan Commissions 
of  Inquiry  Act,  1956  (Repealed)  and  Section  6  of  Indian  Commissions  of 
Inquiry Act, 1952. Since there is very little case on Section 6 of the Punjab 
Tribunals of Inquiry Ordinance, 1969, therefore, case law available on the 
identical provisions of statutes of same nature may be useful to understand 
its proper scope. Relevant provisions are reproduced as under:- 
THE PUNJAB TRIBUNALS OF INQUIRY ORDINANCE, 1969 
“6.   Statements made by persons to the Tribunal.— No statement 
made  by  a  person  in  the  course  of  giving  evidence  before  the 
Tribunal shall subject him to, or be used against him in, any civil or 
criminal  proceeding  except  a  prosecution  for  giving  false  evidence 
by such statement: 
35  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
        Provided that the statement— 
(a)    is  made  in  reply  to  a  question  which  he  is  required  by  the 
Tribunal to answer; or 
      
 (b)  is relevant to the subject matter of inquiry. 
PAKISTAN COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 2017 
16.  Statements  made  by  persons  before  the  Commission.  No 
statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before 
the Commission shall, except in accordance with law, subject him to, 
or be used against him in, any civil or criminal proceeding except a 
prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement: 
Provided that the statement,--- 
(a)  is  made  in  reply  to  a  question  which  he  is  required  by  the 
Commission to answer; or 
(b) is relevant to the subject matter of inquiry. 
THE PAKISTAN COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1956 
6.  Statements  made  by  persons  to  the  Commission.  No  statement 
made  by  a  person  in  the  course  of  giving  evidence  before  the 
Commission shall subject him to, or be used against him in, any civil 
or  criminal  proceeding  except  a  prosecution  for  giving  false 
evidence by such state ment : 
Provided that the statement, 
(a)  is  made  in  reply  to  a  question  which  he  is  required  by  the 
Commission to answer; or 
(b) is relevant to the subject‑matter of inquiry. 
[INDIAN] THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952 
6. Statements made by persons to the Commission – 
No  statement  made  by  a  person  in  the  course  of  giving  evidence 
before the Commission shall subject him to, or be used against him 
in, any civil or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving 
false evidence by such statement. 
Provided that the statement – 
36  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
(a)  Is  made  in  reply  to  a  question  which  he  is  required  by  the 
Commission to answer, or 
(b) Is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.” 
46. 
In  the  case  “Kehar  Singh  v.  State”  (AIR  1988  (SC)  1883)  question 
before  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  was,  whether  the  appellants  i.e.  the 
accused  before  the  trial  court  were  entitled  to  use  the  copies  of  the 
statement  of  those  prosecution  witnesses  who  were  examined  before  the 
Thakkar Commission for purposes of cross-examination or to use the report 
of the Commission or whether it could be handed over or given over to the 
accused for whatever purpose they intended to use?  While answering the 
question  His  Lordship  Oza  J.  concluded  that  “Without  going  into  the 
wider  questions  even  a  plain  reading  of  Section  6  as  discussed  above 
will  prohibit  the  use  of  the  previous  statements  at  the  trial  either  for 
the  purposes  of  cross-examination  to  contradict  the  witness  or  to 
impeach  his  credit.    His  lordship  K.  Jagannatha  Shetty,  J.  (agreeing 
with  Oza,  J.)  observed  that  the  statement  given  before  a  commission 
shall  not  be  admissible  against  the  person  in  any  subsequent  civil  or 
criminal  proceeding  save  for  perjury.  It  may  be  observed  that  in  a 
considerable  number  of  cases  the  subsequent  use  of  statement  recorded 
before the Inquiry Commission came under consideration but it pertained 
to  “use  against  the  witness  himself”  and  the  courts  consistently  ruled 
that such statement cannot be used against such witness in any manner 
whatsoever. However, there has been no question ever that the witness 
examined  before  the  Commission  cannot  be  summoned  or  produced 
witness in any subsequent proceedings.  In this regard, reference may be 
made  to  “Ram  Krishna  Dalmia  v.  Justice  Tendolkar”  (1959  SCR  279); 
“Sohan Lal v. State” (AIR 1965 Bombay 1) and “State of Maharashtra v. 
Ibrahim Mohd.,” (1978 Cri LJ 1157). 
47. 
In  the  case  “Sajjan  Kumar  vs  Central  Bureau  Of  Investigation” 
(CRL.REV.P.328/2012) the question of admissibility of evidence (recorded 
before commission) in another criminal case, came under consideration. In 
37  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
the cited case, the prosecution raised objection that accused cannot use the 
previous statements of prosecution witnesses for purpose of contradiction. 
The  prosecution  argument  was  based  on  the  observation  made  by  Apex 
Court  in  Kehar  Singh's  case  (cited  supra),  wherein,  the  honourable  court 
observed:- 
“26. At this stage, it would be appropriate to take note of the fact that 
in Kehar Singh's case, the prosecution did not rely upon any affidavit 
filed  or  statement  made  before  the  Commissions.  It  was  the  accused 
who  requested  for  the  copies  of  the  statement  of  witnesses  made 
before  the  Commission,  to  contradict  the  witness  with  reference  to 
such  statements  as  part  of  defence.  Therefore,  the  facts  of  the  case 
before this Court are altogether different. 
27.  The  contention  of  learned  Senior  Advocate  for  CBI  that  the 
affidavits  filed  and  statement  made  before  the  Commissions  are 
admissible  in  examination-in-chief  of  PW-1  Smt.  Jagdish  Kaur  but 
accused is precluded from contradicting the  witness on Ex.PW1/A to 
C  during  cross  examination 
in  view  of  bar  of Section  6 of 
Commissions of Inquiry Act, is devoid of any merit as no examination-
in-chief which is not allowed to be subjected to cross examination can 
be  read  in  evidence,  since  a  person  against  whom  a  deposition  is 
made/examination-in-chief  is  directed,  has  a  legal  right  to  cross 
examine the witness who has deposed against him. 
28.  Neither  the  part  of  examination-in-chief  which  referred  to 
affidavits  Ex.PW1/A  &  B  and  statement  Ex.PW1/C,  nor  these 
documents  can  be  read  in  evidence  against  the  accused  unless  he  is 
given an opportunity to cross examine PW-1 Smt.  Jagdish Kaur with 
respect 
the 
Commissions.” 
filed  and  statement  made  before 
to  affidavits 
48. 
It  may  be  concluded  that  the  report  is  a  recommendation  of  the 
Commission/Tribunal  for  consideration  of  the  Government.  It  is  the 
opinion of the Commission based on the statements of witnesses and other 
material. It has no evidentiary value in the trial of the criminal case (in this 
regard  reference  may  be  made  to  “Kehar Singh v. State”  (AIR  1988  (SC) 
1883). However, the material collected or evidence recorded by the Inquiry 
Commission  (i.e.  oral  depositions,  affidavits,  site 
inspection  note, 
electronic and print media reports etc.)  may be used by the prosecution and 
the  embargo  of  Section  6  of  the  Punjab  Tribunals  of  Inquiry  Ordinance, 
1969  only  affords  protection  to  such  witness.  The  trial  court  may,  on  its 
own  motion  or  at  the  request  of  the  complainant  may  call  the  concerned 
38  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
persons to appear in investigation or inquiry for the purposes of recording 
of evidence or direct them to produce the relevant documents or to produce 
the  record  of  electronic  and  print  media  and  its  transcript  if  required. 
However, while passing an order under section 203 or 204 of the Code, the 
court has to adjudge the relevance of the material so produced and not its 
admissibility which is the subject of regular trial. 
49. 
It  may  further  be  noted  that  the  Tribunal  report  has  already  been 
made  public  on  the  direction  of  this  court  in  case  of  “PROVINCE  OF 
PUNJAB versus QAISAR IQBAL and others” (PLD 2018 Lahore 198). This 
report  is  no  more  a  privileged  document  as  it  has  become  a  public 
document.  The  complainant  has  a  right  to  produce  the  evidence/material 
collected  by  the  one-man  Tribunal  in  case  of  inquiry/investigation  Under 
Section 202 of the Code.  Therefore, there is every possibility that such 
material may or may not qualify as an admissible piece of evidence in 
subsequent  trial  proceedings.  However,  such  “material”  may  be 
capable  of  being  translated  into  admissible  piece  of  evidence,  leads  to 
the  discovery  of  admissible  evidence  or  it  is  helpful  to  the  court  in 
reaching  the  conclusion  that  order  under  Section  204  of  of  the  Code 
may be passed for the summoning of the accused.      
50.  The  question  before  this  court  is,  whether  Judge  Anti-Terrorism 
Court  while  conducting  inquiry  under  Section  202  Cr.PC  was  justified  in 
refusing    to  consider  statements  recorded  before  Inquiry  Commission  to 
ascertain    the    facts/allegations  made  in  the  private  complaint?  It  has     
been  noted  above  that  in  proceedings  under  Section  202  Cr.PC,  Court  is 
required  to  satisfy  himself  as  to  the  truth  or    falsehood  of      the  facts 
narrated in the complaint on the basis of material already available to him 
or  that  came  to  his  knowledge  during  inquiry/investigation  process.  The 
term  “material”  used 
in  Section  202  of 
the  Code  connotes             
something  relevant---not  necessarily  admissible  piece  of  evidence.  It  has 
already been noted that a witness before the Inquiry Commission may be a 
good  and  competent  witness  during  subsequent  trial  or  proceedings. 
39  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
Therefore,  at  inquiry  stage,  Judge  ATC  was  bound  to  consider  the 
statements  made  before  the  Inquiry  Commission  to  reach  the  conclusion 
whether  these  statements  are  “relevant”  to  the  case  and  if,  he  reaches  the 
conclusion  that  those  statements  are  relevant,  then  on  the  basis  disclosure 
of  facts  made  therein,  he  could  have  summoned  those  witnesses  at  the 
inquiry stage under Section 202 of Cr.PC   for the purpose of ascertaining 
the  truth  or  falsehood  of  complaint.  It  may  be  called  as  a  “pre-
ascertainment  of  purpose  stage”.  There  arises  no  question  of  using  it 
against  the  witness  who  made  the  same  before  the  Inquiry  Commission. 
Therefore,  Judge  ATC  altogether  misapplied  and  misquoted  Section  6  of 
the Punjab Tribunals of Inquiry Ordinance, 1969. 
SECTION IV 
51. 
It has been argued before us that no complaint  under Section 120-B 
of PPC can be lodged except by Federal or Provincial Government or by a 
person  authorized  by  either  of  the  said  Governments  by  virtue  of  bar 
contained  in  Section  196-A  read  with  Section  196  Cr.PC.    The  said 
provisions are reproduced hereunder for ready reference:- 
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 1898 
“196. Prosecution for offences against the State: No Court shall take 
cognizance of any offence punishable under Chapter VI or IX-A of the 
Pakistan  Penal  Code  (except  Section  127),  or  punishable  under 
Section  108-A,  or  Section  153-A  or  Section  294-A,  or  Section  295-A 
or  Section  505  of  the  same  Code,  unless  upon  complaint  made  by 
order  of  or  under  authority  from,  the  Federal  Government  or  the 
Provincial Government concerned, or some officer empowered in this 
behalf by either of the two Governments. 
196-A.  Prosecution  for  certain  classes  of  criminal  conspiracy.  No 
Court  shall  take  cognizance  of  the  offence  of  criminal  conspiracy 
punishable under section 120-B of the Pakistan Penal Code, (XLV of 
1860). 
(1) in  a  case  where  the  object  of  the  conspiracy  is  to  commit 
either  an  illegal  act  other  than  an  offence,  or  a  legal  act  by 
illegal means, or an offence to which the provisions of section 
196  apply,  unless  upon  complaint  made  by  order  or  under 
authority from [the [Federal Government], or the Provincial 
Government  concerned,  or  some  officer  empowered  in  this 
behalf by either of the two Governments], or 
40  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
  
(2)  in a case where the object of the conspiracy is to commit any 
non-cognizable offence, or a cognizable offence not punishable 
with death, 8[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment 
for  a  term  of  two  years  or  upwards,  unless  the  [Provincial 
Government], or a [Officer incharge of the prosecution in the 
district]  empowered 
the  [Provincial 
Government],  has,  by  order  in  writing,  consented  to  the 
initiation of the proceedings: 
Provided  that  where  the  criminal  conspiracy  is  one  to  which 
the provisions of subsection [(4)] of section 195 apply no such 
consent shall be necessary.]” 
this  behalf  by 
in 
The  plain  reading  of  Section  196-A  of  the  Code  suggests  that  “certain 
classes of criminal classes” have been subjected to aforesaid condition i.e. 
if the criminal conspiracy is to commit an offence to which the provisions 
of  section  196  apply.  Section  196  of  the  Code  applies  to  the  offences 
punishable  under  Chapter  VI  or  IX-A  PPC  (except  Section  127),  or 
punishable  under  Section  108-A,  or  Section  153-A  or  Section  294-A,  or 
Section 295-A or Section 505 of the same Code. Therefore, the offence of 
criminal  conspiracy  (section  120-B  PPC)  would  ordinarily  be  coached  by 
Section  196-A  of  the  Code  if  it  has  any  connection  with  the  offences 
controlled  by  Section  196  of  the  Code.  Even  otherwise,  Honourable 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case “JAVED IQBAL and others Vs  The 
STATE”  (2016 SCMR 787) observed:- 
  
“6.         Another legal aspect of the case argued before us by the 
learned  Sr.  ASC  was  regarding  non-compliance  of 
the 
mandatory  requirement  of  section  196,  Cr.P.C.,  about  seeking 
sanction/permission  for  trial  of  an  accused  charged  under 
sections 295-A, P.P.C., which was lacking in the present case. In 
this context, he relied upon the case of Nawaz Sharif v. The State 
(2000 MLD 946). Indeed, section 196 of Cr.P.C. bars the Court 
from  taking  cognizance  of  an  offence  under  section  295-A  of 
P.P.C.,  without  requisite  sanction/approval/permission  and 
failure  to  obtain  such  mandatory  permission  renders  the 
proceedings to that extent a nullity in law. However, we are not 
impressed by this submission of the learned Sr. ASC, as bar of 
taking cognizance provided  under section 196,of the Code  will 
not  apply  to the proceedings before the Anti-Terrorism Courts 
in  view  of  the  combined  effect  of  Sections  12,  19,  30  and  the 
overriding  effect  of  section  32  of  the  ATA,  being  proceedings 
41  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
under  a  special  statute,  which  provides  exclusion  of  those 
provisions  of  the  Code  and  other  laws  which  are  inconsistent 
with  the  provisions  of  ATA.  In  this  context,  a  glance  at  these 
provisions of the ATA goes to show that section 12, which starts 
with  non  obstante  clause,  deals  with  the  jurisdiction  of  Anti-
terrorism  Courts;  section  19  provides  for  a  detailed  procedure 
under  subsections  (1)  to  (14),  regarding  the  procedure  and 
powers  of  Anti-terrorism  Court;  section  30,  which  also  starts 
with  non-obstante  clause,  provides  for  modified  application  of 
certain  provisions  of  the  Code  (Criminal  Procedure  Code), 
during  the  proceedings  before  the  Anti-terrorism  Court,  and 
lastly section 32 gives overriding effect to the provisions of ATA, 
and  provides  that  notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the 
Code  or  any  other  law  but,  save  as  expressly  provided  in  this 
Act,  the  provisions  of  the  Code  shall,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not 
inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  this  Act,  apply  to  the 
proceedings  before  an  Anti-terrorism  Court,  which  shall  be 
deemed  to  be  a  Court  of  Session.  The  case  of  Nawaz  Sharif 
(supra)  relied  by  the  learned  Sr.  ASC  in  support  of  his 
submission about the applicability of section 196, Cr.P.C. to the 
proceedings  before  the  Anti-Terrorism  Courts,  also  negates  his 
arguments.  For  ease  of  reference,  relevant  conclusion  in  this 
judgment is reproduced as under:- 
  
"Thus, there being inconsistency and the difference between the 
provisions of section 30 of the Act and section 196 of the Code, 
the provisions contained in the latter will not be applicable to the 
proceeding  before  the  Special  Court.  Therefore,  in  view  of  the 
inconsistency,  as  discussed  above,  section  32  of  the  Act  would 
come  into  play  and  the  bar  contained  in  section  196,  Cr.P.C 
would  not  in  any  way  affect  to  the  taking  of  cognizance  by  this 
Court  in  exercising  power  under  section  19  of  the  Act. 
Consequently, the application is dismissed." 
 (Emphasis added) 
The  interpretation  offered  by  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  fully 
covers  the  proposition in  hand  and the  bar  on taking  cognizance  provided 
under  section  196-A of the  Code  will not apply  to  the  proceedings before 
the  Anti-Terrorism  Courts  in  view  of  the  combined  effect  of  Sections  12, 
19,  30  and  the  overriding  effect  of  section  32  of  the  ATA,  being 
proceedings  under  a  special  statute,  which  provides  exclusion  of  those 
provisions    of  the  Code  and  other  laws  which  are  inconsistent  with  the 
provisions of ATA. 
42  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
52.  Now I will take another important allegation of conspiracy advanced 
in the complaint against private respondents and argued before us with full 
vigour.  The  August  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  “ZULFIKAR  ALI 
BHUTTO Vs. THE STATE”  (PLD 1979 SC 53) while interpreting Section 
120 A of the Pakistan Penal Code observed:- 
733. This section makes criminal conspiracy  a substantive offence 
on the statue book like every other offence in the Penal Code. By its 
very definition criminal conspiracy consists in the mere agreement 
between two or more persons to do an illegal act, or an act which 
is  not  illegal  by  illegal  means.  However,  as  pointed  out  in 
Mulcahy's case a conspiracy consists not merely in the intention of 
two or more, but in the agreement of two or more to do an illegal 
act,  or  to  do  act  by  illegal  means.  As  long  as  the  design  rests  in 
intention  only  it  is  not  indictable.  The  proviso  to  this  section, 
however,  expressly  lays  down  that  no  agreement,  except  an 
agreement  to  commit  an  offence,  shall  amount  to  a  criminal 
conspiracy unless some overt act besides the agreement is done in 
pursuance thereof. 
  
734.  This in essence  is  the  whole gist of the  offence  of conspiracy 
and its characteristics. At the core, in a conspiracy, lies some sort 
of  agreement,  be  it  express,  implied  or  implicit,  or  in  any  other 
form,  between  the  parties  thereto  to  do  an  illegal  act  or  to  do  a 
legal act by unlawful means. Indeed, this is common ground, and 
on this there was no difference  between the  parties at the hearing 
before  us,  It  is,  therefore,  not  necessary  to  labour  the  point  any 
further.” (Emphasis added) 
53. 
I am benefitted from a number of judgements of the Supreme Court 
of  India i.e.  Devender Pal Singh v. State N.C.T. of Delhi (2002  AIR  (SC) 
1661,  K.  Hashim  v.  State  of  Tamil  Nadu  (AIR  2005  SC  128)  and  State 
(N.C.T.  of  Delhi)  v.  Navjot  Sandhu  @  Afsan  Guru  (AIR  2005  SC  3820), 
and  deduce  the  pivotal  points  relating  to  the  offence  of  criminal 
conspiracy:- 
  
 
 (i) An object to be accomplished,  
(ii)  A plan or scheme  embodying  means to  accomplish 
that object,  
(iii)  An  agreement  or  understanding  between  two  or 
more  of  the  accused  persons  whereby  they  become 
43  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
committed 
definitely 
the 
accomplishment of the object by the means embodied in 
the agreement, or by any effectual means,  
co-operate 
for 
to 
(iv)  In  the  jurisdiction  where  the  statute  required  an 
overt act, 
(v)  Essence  of  a  criminal  conspiracy  is  the  unlawful 
combination  and  ordinarily  the  offence  is  complete 
when the combination is framed, 
(vi) Unless the statute so requires, no overt act need be 
done  in  furtherance  of  the  conspiracy,  and  that  the 
object of the combination need not be accomplished, in 
order to constitute an indictable offence, 
(vii) Encouragement and support which co-conspirators 
give  to  one  another  rendering  enterprises  possible 
which,  if  left  to  individual  effort,  would  have  been 
impossible,  furnish  the  ground  for  visiting  conspirators 
and abettors with condign punishment. 
(viii)  The  conspiracy  is  held  to  be  continued  and 
renewed  as  to  all  its  members  whenever  and  wherever 
any member of the conspiracy acts in furtherance of the 
common design , 
(ix)  For  an  offence  punishable  under  Section  120-B, 
prosecution  need  not  necessarily  prove 
the 
perpetrators  expressly  agree  to  do  or  cause  to  be  done 
illegal  act;  the  agreement  by  may  be  proved  by 
necessary implication, 
that 
(x) A conspiracy consists not merely in the intention of 
two or more, but in the agreement of two or more to do 
an unlawful act by unlawful means, 
(xi) So long as such a design rests in intention only, it is 
not  indictable.  When  two  agree  to  carry  it  into  effect, 
the very plot is an act in itself, and an act of each of the 
parties,  promise  against  promise,  acts  contra  actum, 
capable of being enforced, if lawful, punishable if for a 
criminal object or for use of criminal means.  
(xii) Essence of criminal conspiracy is an agreement to 
do  an  illegal  act  and  such  an  agreement  can  be  proved 
either  by  the  direct  evidence  or  by  circumstantial 
evidence  or  by  both,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  common 
44  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
experience  that  direct  evidence  to  prove  conspiracy  is 
rarely available. 
committed 
(xiii)  There  is  distinction  between  the  conspiracy  and 
offences 
conspiracy. 
Conspirators who did not commit the offence are liable 
for the offence committed by some of them in execution 
of the common design. 
pursuant 
to 
xiv)  Exact  when  the  conspiracy  was  hatched  can  be 
spelled out. It is not always possible “to give affirmative 
evidence”  about  the  date  of  formation  of  the  criminal 
conspiracy.” 
54.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of  “Yakub  Abdul  Razak  Memon  v.  State  of 
Maharashtra,  through  CBI,  Bombay”  (2013(13)  SCC  1)  it  has  been 
observed  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  that  the  gist  of  the  offence  is  an 
agreement to break the law. It is not an ingredient of the offence that all the 
parties  should  agree  to  do  a  single  illegal  act.  It  may  comprise  the 
commission of a number of acts.  It observed further,  
“Since  conspiracy  is  hatched  in  secrecy,  to  bring  home  the 
charge  of  conspiracy,  it  is  relevant  to  decide  conclusively  the 
object  behind  it  from  the  charges  leveled  against  the  accused 
and the facts of the case.  Object behind it is the ultimate aim of 
the conspiracy. Further, many means might have been adopted 
to achieve this ultimate object. The means may even constitute 
different  offences  by  themselves,  but  as  long  as  they  are 
adopted  to  achieve  the  ultimate  object  of  the  conspiracy,  they 
are also acts of conspiracy.  
Prosecution  need  not  necessarily  prove  that  the  conspirators 
expressly  agreed  to  do  or  cause  to  be  done  the  illegal  act,  the 
agreement  may  be  proved  by  necessary  implication.  It  is  not 
necessary that each number of the conspiracy must know all the 
details  of  the  conspiracy.    All  of  them  need  not  be  present  in 
Pakistan  or  continue  to  remain  in  Pakistan.    The  entire 
agreement  must  be  viewed  as  a  whole  and  it  has  to  be 
ascertained as to what in fact the conspirators intended to do or 
the object they wanted to achieve. Accused need not be present at 
each  and  every  meeting  for  being  held  to  be  a  part  of  the 
conspiracy.  
It  is  also  not  necessary  that  each  member  of  the  conspiracy 
should  know  all  the  details  of  the  conspiracy.  Conspiracy  is  a 
45  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
continuing  offence.  Thus,  If  any  act  or  omission  which 
constitutes an offence is done in Pakistan or outside its territory, 
the  conspirators  continue  to  be  the  parties  to  the  conspiracy  - 
The  conspiracy  may be  a  general one  and  a  smaller  one  which 
may  develop  in  successive  stages.  It  is  an  unlawful  agreement 
and  not  its  accomplishment,  which  is  the  gist/essence  of  the 
crime  of  conspiracy.  In  order  to  determine  whether  the 
conspiracy was hatched, the court is required to view the entire 
agreement  and  to  find  out  as  in  fact  what  the  conspirators 
intended to do.”  
55.  Dr.  Sri  Hari  Singh  Gour  in  his  well-known  'Commentary  on 
Penal Law of India', (Vol. 2, 11th Edn. page 1138) summed up the legal 
position in the following words:  
“In  order  to  constitute  a  single  general  conspiracy  there  must  be a 
common  design.  Each  conspirator  plays  his  separate  part  in  one 
integrated and united effort to achieve the common purpose. Each one 
is aware that he has a part to play in a general conspiracy though he 
may  not  know  all  its  secrets  or  the  means  by  which  the  common 
purpose is to be accomplished. The evil scheme may be promoted by a 
few,  some  may  drop  out  and  some  may  join  at  a  later  stage,  but  the 
conspiracy  continues  until  it  is  broken  up.  The  conspiracy  may 
develop  in  successive  stages.  There  may  be  general  plan  to 
accomplish  the  common  design  by  such  means  as  may  from  time  to 
time be found expedient.” 
56. 
In case of “Regina v. Murphy” [(1837) 173 E.R. 502]  Coleridge, J. 
of Supreme Court of Canada observed:-  
“[...] I am bound to tell you, that although the common design is the 
root of the charge, it is not necessary to prove that these two parties 
came  together  and  actually  agreed  in  terms  to  have  this  common 
design  and  to  pursue  it  by  common  means,  and  so  to  carry  it  into 
execution. This is not necessary, because in many cases of the most 
clearly  established  conspiracies  there  are  no  means  of  proving  any 
such  thing  and  neither  law  nor  common  sense  requires  that  it 
should be proved. If you find that these two persons pursued by their 
acts  the  same  object,  often  by  the  same  means,  one  performing  one 
part of an act, so as to complete it, with a view to the attainment of the 
object  which  they  were  pursuing,  you  will  be  at  liberty  to  draw  the 
conclusion that they have been engaged in a conspiracy to effect that 
object.  The  question  you  have  to  ask  yourselves  is,  'Had  they  this 
common  design,  and  did  they  pursue  it  by  these  common  means  - 
the design being unlawful ?' .... "If you are satisfied that there was 
concert  between  them,  I  am  bound  to  say  that  being  convinced  of 
the  conspiracy,  it  is  not  necessary  that  you  should  find  both  Mr. 
46  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
Murphy and Mr. Douglas doing each particular act, as after the fact 
of  conspiracy  is  already  established  in  your  minds,  whatever  is 
either  said  or  done  by  either  of  the  defendants  in  pursuance  of  the 
common  design,  is,  both  in  law  and  in  common  sense,  to  be 
considered as the acts of both.” 
57. 
In  the  case  of  “Ajay  Agarwal  v.  Union  of  India”  (1993  AIR  (SC) 
1637 the Supreme Court of India as to the nature of criminal conspiracy as 
a continuing offence, observed:- 
“29.  A  conspiracy  thus,  is  a  continuing  offence  and  continues  to 
subsist  and  committed  wherever  one  of  the  conspirators  does  an  act 
or series of acts. So long its performance continues, it is a continuing 
offence  till  it  is  executed  or  rescinded  or  frustrated  by  choice  or 
necessity. A crime is complete as soon as the agreement is made, but 
it is not a thing of the moment. It does not end with the making of the 
agreement. It will continue so long as there are two or more parties to 
it intending to carry into effect the design. Its continuance is a threat 
to the society against which it was aimed at and would be dealt with 
as  soon  as  that  jurisdiction  can  properly  claim  the  power  to  do  so. 
The  conspiracy  designed  or agreed  abroad  will have  the  same  effect 
as  in  India,  when  part  of  the  acts,  pursuant  to  the  agreement  are 
agreed to be finalized or done, attempted or even frustrated and vice 
versa.”  
 
58.  United States Federal Court in case “Van Riper v. United States” (13 
F 2d. 961) observed, "When men enter into an agreement for an unlawful 
end,  they  become  ad  hoc  agents  for  one  another  and  have  made  a 
partnership in crime." In the case “Ram Narain Poply v. Central Bureau of 
Investigation”  (2003  AIR  (SC)  2748)  the  Supreme  Court  of  India 
observed:-  
“349. No doubt in the case of conspiracy there cannot be any direct 
evidence.  The  ingredients  of  offence  are  that  there  should  be  an 
agreement between persons who are alleged to conspire and the said 
agreement  should  be  for  doing  an  illegal  act  or  for  doing  illegal 
means an act which itself may not be illegal. Therefore, the essence of 
criminal conspiracy is an agreement to do an illegal act and such an 
agreement  can  be  proved  either  by  direct  evidence  or  by 
circumstantial  evidence  or  by  both,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  common 
experience  that  direct  evidence  to  prove  conspiracy  is  rarely 
available.  Therefore,  the  circumstances  proved  before,  during  and 
after  the  occurrence  have  to  be  considered  to  decide  about  the 
complicity of the accused.  
47  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
It was observed further:- 
to  be 
is  sought 
factum  of  conspiracy 
We  are  aware  of  the  fact  that  direct  independent  evidence  of 
criminal conspiracy is generally not available and its existence is a 
matter of inference. The inferences are normally deduced from acts 
of  parties  in  pursuance  of  a  purpose  in  common  between  the 
conspirators.  This  Court  in  V.C.  Shukla  v.  State  (Delhi  Admn.), 
(1980(2) SCC 665) held that to prove criminal conspiracy there must 
be  evidence  direct  or  circumstantial  to  show  that  there  was  an 
agreement between two or more persons to commit an offence. There 
must be a meeting of  minds resulting in ultimate decision  taken by 
the conspirators regarding the commission of an offence and where 
the 
from 
circumstances,  the  prosecution  has  to  show  that  the  circumstances 
give  rise  to  a  conclusive  or  irresistible  inference  of  an  agreement 
between  two  or  more  persons  to  commit  an  offence.  As  in  all  other 
criminal offences, the prosecution has to discharge its onus of proving 
the  case  against 
the  accused  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  The 
circumstances  in  a  case,  when  taken  together  on  their  face  value, 
should indicate the meeting of the minds between the conspirators for 
the intended object of committing an illegal act or an act which is not 
illegal, by illegal means. A few bits here and a few bits thereon which 
the  prosecution  relies  cannot  be  held  to  be  adequate  for  connecting 
the accused with the commission of the crime of criminal conspiracy. 
It has to be shown that all means adopted and illegal acts done were 
in furtherance of the object of conspiracy hatched. The circumstances 
relied  for  the  purposes  of  drawing  an  inference  should  be  prior  in 
time  than  the  actual  commission  of  the  offence  in  furtherance  of  the 
alleged conspiracy.”  
inferred 
59. 
In  the  Case  of  “IMRAN  ASHRAF  and  7  others  Vs.  THE  STATE” 
(2001 SCMR 424), it has been held:- 
“As  far  as  commitment  between  two  or  more  persons  who  have 
conspired  together  to  commit  an  offence  etc.,  is  concerned  it  is  a 
relevant  fact  as  against  each  of  the  persons  believed  to  be  so 
conspiring as well as for the purpose of proving the existence of the 
conspiracy  as  far  as  the  purpose  of  showing  that  any  such  person 
was  a  party  to  it  within  the  meaning  of  Article  23  of  Qanun-e-
Shahadat  Order,  1984.  For  convenience 
is  reproduced 
hereinbelow:-- 
it 
 "23. Things  said  or  done  by  conspirator  in  reference  to 
common design.---Where there is reasonable ground to believe 
that  two  or  more  persons  have  conspired  together  to  commit 
an.  offence  or  an  actionable  wrong  anything  said,  done  or 
written  by  any  one  of  such  persons  in  reference  to  their 
common intention, after the time when such intention was first 
entertained  by  any  one  of  them,  is  a  relevant  fact  as  against 
each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the 
48  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
purpose  of  proving  the  existence  of  the  conspiracy  as  for  the 
purpose of showing that any such persons was a party to it." 
 A  perusal  of  above  Article  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order 
suggests  that  the  Court  seized  with  the  matter  has  a  duty  to 
satisfy  itself  that  there  is  a  reasonable  ground  to  believe  the 
existence  of  conspiracy  in  pursuance  of  an  agreement  among 
them  to  commit  an  unlawful  act  etc.  existed,  therefore,  it 
becomes  obligatory  upon  the  prosecution  to produce  evidence 
for the purpose of establishing that two or-more persons have 
conspired  for  the  commission  of  a  crime  or  unlawful  act  by 
way of entering into an agreement and making commitment to 
fulfill  it  for  the  purpose  of  achieving  the  object.  If  the 
prosecution has failed to bring on record evidence to show that 
before  the  actual  commission  of  the  offence  there  was  any 
agreement  may  be  oral  or  written  amongst  two  or  more 
persons for the commission of the offence then it would not be 
possible to conclude that prior to the commission of the offence 
any  criminal conspiracy  was  hatched  to  attract  the  provisions 
of section 120-B, P.P.C.”  
60.  August  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  “ZULFIKAR  ALI  BHUTTO  Vs. 
THE STATE” (PLD 1979 SC 53) while interpreting Section 10 of Evidence 
Act 1872 (corresponding to Article 23 of QSO 1984) held:- 
“100.  The  methodology  employed  in  the  actual application of section  1 
of the Evidence Act is fully demonstrated in these cases to the effect that 
its actual application follows and does not precede the finding that there 
is  reasonable  ground  to  believe  that  a  conspiracy  exists  and  certain 
persons are conspirators. It merely speaks of the use of evidence  in the 
case, and the section does not control the sequence in which the evidence 
should be let in. It  appears to that these  are  but only two phases in the 
exercise of the application of section 10 of the Act, and not two distinct 
and separate stage laying down the order in which evidence is to be led. 
In the initial phase and as a condition precedent under this section; the 
Court  has  got  to  find  from  evidence  aliunde  on  the  record  that  there 
are  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  two  or  more  persons  have 
conspired together to commit an offence or ar; actionable wrong. After 
having  passed  this  test,  the  next  phase  ire  the  exercise  consists  in  the 
actual application of the operative part of this section whereby anything 
said,  done  or  written  by  any  one  of  such  persons  in  reference  to  their 
common  intention,  during  the  continuance  of  the  conspiracy,  is  treated 
as  a  relevant  fact  against  each  of  the  persons  believed  to  be  so 
conspiring,  as  well  for  the  purpose  of  proving  the  existence  of 
conspiracy  as  for  the  purposes  of  showing  that  any  such  person  was  a 
party to it. In fact this section deals with the mode of evaluation and the 
use  of  the  evidence  brought  on  the  record.  It  does  not  provide  that  the 
proof of existence of the conspiracy must necessarily precede any proof 
of  the  acts  and  declarations  of  the  co-conspirators  of  the  accused  for 
usel against them.” 
49  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
 
intention  during 
the  continuance  of 
“101.  To  sum  up,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  facts  in  issue  in  a  case 
under  section  10  of  the  Evidence  Act  are,  whether  there  was  an 
agreement for the alleged purpose and whether the accused was a 
party to it. Evidence in support of either may be given first. It may 
be that evidence is first allowed to go on the record about anything 
said  done  or  written  by  one  of  the  accused  in  reference  to  their 
common 
the  alleged 
conspiracy for use against the other accused of their participation 
in the offence, subject to the condition that there were reasonable 
ground  to  believe  about  the  very  existence  of  the  conspiracy  and 
the  partners  in  it  This  course  is  thus  provisionally  admitting  the 
evidence  has  a  merit  in  it  and  is  conducive  to  the  expeditious 
disposal  of  the  trial  and,  if  I  may  say  so,  suited  to  the  prevailing 
conditions  in  this  country  where  the  delays  in  the  administration 
of justice have become proverbial and moral especially because, as 
in  this  case,  the  trial  is  not  by  jury.  So  that  the  trial  Court  at  the 
same  time  is  the  Judge  both  on  facts  and  law  in  the  case”. 
(Emphasis added) 
  
These  principles  were  also  followed  by  a  learned  full  bench  of  Karachi 
High Court in the case “Mian MUHAMMAD NAWAZ SHARIF and others 
Vs.  THE  STATE  and  others”  (PLD  2002  Karachi  152).    In  the  case 
“MUHAMMAD  AZIM  MALIK  Vs.  GOVERNMENT  OF  PAKISTAN  and 
others” (PLD 1989 SC 519) it was held by the august Supreme Court:- 
“15.  Conspiracy  has  been  made  an  offence  under  section  963  of  the 
United States Code Annotated. At serial No.134 of United States Code 
Annotated,  Title  18,  Cumulative  Annual  Pocket  Part  for  use  in  1983 
mentions the following case:- 
 "Accused who allegedly conspired with persons who were in Canada 
to  have  a  murder  committed  and  who  allegedly  made  one  or  more 
telephone  calls  to  those  people  in  Canada  had  sufficient  nexus  with 
Canada,  even  though  he  did  not  enter  Canada,  to  justify  Canada's 
exercise of jurisdiction over charges that he conspired to kill someone 
outside of Canada. Melia v. U.S., C.A. Conn. 1981, 667 F.2d 300.1 
 16.  Article  23  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  contains  an  illustration  of 
conspiracy  which  is  relevant  to  the  matter  under  consideration.  It  is 
reproduced as hereunder:- 
 "Reasonable  ground  exists  for  believing  that  A  has  joined  in  e 
conspiracy to wage war against Pakistan. 
 The  facts  that  B  procured  arms  in  Europe  for  the  purpose  of the 
conspiray,  C  collected  money  in  Peshawar  for  a  like  object  D 
persuaded  persons  to  join  the  conspiracy  in  Karachi,  E  published 
50  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
writings  advocating  the  object  in  view  at  Multan  and  F  transmitted 
from  Lahore  to  G  at  Kabul  the  money  which C  had  collected  at 
Peshawar and contents of a letter written ....''by H giving an account 
of the conspiracy are each relevant, both to prove the existence of the 
conspiracy,  and  to  prove  A's  complicity  in  it,  although  he  may  have 
been ignorant of all of them, and although the persons by whom they 
were  done  were  strangers  to  him  and  although  they  may  have  taken 
place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it." 
 These two illustrations, one from the United States Law and the other 
from  our  own  are  sufficient  to  establish  that  in  a  case  of  conspiracy 
physical presence within the Court's jurisdiction is not necessary.” 
61.  The  “design”  is  a  very  critical  component  as  to  constitute  criminal 
conspiracy.  The  said  term  has  not  been  defined  anywhere  in  Code  of 
Criminal  Procedure  or  Pakistan  Penal  Code.  Black’s  Law  Dictionary 
TENTH EDITION defines design asunder:- 
Design,  n.  (16c)  1.  A  plan  or  scheme.  2.  Purpose  or  intention 
combined with a plan.  
  Formed  design.  (1861)  Criminal  law.  The  deliberate  and  fixed 
intention to kill, though not necessarily a particular person. See 
PREMEDITATION.  
3.---  
Advance  Law  Lexicon  (4th  Edition,  Volume  2)  explains  the  term  in  the 
following manner:- 
Design,  Purpose,  Intend.  To  design  denotes  an  object  or 
attainment placed before the mind, with a calculation of the steps 
necessary for it. It is a complicated intention carried into action, 
or proposed for it.  
The intention is a movement or inclination of the mind in regard 
to a distant object, which causes it to stretch forward toward that 
object. The design is an idea chosen and adopted, which implies 
method  and  mediation.  An  intention  is  pure  or  otherwise;  a 
design  is  suddenly  or  deliberately  formed,  and  may  be  good  or 
bad, but is seldom entirely good. One may be mistaken in one’s 
intentions, and thwarted in one’s design. (Smith Syn. Dis.) 
IN  THE  LAW  OF  EVIDENCE  Design  denotes  purpose,  or 
intention, combined with plan, or implying a plan in the mind.  
51  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
It may also not be out of place to note that the term “design” has been used 
in  Section  6  of  ATA.  The  said  term  came  under  consideration  before 
august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  “KASHIF  ALI  Vs.  The 
JUDGE,  ANTI-TERRORISM,  COURT  NO.II,  LAHORE  and  other”  (PLD 
2016 SC 951), the honourable court observed:- 
“11.       The  term  "design"  has  been  defined  in  the  Words  and 
Phrases, Permanent Edition - Vol.12 as under:- 
"Act  is  done  "designedly"  when  done  by  design,  on  purpose, 
intentionally;  "design"  is  plan  or  scheme  conceived  in  mind  and 
intended  for  subsequent  execution,  preliminary  conception  of  idea  to 
be  carried  into effect by  action,  contrivance  in  accordance  with pre-
conceived plan; and "to design" is to form plan or scheme of conceive 
and arrange in mind, originate mentally, plan out, contrive." 
12.       The  term  "design"  now  used  in  Section  6  of  the  Act  has 
widened  the  scope  of  the  Act  and  the  terms  "intention"  and 
"motive" previously used have been substituted with the sole object 
that  if  the  act  is  designed  to  create  a  sense  of  fear  or  insecurity  in 
society,  then  the  Anti-  Terrorism  Court  will  have  the  jurisdiction. 
From  the  above  definition  of  the  term  "design"  it  is  clear  that  it 
means  a  plan  or  scheme  conceived  in  mind  and  intended  for 
subsequent execution.” 
In the case “Mirza Shaukat Baig and others Vs. Shahid Jamil and others” 
reported as (PLD 2005 SC 530) it has been observed:- 
“[T]he  words  "designed  to"  as  used  in  section  6  of  the  Act  can  be 
equated  to  that  of  `willful'  "which  means  intending  the  result  which 
actually  comes  to  pass;  design;  intentional;  not  incidental  or 
involuntary.  Again  it  says  `willfully  is  generally  used  to  mean  with 
evil purpose, criminal intent or the like. In R.V. Senior, willfully, was 
interpreted  to  mean  deliberately  and  intentional,  not  accidentally  or 
inadvertently." [(1899)  1  Q  B  283].  (Words  and  Phrases,  permanent 
Edn. Vol. 45, p.275). 
  
17. According to Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Vol.11, 
para.  1252  `wilfully'  means  deliberately  and 
intentional,  not 
accidentally  or  inadvertently.  Frank  R.  Prassel  in  his  Criminal  law, 
Justice  and  Society  1979  Edition,  page  150  says  that  "Intent  is 
probably the most common, at least for the major traditional offences, 
but  some  L  codes  call  the  proof  of  `wilful'  `voluntary',  `malicious', 
`corrupt',  or  `purposeful'  product  instead.  These  terms  are  generally 
accorded  similar  legal  meanings,  subject  to  limited  variation  from 
one jurisdiction to another. 
 
52  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
18.  According  to  Black's  Law  Dictionary,  Fifth  Edition,  "an  act  is 
done wilfully and knowingly when the actor intends to do it and knows 
nature of the act. Further that an act or omission is `wilfully' done, if 
done  voluntarily  and  intentionally  and  with  the  specific  intent  to  do 
something  the  law  forbids,  or  with  the  specific  intent  to  fall  to  do 
something  the  law  requires  to  be  done;  that  is  to  say,  with  bad 
purpose  either  to  disobey  or  to  disregard  the  law.  It  goes  on  to  say 
that  when  used  in  criminal  context  it  generally  means  an  act  done 
with  a  bad  purpose,  without 
justifiable  excuse;  stubbornly, 
obstinately,  perversely.  The  word  is  also  employed  to  characterize  a 
thing  done  without  ground  for  believing  it  is  lawful  or  conduct 
marked by a careless disregard whether or not one has the right so to 
act." 
  
19.  Stroud's  Judicial  Dictionary  Vol.  4,  third  Edition,  says  "that  the 
legal  meaning  of  wilful  is  purposely  without  regard  to  bona  fides  or 
collusion  and  deliberately  and  intentionally  but  does  not  involve 
obstinacy  of  an  obstructive  kind  and  it  means  an  intentional 
disobedience.  In  the  Law  Terms  and  Phrases  Judicially  Interpreted, 
by Sardar Muhammad Iqbal Khan Mokal, the term "wilfully' amounts 
to nothing more than this that the person whose action is in question, 
mows that he is doing and intends to do what he is doing and is free 
agent.  He  further  says  that  wilful  means  wantonly,  intentional, 
deliberately and consciously and not accidentally or by inadvertence. 
Reference  is  made  there  to  Madras  State  Waqf  Board  v.  Tajammal 
Hussain (AIR 1968 Mad. 332) and Kedar Nath v. The State (AIR 1965 
All. 233)." 
  
20. According to Cyclopaedic Law Dictionary, 2nd Edition, the word 
`wilfully'  "means  in  the  common  sense,  voluntary  or  intentional.  In 
criminal  law  the  term  generally  means  more  than  'voluntary'  and 
implies as evil mind or intent. " 
 
21. In the light of above mentioned discussion the only inescapable 
conclusion  would  be  that  the  words  "designed  to"  are  equated  to 
that of wilfully, knowingly and deliberately. 
62. 
I  am  cognizant of the fact that terms, phrases and definitions used 
in  one  statute  cannot  be  imported  into  another  unless  the  law  expressly 
provides  for  the  same.  However,  if  the  context  and  object  of  the  two 
different statutes is the same, the terms used in either of them may be used 
to understand the purpose of the same. 
63.  Ordinarily,  a  person  cannot  be  made  responsible  for  the  acts  of 
others unless they have been instigated by him or done with his knowledge 
53  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
or consent. However, Article 23 of QSO (which corresponds to Section 10 
of repealed Evidence Act 1872, which is still in vogue in India) provides an 
exception to that rule, by laying down that an overt act committed by any 
one of the conspirators is sufficient, (on the general principles of agency) to 
make it the act of all. In this context it would useful to reproduce the pari 
materia provisions of both Acts:- 
 
INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872 
“10.  Things  said  or  done  by  conspirator  in  reference  to  common 
design 
Where  there  is  reasonable  ground  to  believe  that  two  or  more  persons 
have conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, 
anything said, done or written by any one of such persons  in reference 
to their common intention, after the time when such intention was first 
entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against each of the 
persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving 
the existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any 
such person was a party to it.” 
 
Illustration 
Reasonable  ground  exists  for  believing  that  A  has  joined  in  a 
conspiracy to wage war against the 11[Government of India] 
 
The  facts  that  B  procured  arms  in  Europe  for  the  purpose  of  the 
conspiracy,  C  collected  in  Calcutta  for  a  like  object  D  persuaded 
persons  to  join  the  conspiracy  in  Bombay,  E  published  writings 
advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi to 
G  at  Kabul  the  money  which  C  had  collected  at  Calcutta  ,  and  the 
contents  of  a  letter  written  by  H  giving  an  account  of  the  conspiracy, 
are each relevant, both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to 
prove A’s complicity in it, although he may have been ignorant of all of 
them,  and  although  the  persons  by  whom  they  were  done  were 
strangers  to  him,  and  although  they  may  have  taken  place  before  he 
joined the conspiracy or after he left it. 
 
QANUN-E-SHAHADAT ORDER 1984 
“23. Things  said  or  done  by  conspirator  in  reference  to  common 
design.--Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more 
persons have conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable 
wrong  anything  said,  done  or  written  by  any  one  of  such  persons  in 
reference to their common intention, after the time when such intention 
was  first  entertained  by  any  one  of  them,  is  a  relevant  fact  as  against 
each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose 
54  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
  
of  proving  that  existence  of  the  conspiring  as  for  the  purpose  of 
showing, that any such person was a party to it. 
  
Illustrations 
Reasonable  ground  exists  for  believing  that  A  has  joined  in  A 
conspiring to wage war against Pakistan. 
  
The  fact  that  B  procured  arms  in  Europe  for  the  purpose  of  the 
conspiracy,  C  collected  money  in  Peshawar  for  a  like  object,  D 
persuaded persons to  join the  conspiracy  in  Karachi, E published 
writings  advocating  the  object  in  view  at  Multan,  and  F 
transmitted  from  Lahore  to  G  at  Kabul  the  money  which  C  had 
collected at Peshawar and contents of a letter written by H giving 
an  account  of  the  conspiring  are  each  relevant, both  to  prove  the 
existence  of  the  conspiracy,  and  to  prove  A's  complicity  in  it, 
although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although 
the  persons  by  whom  they  were  done  were  strangers  to  him  and 
although  they  may  have  been  taken  place  before  he  joined  the 
conspiracy or after he left it.” 
64. 
In  the  case  “Kali  Ram  v.  State”  2010(6)  AD(Delhi)  45  a  Division 
Bench of Delhi High Court observed:-  
“47.  Since  more  often  than  not,  conspiracy  would  be  proved  on 
circumstantial  evidence,  four  fundamental  requirements  as  laid  down  as 
far  back  as  in  1881  in  the  judgment  reported  60  years  later  at  the 
suggestion of Rt. Hon'ble Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru i.e. 1941 All ALJR 416, 
Queen Empress v. Hoshhak may be re- emphasised :-  
I.  That  the  circumstances  from  which  the  conclusion  is  drawn 
be fully established;  
II. That all the facts should be consistent with the hypothesis of 
guilt;  
III.  That  the  circumstances  should  be  of  a  conclusive  nature 
and tendency;  
IV.  That  the  circumstances  should,  by  a  moral  certainty, 
actually  exclude  every  hypothesis  but  the  one  proposed  to  be 
proved;” 
 
65. 
In  “Kehar  Singh  v.  State”  (cited  supra)  Jagannatha  Shetty,  J.,  has 
analysed this particular section as follows:  
55  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
"278. From an analysis of the section, it will be seen that Section 
10 will come into play only when the court is satisfied that there 
is reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have 
conspired  together  to  commit  an  offence.  There  should  be,  in 
other words, a prima facie evidence that the person was a party 
to  the  conspiracy  before  his  acts  can  be  used  against  his  co-
conspirator.  Once  such  prima  facie  evidence  exists,  anything 
said, done or written by one of the conspirators in reference to 
the  common  intention,  after  the  said  intention  was  first 
entertained,  is  relevant  against  the  others.  It  is  relevant  not 
only for the purpose of proving the existence of conspiracy, but 
also for proving that the other person was a party to it." 
68.  Section  10  of  the  Evidence  Act  is  based  on  the  principle  of 
agency operating between the parties to the conspiracy inter se 
and it is an exception to the rule against hearsay testimony. If the 
conditions  laid  down  therein  are  satisfied,  the  act  done  or 
statement  made  by  one 
the  co-
conspirators.” 
is  admissible  against 
66. 
In  “Sardul  Singh  Caveeshar  v.  State  of  Bombay”  (AIR  1957 
Supreme Court 747), it was held:  
"The principle underlying the reception of evidence under Section 10 
of  the  Evidence  Act  of  the  statements,  acts  and  writings  of  one  co-
conspirator as against the other is on the theory of agency. The rule 
in Section 10 of the Evidence Act, confines that principle of agency in 
criminal  matters  to  the  acts  of  the  co-conspirator  within  the  period 
during  which  it  can  be  said  that  the  acts  were  in  reference  to  their 
common  intention  `that  is  to  say'  things  said,  done  or  written,  while 
the  conspiracy  was  on  foot  `and'  in  carrying  out  the  conspiracy.  It 
would  seem  to  follow  that  where,  the  charge  specified  the  period  of 
conspiracy,  evidence  of  acts  of  co-conspirators  outside  the  period  is 
not receivable in evidence." 
 
67.  The  Supreme  Court  of  India  in  “Central  Bureau  of  Investigation  v. 
V.C. Shukla and Ors.” (1998) 3 SCC 410, held:  
"40. ... ... .In dealing with this Section in Sardul Singh v. State of 
Bombay,  1957  CriLJ  1325,  this  court  observed  that  it  is 
recognised  on  well-established  authority  that  the  principle 
underlining the reception of evidence of the statements, acts and 
writings  of  one  co-conspirator  as  against  the  other  is  on  the 
theory  of  agency.  Ordinarily,  a  person  cannot  be  made 
responsible  for  the  acts  of  others  unless  they  have  been 
instigated  by  him  or  done  with  his  knowledge  or  consent.  This 
section provides an exception to that rule, by laying down that an 
56  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
overt act committed by any one of the conspirators is sufficient, 
(on the general principles of agency) to make it the act of all. But 
then,  the  opening  of  words  of  the  Section  makes  in  abundantly 
clear that such  concept  of agency  can  be  availed of, only, after 
the  Court  is  satisfied that there is reasonable ground to believe 
that they  have  conspired to commit an offence or an actionable 
wrong.  In  other  words,  only  when  such  a  reasonable  ground 
exists,  anything  said,  done  or  written  by  any  one  of  them  in 
reference to their common intention thereafter is relevant against 
the  others,  not  only  for  the  propose  of  proving  the  existence  of 
the  conspiracy but also for proving that the other person was a 
party to it. In Bhagwan Swarup v. State of Maharashtra, 1976 
CriLJ 860, this court analysed the section as follows:-  
"(1)  There  shall  be  a  prima  facie  evidence  affording  a 
reasonable ground for a Court to believe that two or more 
persons  are  members  of  a  conspiracy;  (2)  if  the  said 
condition is fulfilled, anything said, done or written by any 
one of them in reference to their common intention will be 
evidence  against  the  other;  (3)  anything  said,  done  or 
written  by  him should have been said, done or written by 
him after the intention was formed by any one of them; (4) 
it  would  also  be  relevant  for  the  said  purpose  against 
another  who  entered  the  conspiracy  whether  it  was  said, 
done or written  before he entered the conspiracy or after 
he  left  it;  and  (5)  it  can  only  be  used  against  a  co-
conspirator and not in his favour." (Emphasis Supplied) 
68. 
In  the  case  “Mohd.  Khalid  v.  State  of  West  Bengal”  [2002(7)  SCC 
334], Supreme Court of India stated the legal position thus: 
"We cannot overlook that the basic principle which underlies Section 
10 of the Evidence Act is the theory of agency. Every conspirator is an 
agent  of  his  associate  in  carrying  out  the  object  of  the  conspiracy. 
Section 10, which is an exception to the general rule, while permitting 
the  statement  made  by  one  conspirator  to  be  admissible  as  against 
another  conspirator  restricts  it  to  the  statement  made  during  the 
period  when  the  agency  subsisted.  Once  it  is  shown  that  a  person 
became  snapped  out  of 
the  conspiracy,  any  statement  made 
subsequent  thereto  cannot  be  used  as  against  the  other  conspirators 
under Section 10." 
 
69.  Adrian  Keane  and  Paul McKeown  in  their  book  “The  Modern  Law 
of Evidence” (9th Edition, Oxford University Press, London, 2011, pp 398-
400)  have  made  exhaustive  discussion  on  the  issue  of  admissibility 
confessional  statement/statement  of  an  accused  against  co-accused.  They 
57  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
have categorised three exceptions to the general rule (as to inadmissibility). 
The third exception relates to case in hand. They observe:- 
“The  third  exception,  which  is  perhaps  best  understood  in  terms  of 
implied  agency,  applies  in  the  case  of  conspiracy:  statements  (or 
acts)  of  one  conspirator  which  the  jury  is  satisfied  were  said  (or 
done)  in  the  execution  or  furtherance  of  the  common  design  are 
admissible in evidence against another conspirator, even though  he 
was  not  present  at  the  time,  to  prove  the  nature  and  scope  of  the 
conspiracy,  provided  that  there  is  some  independent  evidence  to 
show the  existence  of the  conspiracy  and  that  the  other  conspirator 
was a party to it. Thus in R v Blake and Tye, where the accused were 
charged  with  conspiracy  to  pass  goods  through  the  Custom  House 
without paying duty, it was held that whereas a false entry by T in a 
counterfoil  of  a  cheque,  by  which  he  received  his  share  of  the 
proceeds of the crime, was not admissible against B because it was 
not made  in pursuance  of the  conspiracy,  but  simply  as a  matter  of 
record  and  convenience,  another  false  entry  by  T  in  a  day  book 
could  be  used  in  evidence  against  B  since  it  was  made  in  the 
execution or furtherance of their common design. It does not matter 
in  what  order  the  evidence  of  the  statements  (or  acts)  of  the 
conspirator and the ‘independent evidence’ is adduced. Evidence of 
the  statements  (or  acts)  may  be  admitted  conditionally, 
ie 
conditional  upon  some  other  evidence  of  the  common  design  being 
adduced;  if  it  transpires  that  there  is  no  other  evidence  of  common 
design, then the statements (or acts) should be excluded. 
R  v  Blake  and  Tye  was  applied  in  R  v  Devonport,  in  which  the 
prosecution  were  allowed  to  rely  on  a  document,  dictated  by  one 
accused, which showed the proposed division of the proceeds of the 
conspiracy  among  all  five  accused.  The  following  elaborations  on 
the  principle  derive  from  R  v  Platten.  (1)  The  exception  does  not 
cover  narrative,  after  the  conclusion  of  the  conspiracy,  describing 
past  events.  (2)  It  covers  statements  made  during  a  conspiracy  and 
as part of the natural process of making the arrangements to carry it 
out, which are admissible not just as to the nature and extent of the 
conspiracy,  but  also  as  to  the  participation  in  it  of  persons  absent 
when the statements were made. (3) Such statements can be admitted 
against  all  the  conspirators  even  if  made  by  one  conspirator  to  a 
non-conspirator. (4) Statements about a conspirator having ‘second 
thoughts’  would  be  made  in  furtherance  of  the  common  design, 
because  it  is  typical  of  a  conspiracy  for  one  conspirator  to  have 
doubts  and  to  be  persuaded  by  his  co-conspirators  to  forget  them. 
(5) Statements made before a conspirator was alleged to have joined 
the agreement can only be evidence of the origin of the conspiracy, 
not evidence of his part in it.” 
70.  From  our  above  survey  it  may  be  summarized  that  Sections  120-A 
and 120-B were introduced in the Penal Code by way of amendment in the 
58  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
year  1913.  Underlying  purpose  was  to  make  a  mere  agreement  to  do  an 
illegal act or an act which is not illegal by illegal means punishable under 
law. For an offence punishable under Section 120-B, prosecution need not 
necessarily prove that the perpetrators expressly agree to do or cause to be 
done illegal act; the agreement may be proved by necessary implication. It 
is not necessary that all the conspirators must know each and every detail 
of  the  conspiracy.  It  will  be  difficult  to  get  direct  evidence  of  the 
agreement,  but  a  conspiracy  can  be  inferred  even  from  circumstances 
giving rise to a conclusive or irresistible inference of an agreement between 
two or more persons to commit an offence. If encouragement and support 
which  co-conspirators  gives  to  one  another  rendering  enterprises  possible 
which, if left to individual effort, would have been impossible, furnish the 
ground  for  visiting  conspirators  and  abettors  with  condign  punishment. 
Mostly, the conspiracies are proved by the circumstantial evidence, as the 
conspiracy is seldom an open affair. The exact period when the conspiracy 
was  hatched  can  be  spelled  out.  It  is  not  always  possible  "to  give 
affirmative  evidence"  about  the  date  of  formation  of  the  criminal 
conspiracy.    Usually  both  the  existence  of  the  conspiracy  and  its  objects 
have  to  be  inferred  from  the  circumstances  and  the  conduct  of  the 
accused.    Moreover,  there  is  distinction  between  the  conspiracy  and 
offences  committed  pursuant  to  conspiracy.  Conspirators  who  did  not 
commit the offence are liable for the offence committed by some of them 
in execution of the common design.  
71. 
It  appears  that  the  learned  trial  court  was  not  fully  conversant  with 
the principle of law of criminal conspiracy and how the conspiracy will be 
inferred  and  in  order  to  prove  the  case  of  conspiracy,  normally  no  direct 
evidence  is  available  and  inference  is  to  be  drawn  through  circumstantial 
evidence.  The  court  below  has  not  passed  any  order  that  newspapers  are 
not piece of  material  to  be  ignored, rather  the  court took  defence  point of 
view  that  these  statements  were  political  in  nature  and  there  was  no 
intention of these persons to have conspired.  The Court adopted a different 
59  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
approach while directing summoning of Muhammad Usman (DCO), Tahir 
Mehmood Chandio and Ali Abbas (TMO). 
72. 
It has been argued by Mr. Azam Nazir Tarrar, Advocate and his team 
that  allegation  against  his  client  is  of  having  conspired  the  occurrence, 
however,  no  such 
information  was  previously  provided 
in  FIR 
No.696/2014  which  was  registered  on  28.08.2014  and  even  after  a 
considerable delay this fact was not disclosed in the application filed before 
JOP. He argued that the complainant party made a number of applications 
to Respondent police high ups and they had exhibited confidence in them.  
Therefore, in the given circumstances, delay is to be considered fatal to the 
case  of  the  complainant.  He  argued  further  that  action  of  the  police  force 
was taken under the authority of law with  complete bona fide and same is 
protected by Section 79 of Pakistan Penal Code 1860 and Article 171 of e 
Police Order, 2002 (C.E. Order No.22 of 2002). 
73. 
I  would  like  to  address  the  issue  of  “good  faith”  first.  There  is  no 
cavil to the proposition that “acts or omissions” done by a public servants 
in  good  faith, bona  fide  or  with  legal  justification  are  protected  under  the 
law. However, at the same time, it is relevant to observe that these stances 
may be offered as a defence in the appropriate proceedings and ordinarily 
do  not  bar  the  initiation  of  proceedings  out  rightly.  In  the  case  “State  of 
Orissa  v.  Bhagaban  Barik”  (1987  AIR  (SC)  1265)  the  Supreme  Court  of 
India observed:- 
“3.  Section  79  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  provides  that  nothing  is  an 
offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by 
reason of mistake of fact and not by reason of mistake of law, in good 
faith,  believes  himself  to  be  justified  by  law,  in  doing  it.  Under  this 
section,  although  an  act  may  not  be  justified  by  law,  yet  if it is  done 
under a mistake of fact, in the belief in good faith that it is justified by 
law it will not be an offence. Such cases are not uncommon where the 
Courts  in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  particular  case  have 
exonerated the accused under section 79 on the ground of his having 
acted in good faith under the belief, owing to a mistake of fact that he 
was  justified  in  doing  the  act  which  constituted  an  offence.  As  laid 
down  in  section  52  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  nothing  is  said  to  be 
done or believed in good faith which is done or believed without due 
60  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
care  and  attention.  The  question  of  good  faith  must  be  considered 
with reference to the position of the accused and the circumstances 
under  which  he  acted.  'Good  faith'  requires  not  logical  infallibility 
but  due  care  and  attention.  The  question  of  good  faith  is  always  a 
question  of  fact  to  be  determined  in  accordance  with  the  proved 
facts and circumstances of each case.” 
In  the  case  “Oriental  Insurance  Co.  v.  State  of  Bihar,  (Patna)(DB)” 
(2004(2) PLJR 458)  Patna High Court observed:- 
“[---]The  plea  of  'good  faith',  therefore,  is  not  a  ground  on  which 
alone the prosecution can be quashed at the threshold stage itself. It 
is  in  the  nature  of  defence  which  an  accused  may  take  in  a  criminal 
case  and,  therefore,  whether  under  the  General  Insurance  Business 
Act  read  with  the  General  Clauses  Act  or  under  the  Indian  Penal 
Code  when  the  question  arises  as  to  whether  the  particular  act  was 
done  in  good  faith  within  the  meaning  of  Section  38  of  the  General 
Insurance  Business  Act,  the  party  taking  such  defence  is  required  to 
prove it by evidence.” 
In  the  case  “Assistant  Commissioner  Anti  Evasion  Commercial  Taxes, 
Bharatpur  v.  M/s  Amtek  India  Limited”  (2007(11)  SCC  407)  Supreme 
Court of India held in express terms:- 
“10.  Whether  an  act  has  been  done  in  good  faith  would  depend 
upon the factual scenario. In order to establish "good faith", it has 
to be established that what has been imputed concerning the person 
claiming it to be so, is true.” 
 In  the  instant  case,  it  is  very  much  unclear  as  to,  “what  was  the  legal 
mandate  of  police  to  use  the  force?  Whether  the  magnitude  of  such 
mandate  was  proportionate  to  the  object  to  be  achieved?  Whether  such 
mandate was exercised within the legally prescribed limits?” These all are 
the questions of facts and may be adjudicated upon at the appropriate stage 
of the proceedings keeping in view the defence offered for the same.     
74.  The  second  argument  of  Azam  Nazir  Tarrar  Advocate  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioners  that  complainant  were  addressed  number  of 
applications to the police officers and hence, he had expressed confidence 
in  them  and  the  allegation  as  to  their  involvement  is  afterthought.  This 
argument  is  misconceived  on  the  very  premise  that  complainant  party 
moved various applications to various State Agencies and in the same way 
61  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
application  was  moved  to  the  head  of  the  Department  of  police  i.e. 
Inspector General of Police in his official capacity, not to the petitioner in 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 in his personal capacity. Suffice it to say 
that  to  move  an  application  to  register  a  criminal  case  against  an  SHO  is 
addressed to the Station House Officer even he may himself be an accused.  
75.  Now,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  alleged  delayed  introduction  of 
allegation  of  criminal  conspiracy.  From  the  documents  placed  on  the 
direction of this Bench by the learned PG and his tea m it appears that the 
occurrence  commenced  in  the  midnight  of  16/17.03.2014.  First  FIR  was 
registered  on  17.06.2014  by  SHO  Rizwan  Qadir  and  second  FIR  was 
registered  on  28.06.2014  and  per  report  and  documents  placed  on  the  file 
application was filed on 19.06.2014 before the police and then on the same 
facts  without  any  addition  or  deletion  application  was  moved  before  the 
learned  Ex-officio  Justice  of  Peace  and  accordingly  second  FIR  was 
registered  on  the  basis  of  same  allegations.  I  will  not  like  to  further 
comment  on  this  aspect  as  it  may  prejudice  the  rights  of  the  parties, 
sufficient  to  observe  that  in  the  application  moved  on  19.06.2014  it  was 
carried out and ultimately the FIR was registered wherein it was written :- 
 
62  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
From  above  reproduced  excerpt  from  FIR  No.696/2014  registered  on  the 
application of Jawad Hamid as well application  dated 19.06.2014 filed by 
the  same  complainant  before  the  police  authorities;  it  appears  that  in  the 
FIR  as  well  as  application  same  words  have  been  written.  It  therefore 
appears  that  from  the  very  beginning  the  complainant  party  was  levelling 
allegation  of  conspiracy  against  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  country  and 
Chief  Executive  of  the  province  along  with  other  political  personalities, 
Federal  and  Provincial  ministers  and  senior  bureaucrats  and  it  was 
investigating  agency  which,  later  on,  had  to  record  evidence  of  the 
witnesses  and  collect  all  the  evidence  to  dig  out  the  truth.  Although  the 
learned PG submits that the witnesses were summoned again and again yet 
they did not appear before the investigating agency. On the other hand, as 
discussed  above,  in  the  complaint  it  is  stated  that  the  witnesses  appeared 
before  the  JIT  and  their  statements  were  not  recorded  and  further 
mentioned  that  they  moved  number  of  applications  for  constitution  of  a 
new  JIT  as  they  had  no  confidence  on  the  JIT  constituted  by  the 
government. When these facts are examined, prima facie the stance of the 
complainant appeals to mind that JIT had not recorded their statements and 
for  the  same  reason  details  of  the  facts  were  for  the  first  time  narrated 
63  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
before the court during recording of cursory evidence. There is nothing on 
the record that witnesses of abetment (Khuram Nawaz Gandapur & Fayyaz 
Ahmad  Chaudhry, Muhammad  Tayyab  Zia  Norani  and  Hafiz  Muhammad 
Waqar  who  had  heard  I.G  Police,  earlier  before  any  authority  deposed 
different as to their statements in the proceedings during complaint before 
the  court, hence, their  statements for  the  first time  surfaced  and  could not 
be  brushed  aside  simply  on  the  ground  of  having  no  supporting 
documentary  evidence.  Our  apex  court  and  the  superior  courts  of  many 
other foreign jurisdictions in a number of judgments, as we have discussed 
above,  are  of  the  view  that  normally  there  is  no  direct  evidence  as  to  the 
proof  agreement  between  the  conspirators  and  from  the  circumstances  of 
the case inference is to be drawn. This important aspect has altogether been 
ignored by the learned Trial Court while passing the impugned order. 
76.  There  is  another  important  aspect  of  the  case  that  the  FIR  is  not 
substantive piece of evidence, it is just information of an offence which is 
provided  in  FIR  No.610/2014  and  allegations  of  abetment  have  been 
levelled. It is duty of the IO to dig out the truth and collect all evidence and 
not  to  bank  upon  the  complainant  alone.  Quite  recently,  August  Supreme 
Court in “Mst. SUGHRAN BIBI Versus The STATE” (PLD 2018 SC 595), 
has  held  that  each  and  every  detail  is  not  required  to  be  provided  in  the 
FIR.  It  is  not  requirement  of  law  that  the  complaint  should  provide  full 
details to canvass the whole scene of the occurrence, describe the weapon 
of offence, number of witnesses, motive, the role played by the accused or 
details of the conspiracy. The relevant portion of FIR states:- 
 
64  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
Moreover, in case of “Ali Muhammad and others v. Syed Bibi and others” 
(PLD 2016 SC 484) it was held:- 
“10.       As could be seen from the plain reading of above reproduced 
provision  of  law,  the  requirement  of  Section  154  of  the  Code  is  to 
enter  every  information  of  commission  of  a  cognizable  offence, 
whether  given  orally  or  in  writing  to  the  officer-in-charge  of  the 
police station, which shall then be reduced into writing and signed by 
the  person  giving  it  and  the  substance  thereof  shall  be  entered  in  a 
book  to  be  kept  by  such  officer  in  the  form  prescribed  by  the 
Provincial Government in this behalf. Meaning thereby, that it is not a 
legal  requirement  for  provider  of  such  information  to  canvass  the 
whole scene of occurrence of a cognizable offence giving description 
and details of accused, details of weapons used by them, their specific 
role,  motive  behind  the  occurrence,  and  the  names  of  eye-witnesses 
etc.  But  it  is  a  matter  of  common  experience  that  usually  the  entries 
made  in  Section  154  of  the  Code  book,  as  per  practice,  contain 
invariably  all  such  details  so  much  so  that  in  the  ordinary 
parlance/sense  it  is  considered  as  the  gist  of  the  prosecution  case 
against the  accused.  In  such  state of affairs,  if  a  collusive,  mala  fide 
or  concocted  FIR,  registered  at  the  instance  of  some  individual  with 
some  ulterior  motive,  is  taken  as  sacrosanct,  it  is  likely  to  divert  the 
whole course of investigation in a wrong direction and spoil the entire 
prosecution  case  on  that  premise.  The  Court  while  considering  the 
crucial  point  of  registration  of  another  FIR  cannot  remain  oblivious 
of  these  ground  realities  so  as  to  non-suit  the  aggrieved  party  from 
agitating  his  grievance  in  an  honest  manner,  or  ensure  regulating 
proper  investigation  of  a  crime  in  the  right  direction,  or  apprehend 
the  real  culprits  and  brought  them  before  the  Court  of  law  for 
justice.” 
77. 
In line  with the  above  referred  judgment, a  three  member  Bench of 
honourable Supreme Court, in the case “Mst. SUGHRAN BIBI Versus The 
STATE” (PLD 2018 SC 595), held:- 
“(i)  According  to  section  154,  of  the  Code  an  FIR  is  only  the  first 
information  to  the  local  police  about  commission  of  a  cognizable 
offence. For instance, an information received from any source that a 
murder has been committed in such and such village is to be a valid 
and sufficient basis for registration of an FIR in that regard.  
(ii)  If  the  information  received  by  the  local  police  about  commission 
of a cognizable offence also contains a version as to how the relevant 
offence  was  committed,  by  whom  it  was  committed  and  in  which 
background it was committed then that version of the incident is only 
the version of the informant and nothing more and such version is not 
to be unreservedly accepted by the investigating officer as the truth or 
the whole truth.  
65  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
(iii)  Upon  registration  of  an  FIR  a  criminal  “case”  comes  into 
existence  and  that  case  is  to  be  assigned  a  number  and  such  case 
carries the same number till the final decision of the matter.  
(iv)  During  the  investigation  conducted  after  registration  of  an  FIR 
the  investigating  officer  may  record  any  number  of  versions  of  the 
same  incident  brought  to  his  notice  by  different  persons  which 
versions are to be recorded by him under section 161, of the Code in 
the same case. No separate FIR is to be recorded for any new version 
of the same incident brought to the notice of the investigating officer 
during the investigation of the case.” 
78.  Hence,  in  the  first  application  moved  on  19th  July,  2014  they  have 
provided  the  information  and  it  was  duty  of  the  concerned  investigating 
agency  to  dig  out  the  truth,  call  the  witnesses  and  collect  the  material  in 
this  respect.  It  appears  that  when  the  petitioner  was  not  satisfied  with  the 
investigation  as  senior  officers  and  political  high-ups  were  involved  and 
complainant  was  of  the  view  that  fair  independent  JIT  had  to  be 
constituted,  and  after  his  failure  he  filed  this  complaint  and  disclosed  the 
facts  in  detail.  The  observations  of  trial  court  for  disbelieving  the  cursory 
statements on the ground that they had not provided number of the vehicle, 
colour of the vehicle, number of the building where meeting was convened, 
CDR  was  not  placed  on  the  record  or  the  way  of  departure  was  not 
mentioned,  does  not  appeal  to  reason.  It  appears  that  the  court  was 
considering  the  case  with  the  angle  of  the  defence.  Qanoon-e-Shahadat 
Order  1984,  provides  opportunity  of  cross  examination  under  section  151 
QSO  to  impeach  credibility  of  the  witnesses  and  even  the  court  itself  did 
not put questions to the complainant or his witnesses while recording their 
cursory statements to get detailed information. Such observations have no 
legal  support  at  all.  The  court  while  passing  the  impugned  order  ignored 
the provisions of QSO which although lay down strict principle for proving 
a  case  yet  where  there  is  allegation  of  criminal  conspiracy  then  the 
principle  applicable  to  normal  cases  would  not  be  applied  and    the  rule 
embodied in Article 23 QSO would come into play.  
79.  Another reason advanced by the learned trial court is that holding of 
three meetings were not flashed in the electronic or print media and  same 
66  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
were also not disclosed in FIR No.696/2014. I cannot lose the sight of the 
fact that Dr. Tahir ul Qadri along with his allies had expressed his intention 
to  launch  a  campaign  against  the  government.  The  said  declaration  made 
the  Federal  and  Punjab  Governments  perturbed.  In  such  circumstances,  if 
some secret meetings were held between the two political parties, this was 
nothing  unusual.  Secret  meetings  especially  in  our  country  are  not  a  new 
dimension. In order to prevent any sort of distrust amongst their followers, 
if  any  political  party  thought  of  not  making  such  secret  meeting  public, 
there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  serious  wrong  with  it.  Therefore,  the 
reasoning  advanced  by  the  learned  trial  court  is  totally  alien  to  our  social 
context.  At  the  same  time  it  appears  that  the  court  did  not  fulfil  its 
obligation  to  determine  truth  or  falsehood  and  even  the  court  did  not 
examine  the  report  under  section  173  Cr.P.C.  and  report  of  the  JIT  in  the 
state  case  registered  regarding  the  same  occurrence.  The  report  of  JIT  is 
equated with report under section 173 Cr.P.C. in a recent judgment of the 
apex  Court  in  the  case  “PROVINCE  OF  PUNJAB  through  Secretary 
Punjab Public Prosecution Department and another Versus MUHAMMAD 
RAFIQUE and others” (PLD 2018 SC 178) held:- 
“13. 
The  learned  counsel  has  mainly  relied  upon  the  report  of  JIT 
and  also  read  certain  paragraphs  therefrom  but  the  said  report  is  an 
opinion of the members of JIT, and it can be considered, at the most as a 
report  under  Section  173  Cr.P.C.  It  is  settled  by  now  that  report  under 
Section  173,  Cr.P.C.  is  inadmissible  in  evidence,  as  laid  down  by  this 
Court in the case of Syed Saeed Muhammad Shah and another v. The State 
(1993 SCMR 550). The trial Court will appreciate the same if supported 
by  some  admissible  material/evidence  because  the  Court  has  to  see  the 
material  and  cannot  decide  the  case  upon  any  opinion  of  Police 
Officer/s,  even  of  a  high  rank  of  Inspector  General  of  Police.” 
[Emphasis added] 
After conclusion of hearing of this case when trial court was asked whether 
there  is  any  JIT  report  available  on  its  record,  it  was  reported  in  the 
negative,  whereas  the  learned  PG  and  his  team  submitted  all  JIT  reports 
informing  that  all  these  were  part  of  the  police  files  already  submitted 
before  the  learned  trial  court.  It  therefore,  appears  that  the  court  even  did 
not  bother to  examine  JIT  report  and  material  collected  by  them.  The  JIT 
67  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
report  establishes  that  meeting  of  16th  was  held  and  such  meeting  is 
corroborated  by  one  witness  who  heard  statement  of  the  witnesses  before 
the tribunal and in said meeting it has been admitted that all high ups were 
present,  matter  about  removal  of  barrier  was  discussed  along  with  overall 
situation of the country, but 
i) 
 
ii) 
No attempt was made by the learned trial court to probe about 
minutes of the meeting,  
no  attempt  was  made  to  probe  that  barriers  on  other  roads  of 
Lahore  city  were  also  removed  or  not, whereas  it  is  admitted 
position  that  so  many  roads  had  been  cleaned  from  barriers 
recently  by  the  orders  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan and by the orders of this Court. 
 
iii)  Meeting  is  admittedly  part  of  the  JIT,  but  courts  failure  to 
examine  those  parts  especially  that  he  failed  to  fulfil  his 
liability  under  section  202  of  the  Code  or  where  big  political 
figures  or  bureaucrats  were  the  persons  complained  against, 
principle of law has been violated by the court. 
 
iv)  The  court  also  did  not  discuss  that  according  to  JIT  report 
more  than  five  hundred  police  men  were  present,  along  with 
police, private persons were also there, one of whom is Gullu 
Butt  who  has  been  separately  tried  and  sentenced  and  video 
clips  show  that  one  SP  rank  officer  could  be  seen  embracing 
him.  Therefore,  such  large  number  of  police  contingent  and 
private  persons  under  the  command  of  the  D.I.G  Police  was 
not required just for the removal of barriers. Further it has also 
come on record that occurrence spread over a vast area of bout 
2  ½  kilometre  radius.  The  Chief  Minister  had  joined  JIT 
proceedings on 14.03.2015 and told that he asked his secretary 
to  disengage;  the  secretary 
joined  JIT  proceedings  on 
15.03.2015  and submitted  that  he had  conveyed  this  message 
to the law minister and the Law Minister submitted before the 
JIT  that he  onwards directed the  CCPO  to  complete  the  task. 
The  post  mortem  reports  and  MLCs  show  that  lot  of  injuries 
were  caused  after  9/20  a.m.  All  these  aspects  established 
during JIT, are material as required by the law and admissible 
in  evidence  under  Article  23  QSO.  In  this  situation,  another 
important  aspect  is  that  as  a  normal  course  government 
agencies  carry  out  their  such  operations  like  removal  of 
barricades in broad day light but here in this case no justifiable 
explanation  has  come  on  the  record  as  to  what  forced  the 
68  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
police  or  what  was  the  urgency  so  as  to  rush  to  the  troubled 
area  at  about  12.00  midnight  and  that  too  while  armed  with 
heavy  weaponry,  especially  when  the  opposite  party  at  the 
most  had  batons  with  them.  All  these  facts  when  considered, 
lead  us  to  infer that same  were  continuation of  one  mind set. 
Although  it  has  come  on  the  record  that  two  police  men  also 
sustained  fire  arm  injuries,  but  admittedly  those  were  simple 
in nature. However we would not like to further comment on 
the  veracity  of  such  injuries.  Such  brutality  unleased  by  the 
police  against  unarmed  men,  with  whom  they  also  had  no 
enmity,  just  for  the  purposes  of  removing  the  barriers,  is 
sufficient  to  infer  something  seriously  wrong  or  fishy  and 
when  these  facts  are  read  along  with  statements  of  Shahbaz 
Sharif,  Rana  Sana  Ullah,  Secretary  to  Chief  Minister  Syed 
Tauqeer  Shah  and  Secretary  Home  Major  ®  Azam  Suleman, 
during investigation of case FIR No.696/2014, an inference in 
favour  of  the  stance  taken  by  the  complainant  becomes 
obvious. 
80.  A  news  item  was  flashed  in  number  of  newspapers  and  there  is  no 
rebuttal from any authority that  why does the  flight boarding Dr. Tahir ul 
Qadri bound for Rawalpindi was diverted to Lahore? As discussed earlier, 
these clippings were relevant material and trial court was bound to consider 
the same at inquiry stage. However, the learned trial court:- 
i) 
Did not bother either to hold inquiry itself or get the matter 
investigated  on  the  lines  that  how  many  flights  on  the 
crucial date were diverted?  
ii)  What  were  the  weather  conditions  on  the  said  date? 
Whether  report  from  meteorology  department  was  called 
for?   
iii)  What was the justification behind diversion of the flight?  
iv)  Whether  “Tarmac”  where  the  said  flight  landed  after 
diversion  was  under  the  control  of  Civil  Aviation?  If  not 
then why?  
Such material was beyond the reach and access of the complainant and the 
trial  court  could  have  call  for  the  same  in  the  inquiry  proceedings  or  it 
conveniently,  could  have  directed  the  investigation  under  Section  202  of 
the Code. 
69  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
81.  From  the  above  discussions,  especially  the  principles  derived  from 
the  judgments  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  and  the  High 
Courts,  I  am  convinced  that  sufficient  material  for  summoning  of  the 
petitioner  in  Criminal  Revision  No.7067/2017  was  available  before  the 
learned  trial  court  and  I  could  not  find  out  any  illegality,  irregularity  or 
jurisdictional defect in the impugned order to his extent. Moreover, the said 
petitioner  also  has  a  remedy  before  the  learned  trial  court  to  move  an 
application  under  section  265-K  Cr.P.C.  for  redress  of  his  grievance; 
therefore, Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 is dismissed.   
82. 
 Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 is allowed, the impugned order to 
the extent of non-summoning respondents No.1 to 12 is held to be against 
law  as  the  sufficiency  of  material  available  on  file  has  not  been  properly 
appreciated,  thus  the  same  is  set-aside.  The  case  is  remanded  to  the  trial 
court    with  the  direction  that  it  is    duty  of  the  court,  during  proceedings 
under section 202 of the Code, to determine the falsehood or truthfulness of 
allegations  levelled  in  the  complaint  and  in  the  light  of  above  made 
observations,  the  court  may  hold  further  inquiry  into  the  matter  or  get  it 
investigated  through  any  person/agency  or  a  team  of  experts,  as  the 
investigation by police officers does not appear to be appropriate exercise 
for  the  reason  that  number  of  police  officers  are  involved  in  the  case  and 
have  already  been  summoned.  While  holding  so,  I  am  influenced  by  the 
judgement  “NOOR  MUHAMMAD  vs  THE  STATE,  etc”  (2007  SCMR  9), 
wherein, their lordships held that:-  
reasonable  doubt  and  at 
“The  burden  of  proof  in  a  preliminary  inquiry  for  the 
issuance  of  process  is  quite  lighter  on  the  complainant 
as  compared  to  the  burden  of  pro of  on  prosecution  at 
the  trial  of  an  offence  as  the  prosecution  is  to  prove 
the  case  beyond 
the 
preliminary  stage  the  complainant  is  not  required  to 
discharge  above  heavy  burden  of  proof.  The  Court 
cannot  overstretch  the  proceedings   as  to  convert  the 
preliminary  inquiry  or  the  averments  made  in  the 
complaint  to  a  stage  of  full -fledged  trial  of  the  case.  It 
is  quite  an  initial  stage  whereafter  the  accused  is 
having 
the  opportunity,  apart  from  showing  his 
70  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
innocence  in  the  case  at  the  final  stage,  to  have  a 
recourse  of  an  interm ediatory  rem edy  by  m oving  the 
Court  showing  the  com plaint  to  be  false  and  frivolous 
one  and  requesting  the  Court  for  his  acquittal  under 
section  249-A  or  265-K,  of  the  Code  prior  to  f urther 
proceeding  in  the  case  to  be  taken.  Mere  summ oning 
of  an  accused  by  the  Court  to  answer  the  charges 
levelled  against  him   does  not  tantam ount  to  any 
infringem ent  of  any  right  of  a  person  but  rather  an 
opportunity  afforded  to  him   to  explain  his  positi on. 
During  the  investigation  of  a  F.I.R.  case,  where  the 
police  is  empowered  to  arrest  without  warrant  i.e.,  in 
cognizable  case,  such  a  process  i.e.,  arrest  etc.  is 
resorted  to  by  the  police,  even  in  a  case  where  the 
person  accused  of  the  charge  pleads  inn ocence  before 
the  police  and  he  succeeds  in  his  efforts  to  some  extent 
and 
the  police  agrees  with  him,  yet  before  any 
recommendation  by  the  police  for  his  discharge  an 
insistence 
the 
authorities/Courts.  The  possibility  of  ac cusation 
turning  out  to  be  false  or  frivolous  at  the  trial  should 
not  overbear  the  Court  from  issuing  the  process  if  the 
material  available,  prima  facie  discloses  the  case 
against  the  accused.  At  this  stage  a  protracted  inquiry 
or  full  dress  rehearsal  of  t rial  is  not  required. ”  
[Emphasis added] 
is  made  on  his  surrender  before 
83. 
In  the  meanwhile,  to  avoid  complexity  and  multiplicity  of  the  trial, 
the  proceedings  of  the  case  to  the  extent  of  already  summoned  accused 
persons shall stand suspended till the conclusion of inquiry/investigation as 
already  directed. Afterwards, if the  remaining  persons  complained  against 
are summoned by the trial court, it shall hold denovo trial and if it does not 
find  sufficient  grounds 
to  proceed  against 
the  remaining  persons 
complained  against,  then  it  shall  proceed  against  the  already  summoned 
accused  persons  from  its  current  stage  and  decide  the  matter  strictly  in 
accordance with law. 
84.  Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  I  would  like  to  appreciate  the 
legal acumen  and  the  worth  exhibited by  the learned  counsel  representing 
the  petitioners  and  similarly  the  assistance  rendered  by  the  learned 
Prosecutor General, Additional Prosecutor General and the law officer has 
also  been  marvellous.  I  gratefully  acknowledge  the  material  assistance 
71  Criminal Revision No.9027/2017 “Muhammad Jawad Hamid v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc.” 
Criminal Revision No.7067/2017 “Mushtaq Ahmad Sukhera v. Judge ATC, etc.” 
 
rendered by Lahore High Court Research Centre (LHCRC) headed by Mr. 
Qaisar  Abbas.  Proper  and  comprehensive  assistance  of  all  above,  on 
different  and  somewhat  unique  multiple  questions  of  law,  helped  this 
Bench to analyse the law in its true perspective. 
  
(Muhammad Qasim Khan) 
Judge. 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
Javed* 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
1 
 
            Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
           Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
 
 
Muhammad Jawad Hamid 
    Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, etc. 
                                    
                                    JUDGMENT 
 
Rai  Bashir  Ahmad,  Muhammad  Azhar 
Siddique,  Mirza  Naveed  Baig,  S.  Parveen 
Mughal,  Naeem  ud  Din  Chaudhary, 
Abdullah  Malik,  Sardar  Ghazanfar  Hussain, 
Mr.  Adeel  Hassan  and  Syed  Umair  Abbas, 
Ch. Naeem ud Din Chaudhary, Advocates for 
the petitioner in Crl.Rev.No.9027/2017.  
Mr.  Azam  Nazir  Tarrar,  Advocate  for  the 
petitioner 
Revision 
No.7067/2017. 
Criminal 
in 
Syed  Ehtisham  Qadir,  Prosecutor  General 
Punjab  assisted  by  Mr.Muhammad  Amjad 
Rafiq,  Additional  Prosecutor  General  and 
Rai  Akhtar  Hussain,  Deputy  Prosecutor 
General on Court’s call. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Hammad  Khan  Rai, 
Assistant Advocate General. 
……………. 
Dates of hearing.  
19.04.2018,  23.04.2018,  25.04.2018,  11.05.2018, 
15.05.2018,16.05.2018,  17.05.2018,  21.05.2018, 
22.05.2018,  23.05.2018,  26.06.2018,  27.06.2018 
and 26.09.2018. 
Aalia  Neelum,  J.  By  this  revision  petition,  Muhammad 
Jawad  Hamid  (petitioner),  who  is  complainant  in  a  private 
complaint  titled,  "  Muhammad  Jawad  Hamid  versus  Mian 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
2 
 
Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif  etc."  filed  under  section  190(1)(a) 
of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1898  and  section 
19(3)  of  the  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997,  for  offences  under 
sections  302/324,  295-B/452,  395/427,  365/506,  120-B, 
148/149, 337-F(vi), 337-C, 337-F(iii), 337-A(v), 337-L(ii), 337-
F(i), 337-A(i) Pakistan Penal Code 1860 read with Section 7 of 
the  Anti-Terrorism  Act,  1997  and  section  155-C  of  Police 
Order,  2002  before  Special  Anti-Terrorism  Court,  Lahore, 
challenges  order 
to 
the  extent  of  non-summoning  of 
respondent  Nos.  1  to  12  passed  by  learned  Judge  ATC-II, 
Lahore dated 07-02-2017. 
2.  
 
The  incident  as  per  the  complaint  (Ex.PA)  took 
place on 16-06-2014 at 01:00 am (midnight) and continued till 
forenoon on 17-06-2014. The District administration of Lahore 
with  the  help  of  police  attempted  to  remove  the  alleged 
illegal  barriers/encroachments  on  public  roads  around 
Minhaj-ul-Quran Academy and its Secretariat in Model Town, 
Lahore,  resulting  in  clash  between  police  and  workers  of 
Pakistan 
Awami 
Tehreek. 
According 
to 
the 
petitioner/complainant,  10  persons  lost  their  lives,  whereas, 
66 
persons 
sustained 
injuries. 
Thereafter, 
the 
petitioner/complainant  went  to  the  Police  Station  Faisal 
Town,  Lahore  and  lodged  a  complaint,  orally.  But  police 
refused  to  lodge  the  FIR.  Rather,  on  the  basis  of  false  and 
concocted story, on the complaint of SHO of the police station 
Faisal  Town,  Lahore  a  case  FIR  No.  510  of  2014 
(Ex.PMMMMMM/1-3)  was  registered  on  17-06-2014,  for 
offences  under  sections  302/34,  324/353,  186/148,  149/290, 
291/427,  506/B,  109  Pakistan  Penal  Code  (Act  XLV  of  1860) 
read  with  Section  7  of  the  ATA  and  under  section  13/20/65 
under  Arms  Ordinance,  1965,  at  police  station  Faisal  Town, 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
3 
 
Lahore against 52 nominated and unknown accused persons, 
who are office bearers and workers of Idara Minhaj-ul-Quran 
and  Pakistan  Awami  Tehreek.  After 
the 
investigation 
conducted  by  JIT,  report  was  filed  against  42  civilians  and 
seven 
police 
officers/officials. 
Meanwhile, 
the 
petitioner/complainant  moved  an  application  under  section 
22-A,  22-B  of  Cr.P.C  (Ex.PNNNNNN/1-7),  for  registration  of 
the second FIR  as per  version of the petitioner/complainant, 
before learned Ex-officio Justice of Peace/ASJ, Lahore on 04-
07-2014.  Vide  order  dated  16-08-2014  (Ex.POOOOOO/4-4) 
learned  Ex-officio  Justice  of  Peace/ASJ,  Lahore  accepted  the 
application  under  section  22-A,  22-B  of  Cr.P.C  and  directed 
to the concerned police to register the FIR on the application 
of the petitioner and then to proceed with investigation under 
the law. The order supra  was  assailed through  constitutional 
petition  No.  22661  of  2014  before  this  Court  by  respondent 
No.  7  etc.,  dismissed  by  this  court  vide  order  dated  26-08-
2014  (Ex.PPPPPPP/1-4).  Thereafter,  FIR  No.  696  of  2014 
(Ex.PQQQQQQ/1-4)  was  registered  on  28-08-2014  and  JIT 
was  constituted  by  the  I.G  Punjab  Mushtaq  Sukhera  to  carry 
out the investigation of the case registered at the petitioner's 
stance.  But  the  members  of  the  JIT  carried  out  dishonest 
investigation of the case because of the nomination of Prime 
Minister  of  Pakistan,  Chief  Minister  Punjab,  Federal  and 
Provincial  Ministers  and  high  ranked  police  officials  being 
accused.  The  JIT  challaned  only  two  police  officials  and  no 
action was taken with regard to principal accused nominated 
in  FIR  No.  696  of  2014  (Ex.PQQQQQQ/1-4).  The  registration 
of  FIR  No.  696  of  2014  was  result  of  sit-in  made  by  Dr. 
Muhammad  Tahir-ul-Qadri.  As  a  result  of  sit-in  and 
negotiation 
the 
government 
promised  with 
the 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
4 
 
petitioner/complainant  and  participants  of  sit-in  that  the 
neutral  JIT  will  be  formed  with  the  consensus.  But  the 
government resiled from its commitment and appointed their 
favorite  officer,  who  earlier  had  earlier  served  under  the 
subordination  at  Gujranwala  and  Lahore,  to  get  favorable 
report.  Thereafter,  Pakistan  Awami  Tehreek  got  registered 
their  protest,  but  the  government  did  not  provide  justice. 
Then, the petitioner/complainant through letter dated 28-12-
2014 asked the I.G Punjab for constitution of neutral JIT, same 
was  ignored.  Till  the  date  of  filing  private  complaint,  the 
petitioner/complainant was trying to get the report of judicial 
commission  through  legal  process,  but  could  not  get  the 
same. Hence, private complaint.  
3.  
 
After  recording  cursory  evidence,  vide  order 
dated  07.02.2017  the  accused-respondent  Nos.13  to  138  in  a 
private complaint were summoned and are facing trial before 
the  ATC,  Lahore.  Vide  the  same  order  dated  07.02.2017  the 
learned  trial  court  opined  that  there  was  no  evidence  to 
prove  prima  facie  case  against  respondent  Nos.1  to  12,  as 
such,  they  were  not  summoned  and  their  names  were 
ordered  to  be  deleted  being  respondent  Nos.  1  to  12  in  the 
private  complaint.  The  impugned  order  dated  07.02.2017  to 
the  extent  of  non-summoning  of  respondent  Nos.1  to  12  is 
under  challenge  by  the  petitioner/complainant  through  the 
instant criminal revision. 
4.  
 
We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  and  learned  Prosecutor  General  Punjab  at  length. 
We  have  also  gone  through  the  record  annexed  with  this 
petition  and  the  copies  of  relevant  documents  from  both 
criminal  cases  pending  on  the  file  of  Special  Judge  Anti-
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
5 
 
Terrorism,  Lahore  placed  on  the  record  by  the  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioner  through  criminal  miscellaneous 
petitions. 
5.  
 
It  is  an  admitted  position  that  FIR  No.  510  of  2014 
(Ex.PMMMMMM/1-3) was registered on 17-06-2014 at Police 
Station Faisal Town, Lahore on the complaint of Rizwan Qadir 
Hashmi,  Inspector/SHO,  police  station  Faisal  Town,  Lahore. 
As per contents of FIR  No. 510 of 2014 till lodging of the FIR 
seven  (07)  persons  lost  their  lives  and  100  persons  sustain 
injuries.  Whereas, 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
written 
complaint/application  dated  19-06-2014  (receipt  of  receiving 
application 
through  dairy  No.  657-5B-FT/19-06-2014  and 
application were placed on the record through C.M. No. 829 of 
2018  at  pages  Nos.  392-A  and  392-B  available  in  volume  No. 
11)  of  the  petitioner/complainant  the  criminal  case  FIR  No. 
696/14,  was  registered  with  Police  Station  Faisal  Town, 
Lahore  on  28-08-2014  and  private  complaint  was  lodged  on 
16-03-2016. 
It 
is 
also 
admitted 
fact 
that 
the 
petitioner/complainant  boycott  the  investigations  conducted 
by two JITs constituted by the government in above said both 
cases.  The  private 
complaint  was 
filed  by 
the 
petitioner/complainant with delay of 21 months from the date 
of occurrence i.e.16/17-06-2014, and finally with delay of six 
months  and  19  days  from  the  date  of  first  submission  of  the 
report  under  section  173  Cr.P.C  in  case  FIR  No.  696/2014 
i.e.27-06-2015. 
6.  
 
Suffice  it  to  point  out  here  that  after  submission  of 
reports under section 173 of Cr.P.C in FIR No. 510 of 2014 till 
14-03-2016  evidence  of  40  prosecution  witnesses  was 
recorded  by 
the 
learned 
trial  court.  Similarly,  after 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
6 
 
submission of reports under section 173 of Cr.P.C in FIR No. 
696  of  2014  till  14-03-2016  evidence  of  21  prosecution 
witnesses  was  recorded  by  the  learned  trial  court  and  the 
cross-examination  upon  the  witnesses  was  reserved  on  the 
request of the defence counsel (appointed by court) and case 
was  adjourned  to  15-03-2016.  Thereafter,  on  15-03-2016,  the 
petitioner/complainant filed a private complaint in the Court 
of  Special  Judge  Anti-Terrorism,  Lahore.  In  this  private 
complaint, 
the  petitioner/complainant  nominated  139 
accused persons, whereas, in FIR No. 696 of 2014 nominated 
23  accused  persons.  In  addition,  the  petitioner/complainant 
has  mentioned  total  number  of  injured  persons  as  66, 
whereas  in  FIR  No.  696  of  2014  mentioned  53  persons  as 
injured persons.  
7.     
Before  proceeding  further  we  may  observe  here 
that  we  are  considering  the  case  only  to  the  extent  of 
respondent  Nos.  1  to  12.  According  to  story/roles  in  the 
private complaint related to respondent Nos. 1 to 12 is/are as 
follows:- 
 
PARA No.8
 کو
 
2014
23 نجو
خہرمو میں نسنفرکا یسپر نے یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ سے اکینیڈ کو ء
2014
11 
 نجو
 کہ یہ
 سکتی اوکر بھی یدگر ہشتد متحکو کہ کیا بھی رظہاا کا تشاخد نا میں نسنفرکا یسپر روا یاد کر نعلاا کا مدآ نکستاپا
  Public FIR 
ہی تھسا نے یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ۔ہیں ستپرسر کے
 ںودگر ہشتد ناحکمر کہ ںکیو ہے
 ،زشہبا  ہحمز  ،بپنجا علیٰا  یرزو یفشر  زشہبا  ،عظما  یرزو یفشر  زانوتو  اہو  ننقصا  نیجا  ئیکو  ارہما  گرا کہ  کیا  نعلاا  کا
 
 شیدر  یزوپر  ،ےیلور  یر
زو  قیفاو فیقر سعد  جہاخو  ،عفاد  یرزو  قیفاو صفآ جہاخو  ،خلہاد  یرزو  قیفاو علی  رنثا  یرہدچو
 ںہو  راد  مہذ تیابلد  و  ننوقا  یرزو  ئیباصو  للہا  ءثنا  ناار  روا بجلی  و  نیپا  یرزو  قیفاو علی شیر  بدعا  ،تعاطلاا  یرزو  قیفاو
 کے ت ارخباا روا یزڈ سی کی شنرپو متعلقہ(۔ہے
 پیشگی یہ کہ کیا نعلاا بھی یہ نے یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ نیز۔گے
FIR 
 ،زاوآ مہنازور  ،
 مئی2014
 خہرمو تبا نئی مہنازور  ،
10 
3 مئی2014
 خہرمو   ناح مہنازور 
بتفصیل شےاتر
 مہنازور  ،یسیکسپرا  مہنازور  ،قتو  مہنازور  ،تبا  نئی  مہنازور  ،جنگ  مہنازور  ،نکستاپا  نجہا  مہنازور  ،نیاد  مہنازور
 
 لف نجو
 خہرمو قتو ئےانو
 مہنازور ،
16 
2014
12 
 نجو
 خہرمو جملہ نکستاپا مہنازور ،زنیو ید مہنازور، ناح
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
7 
 
)۔ہیں 
 
PARA No.09
 تیابلد و ننوقا یرزو ئیباصو للہا ءثنا ناار میں باجو کے نعلاالابا ہکرمتذ کے فصومو یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ کہ یہ
 کا نا
 تو گے ئیںآ نکستاپا یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ کہکہا ئےہو یتےد باجو نے فیقر سعد جہاخو ےیلوریرزو قیفاو روا
 کے تارخباا روا شنرپو متعلقہ کے یزڈ سی(ہے لی کر رتیا
 ‘‘
نیھو
د
’’
 نے ںنہوا کہ کہا بھی یہ روا گے یںد لنکا
’’جِن ‘‘
 نجہا  مہنازور  ،
2014
  نجو  یکم  خہرمو  فصاوا  مہنازور،
2014
5 
  مئی
  خہرمو  ند  مہنازور بتفصیل شےاتر
 نجہا  مہنازور  ،
  نجو
یکسپرا  مہنازور  ،قلشرا  مہنازور  ،
  نجو
خہرمو  نکستاپا
2014
خہرمو  یس3 
2014
2 
 خہرمو زاوآ مہنازور ،
 نجو
خہرمو ںنوود فصاوا مہنازور و یسیکسپرا مہنازور،نجو
2014
9
خہرمو نکستاپا
6 
 
)۔ہیں لف 
2014
 نجو
19 
 
 
 
PARA NO. 10
 ئےار
  ہعمر تیجا مبمقا تقاملا ہمیبا کی یفشر  زشہبا ںمیا  روا یفشر  زانو محمد ںمیا کو
2014
15-06-
 کہ یہ
 یںخبر کی جن۔گئی کی یبند بہمنصو پر عضومو کے مدآ نکستاپا کی یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ میں جس ئیہو  رہولا  ، نڈو
 خہرمو یسیکسپرا مہنازور بتفصیل شےاتر کے تارخباا(۔ئیںہو ئعشا پر رطو ہعدقابا میں یامیڈ نٹپر روا نکولیکٹرا
)۔ہیں لف 
 
2014
16 جو ن
 خہرمو قتو ئےانو مہنازور ،
2014
 نجو
15 
 
 
PARA NO. 11
 یرزو نفو یعہربذ  کو
PAT
 لجنر  یٹرسیکررپو  ہگنڈ  زانو  مخر مسٹرپہرود قبلکو
 
2014
15-06-
خہرمو کہ  یہ
 روا نکستاپا متحکو میں سلسلہ کےمدآ نکستاپا کی یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ کہ ئیہو لصومو عطلاا سے یٹٹرسیکر علیٰا
۔ئیںبنا یقینی گیدجومو پنیا میں رہولا روا ہیںر ہگاآ ہو الہٰذ ہے ہتیچا
ناکر میٹنگ ہما یکا بپنجا متحکو
 
 
 
 
PARA NO. 12
 سا جورپو ہگنڈ زانو مخر میں جس گئی ئیابھجو یڑگا یکا سے سؤہا منسٹر چیف بمغر زنما زا بعد نجو
 خہرمو کہ یہ
15 
 ید  و تھے  یٹرسیکر لجنر 
 کے
PAT
 بپنجا قتو سا  جو ئچاڑو حمدا ضفیا  ہاہمر تھے
 
PAT
 لجنر یٹرسیکر قتو
 لڈما کبلا ،
مبمقا ٹھیکو یکا کر ہو راسو نآلقرا جمنہا علیٰا ظمنا ئبنا وفیسرآ ٹیر و 
 چیف نیگیلا حسین فلطاا
س
یک  ی
H
 کٹراڈ ،زشہبا ہحمز ںمیا ،بپنجا علیٰا یرزو یفشر زشہبا ںمیا ،نکستاپا عظما یرزو یفشر زانو محمد ںمیا ںجہا پہنچے نؤٹا
 شیدر یزوپر  ،صفآ محمد جہاخو،فیقر سعد جہاخو  ،للہا  ءثنا  ناار  ،ںخا علی  رنثا یرہدچو  ،
CM
 یٹرسیکر 
سنلپر  ہشا قیرتو
 محمد کٹراڈ نے یفشر زشہبا محمد ںمیا روا یفشر زانو محمد ںمیا بعد کے گفتگو سمیر مختصر ۔تھے دجومو علی شیر بدعا روا
 کٹراڈ کہ کہا سے ںگولو  ہرکومذ کے
 
PAT
 بعد کے با
جو یقیتصد روا فتیارد میں ےربا کے مدآ کی یردلقااہرطا
 کی نا  کر کہہ  کو حبصا کٹراڈ  کہ ہے حکم  یہ  ارہما  الہذ  گی ئےجا  ہو  ہپیچید  یدمزفضا سیسیا ملکی سے نےآ کے حبصا
 ہے 
چکا ہو فیصلہ حتمی کامدآ نکستاپا کی ممحتر ئدقا کہکہا نے رپو اگنڈ زانو مخر پر جس ۔ئیںاکور رطوبہر کو مدآ نکستاپا
ُ
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
8 
 
 
 کھر کر کچل کو یکتحر ہر کی نا ہم کہ کہا روا گئےآ میں طیش زشہبا ہحمز روا یفشر زشہبا محمد ،یفشر زانو محمد پر جس
 میں ستےار سا جو ہے ید بنا کمیٹی یکا مشتمل پر علی رنثا یرہدچو روا فیقر سعد جہاخو  ، للہا  ءثنا ناار نے ہم۔گے یںد
 شیر بدعا۔نتےما نہیں سے ںتوبا تبھو کے ںتولا کہ کہا نے شیدر یزوپر۔گے یںد
کر نہس تہس کو ٹوکار ہر لیاو نےآ
 
 لینے خبر کی لمحہ لمحہ متعلق کے تسکنا و تکاحر کی یردلقاا ہرطا کٹراڈ کہکہا کر آ میں غصے نے صفآ محمد جہاخو روا علی
 کچلنے کے سا تو چلی یکتحر ئیکو گرا۔گی ہےر
پہنچتی سؤہا منسٹر ئماپر خبر کی لمحہ یکا یکا جو ہے لیا کر منتظاا متعلق کے
 
 یہ  کا  نعلیہا  مالزا۔گے  یںد  کر ختم ٹوکار  ہر  لیاو نےآ میں ستےار  روا گے ئیںٹھاا  مقد  کر  مل سب  ہم لیے کے
۔ئےآ ٹھا سے ںہاو تھیسا کے نا روا رپو ہگنڈ زانو مخر کر یکھد یہور لمعقونا
 
 
 
PARA NO. 13
 
 یکا میں یٹٹرسیکر لسو تراصد  یرز کی تیابلد  و ننوقا  یرزو للہا  ءثنا  ناارکو
 
2014
16-06-
خہرمو کہ  یہ
 شدار  ،یٹرسیکر  مہو نسلیما عظما  )ر( میجر  ،علیٰا یرزو  ٹو یٹرسیکر سنلپر  ہشا قیرتو ید میں جساہو سجلاا صیخصو
 وا یما ٹی سعبا علی،رہولا نؤٹا لڈما سی ےا یونڈچا رمنظو
 قرطا  ،رہولا  وا سی یڈ نعثما محمد  ،رہولا کمشنر لیالنگڑ  دمحمو
 کر مل نے نماملز متما نا میں جس ۔ئےہو ملشا نایگرد روا  رہولا یشنزپرآ
DIG
  رلجبااعبد  ناار  ،رہولا نؤٹا لڈما
 ج
منہا  ہرادا لیے کے تکمیل  کی فیصلے  ہکرمتذ کے  ءارزو  یگرد  و یفشر  زشہبا  ،یفشر  زانو  کہ  کیا فیصلہ  کا تبا  سا
 سےا بنے ٹوکار شخص بھی جو میں ئیاوررکا سا روا ئےجا لابو اوھاد نےبہا کے نےہٹا کو ںٹووکار دگر درا کے نآلقرا
 دمحمو  شدار  ،نسلیما عظما  ڈئریٹار میجر  ،ہشا  قیرتو  ید  ،  للہا  ءثنا  ناار 
ًادفر 
ًادفر  فاعترا  کا  مرا  سا۔ئےجا  یاد  کر  ختم
 کنیر  یکوبرور  تنابیا  پنےا  نے  جی  ئیآ  یڈ  رلجبااعبد  ناار  روا  نعثما  محمد  ،س
عبا  علی  ،یونڈچا  رمنظو  قرطا  ،لیالنگڑ
 محمد لدو یرہدچو حسین بمحبو ۔
نمسمیا کو جس ۔کیا میں تھا مشتمل پر حبصا جج کے ٹرکو ئیہا جو نلبیوٹر یئرانکوا
1
۔سنا ئیاوررکا نارود نےشیدلراعبد لدو شکیل محمد ۔
 
شفیع2 
 
 
PARA NO. 40
 پنےا نے
SHO 
  ر  ید میں  نؤٹا صل ٹ   فتھا  مہدمہ ی مقا ئےابر  عطلاا  نیباز  کی   کعہو نے 
مستغیث من کہ  یہ
 جرد مہدمہ فخلا کے تشخصیا سیسیا روا نافسرا لیسپو یگرد  روا پنےا ئےہو تےکر بجتناا سے ئضافر یرکاسر
 ئیآ ۔ یفا کر بنا نیکہا تگھڑ
من روا ٹیجھو یکا ئےہو تےکر زوتجا سے منصبی ئضافر پنےا روا یاد کر رنکاا سے نےکر
 
۔ہے اہذ لف ئیابتدا ٹرپور نقل ۔لی کر جرد میں نؤٹا صل ٹ  فتھا
 
510/14
 نمبررآ۔
 
 
PARA NO. 47
 ما و علیٰا یعہربذ پر ءیماا کی ءارزو ہرکومذ روا بپنجا علیٰا یرزو روا نکستاپا عظما یرزو یفشر زانو محمد ںمیا اہذ  کعہو کہ یہ
 
۔اہو یریر مام ا اہذ  ہغاثہا جہر
مند نافسرا لیسپو تحت
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
9 
 
8.     
Whereas,  the  story/roles  attributed  to  respondent 
Nos.  1  to  12  in  the  state  case  registered  as  FIR  No.  696  of 
2014, on the basis of written complaint/application dated 19-
06-2014, 
which 
was 
duly 
signed 
by 
the 
petitioner/complainant  and  received  through  dairy  No.  657-
5B-FT/19-06-2014  in  the  police  station  Faisal  Town,  Lahore, 
are reproduced in verbatim as under:-  
16/17 
 نیمیارد شب بطہضا ئیاورکا و مہدمہ جارندا ئےابر ستاخورد رہولا نؤٹا صل ٹ  فتھا حبصا
SHO 
 حمدا  زممتا  لدو  نیارنو  ءضیا لطیف محمد  روا فشرا محمد  لدو  رقاو محمد فظحا معہ میں تار بجے
 یبقر1 
 
2014
  نجو
 ہربا کر ن  زاوآ کی رور تھا دجومو ر
ہولا نؤٹا لڈما کبلا یما
 
365
 مبمقا نآلقرا جمنہا یکتحر یٹٹرسیکر یکزمر
 کٹراڈ یکتحر ئدقا تھسا کے ںکوٹر رڈلو روا ینکر ،زرزوبلڈ ، تشیںآ سلحہا مسلح ینفر یربھا کی لیسپو کہ یکھاد تو نکلے
 یشنپرآ
رلجبااعبد  ناار  ہو کہ چلا پتہ تو پہنچے ںہاو ہم ہیں ہےر ہو کٹھےا  دگردرا کے گھر کے یردلقاا ہرطا محمد
DIG 
 روا ئیربیر کے سیمنٹ ئےہو کھےر منےسا  روا فاطرا کی گھر میں تدقیا کی نؤٹا لڈما
 یزعز قرطا  روا  رہو
SP 
لا
 ہیڈ
  ہوعلا  کے
SP 
TMO 
  نؤٹا  لڈما
  ہاہمر  کے جن
AC 
 
۔ہیں  ئےآ لیے کے  نےٹھاا/نےڑتو جنگلے  ہنیآ
 نشتر
SHO 
 ققا 
SHO نسپکٹرا ہنہکا
نسلما ٹیرسیکو
SP 
چیمہ عمر ئنلا لسو
ہلہاو رصفد فومصر زٹرراکو
SP 
 ظتیحفا سب  یہ کہ  یابتلا جنہیں تھے  دجومو بھی نافسرا لیسپو سینئر  ممعلونا  دمتعد  ہوعلا کے نعثما مجید حمدا نؤٹا
 نے یشنپرآ
 باًاجو
 ہے سکتا جا بھی یاکھاد جو تھے گئے کیے سے حکم کے لیسپو روا لیہعد قبل لسا
DIG 
 تمانتظاا
4 
 کا ناندخا یردقا کہ ہے یاآ حکم سخت سے فطر کی للہا ءثنا ناار روا یفشر زشہبا ںمیا بپنجا علیٰا یرزو ہمیں کہ کہا
 یما
 
328
نخا حمدا ںمیا لدو لقباا یدوجا ںمیا پر یلاواو رور ےرہما۔یںپڑ لینا نیںجا بھی جتنی ہاخو ود مٹا ننشا و منا
 ، گلو ےرسا فیکا  ہوعلا کےیرنذ محمد جہار لدو یمند محمد جہار  روا،نؤٹا لڈما یما
 
307
حمدا  زممتا ںمیا  ،نؤٹا لڈما
------------------------------------------------
۔گئے ہو جمع دافرا کے یامیڈ
 کی ملک نے یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ یکتحر ئدقا کہ ہے یہ دعنا جہو
 
---------------------------
 کےجہد وجد کی ذنفا ئینیآ کے جسکیا نعلاا کا ےیجنڈا تینکا
 لیے کے  فلا کی ماعو ممظلو روا
10 
 
بس بے ، یبغر
 روا گئے ہو  رشکا  کا ہٹکھلابو ناحکمر لمظا سے جس۔کیا نعلاا  کا مدآ نکستاپا  کو
 
2014
23 ن جو
 لیے کے  زغاآ
 نےآ نکستاپا کو یکتحر ئدقا کے کر ںسا
اہر روا قتل کو نکنارکا ےرہما سے ںنوبہا ںحیلو مختلف پر ءبنا کی سیاحوبد
 محمد ںمیا ،یفشر زانو محمد ںمیا تحت کے بےمنصو سمجھے چےسو یکا یہ۔ہے یاد 
ج
 ضحاو کا ئجنتا کنا خطر پہلے سے
س  یم
 یرہدچو  روا علی شیر بدعا  ،شیدر یزوپر  ،صفآ محمد جہاخو  ،فیقر سعد جہاخو  ،للہا  ءثنا  ناار  ، یفشر  ہحمز  ،یفشرزشہبا
 حکم  کا نےکر نہس تہس  کو نآلقرا جمنہا  ہرادا  روا  ہگا ش ہار کی یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ  کو نافسرا لیس
پو نےرنثا
 روا نےکر خمیز  کو ںگولو  ،ترغا  و قتل سا  ہو۔اہو بقمطا کے یٹمینڈ ئےہو یےد کے نا  کعہو  متما  یہ  روایاد
 یدشنوخو کی نا پر  ءیماا کی ںنواحکمر نا
 نے لیسپو۔ہیں یکشر کے برابر میں مجر کے نےپہنچا ننقصا کو کملاا
--------------------
۔ہے ید تعود کو غضب کے اخد کر کھیل سے ںنوجا ممعصو یبغر لیے کے
 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
10 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
 ںنواحکمر
 
--------------------------------------------
------------
 تحفظ معد  روا گئی پھیل ہشتد  روا ساہر  و فخو میں بھر قہعلا سے یدگر ہشتد ستییار سا کی لیسپوپر  ءیماا کی
 لیے 
کے شیپو  ہدپر پر ئماجر نا پر کہنے کے للہا  ءثنا  ناار  روا یفشر  زشہبا ںمیا  ۔ٹھیا بلبلا ماعو  رشکا  کا سحساا کے
 ارسا یہ۔ہے مبنی پر مجر یکا  دخو تابذ جو  ۔ئیاوکر جرد  رہولا نؤٹا صل ٹ  فتھا
 FIR 
ٹیجھو یکا فخلا ےرہما
 ، صفآ محمد جہاخو  ،فیقر سعد جہاخو  ،للہا  ءثنا  ناار  ،زشہبا  ہحمز  ، یفشرزشہبا محمد ںمیا  ،یفشر  زانو محمد  ںمیا قعہاو
 نماملز جملہ کہ ہے عاستدا میں شنیور کی لابا جہرمند تلاحا ۔اہو پر یماا کی
  رنثا یرہدچو روا علی شیر بدعا ، شیدر یزوپر
 نا ئےہو تےکر ےرپو ضےتقا کے فنصاا کے کر رفتاگر کو نماملز روا کے کر جرد مہدمہ بطہضا حسب فخلا کے
۔.ئےجا ید اسز قعیاو راقر کو
 
9.  
 
The 
story/roles, 
as 
described 
by 
the 
petitioner/complainant  in  the  private  complaint,  is  certainly 
not identical with the story as put up by the prosecution in the 
state  case  i.e.  FIR  No.  696/14.  For  the  purpose  of  present 
revision  petition,  it  is  necessary  to  take  a  note  of  the  roles 
attributed  to  the  respondent  Nos.  1  to  12,  in  the  private 
complaint,  much  different  than  the  state  case.  No  doubt 
private complaint is based on the same incident taken place 
at midnight between 16-06-2014 and 17-06-2014 till forenoon 
on  17-06-2014  (as  per  FIR  No.  696  of  2014  till  10/11  a.m.  on 
17-06-2014).  The  major  details  regarding  the  prosecution 
story to the extent of the roles of respondent Nos. 1 to 12, as 
mentioned  in the private complaint and state case are given 
above,  for  the  purpose  of  decision  of  present  revision 
petition.  
10.    
We have observed that in the State case i.e. FIR No. 
696  of  2014  dated  28-08-2014  the  petitioner/complainant 
impleaded respondent Nos. 1 to 9 as accused but no specific 
role  was  attributed  to  them,  whereas,  respondents  No.  10  to 
12  were  not  impleaded  as  accused. In  the  private  complaint 
respondent  Nos.  10  to  12  have  been  impleaded.  That  has 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
11 
 
been  so,  because  the  petitioner/complainant  with  some 
motive has introduced entirely a new story at the time of the 
filing of the private complaint.  
11.     
The other addition/difference is that in paragraphs 
Nos,  10,  11,  12  and  13  of  the  private  complaint,  some 
additional  allegations  have  been  levelled  in  continuation  of 
the  attempt  to  connect  the  respondent  Nos.  1  to  12  with  the 
incident.  The  learned  Judge  Anti  Terrorism  Court  recorded 
the  cursory  evidence  of 
four  witnesses 
i.e. 
the 
complainant/petitioner  (CW-1),  Muhammad  Shakeel  (CW-
18),  Fiaz  Ahmad  Warriach  (CW-25)  and  Khurram  Nawaz 
Gandapur (CW-56), in this regard under section 200 and 202 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.  
12.    
The  object  of  an  inquiry  under  section  202  of  the 
Code of Criminal Procedure is to ensure that no person shall 
be compelled to answer a criminal charge unless the Court is 
satisfied  that  there  is  a  prima  facie  case  against  him/them. 
The law as  to the  scope and extent of enquiry  under  section 
202  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  is  well  established 
and same is limited to finding out the truth or otherwise of the 
complaint  in  order  to  determine  whether  process  should  be 
issued  or  not. Whereas, section  203  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 
Procedure lays down what materials are to be considered for 
the  said  purpose.?  According  to  Section  203  of  the  Code  of 
Criminal  Procedure,  if,  after  considering  the  statements  on 
oath  (if  any)  of  the  complainant  and  of  the  witness  (es)  and 
the result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under Section 
202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the Court is of opinion 
that  there  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  proceeding,  he  shall 
dismiss the complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
12 
 
record his reasons for so doing. If, on the contrary, the Court 
taking cognizance of the offence is of the opinion that there is 
sufficient  cause  for  proceeding,  he  should  issue  process 
against  the  accused  in  accordance  with  Section  204  of  the 
Code.  It  may  be  that  the  evidence  which  is  required  to  be 
adduced  by  the  complainant  at  that  stage  may  not  be 
sufficient to record a finding of conviction, but that fact would 
not  absolve  the  complainant  who  wants  Court  to  issue  a 
process  against  the  accused  person  from  leading  some 
credible  evidence  as  may  “prima 
facie”  show 
the 
commission of the offence.  
13.    
 For ready reference section 200, 202, 203 and 204 
of Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 are reproduced below: 
Section 200 in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  
 
200.   Examination  of  complainant.  A  Magistrate 
taking  cognizance  of  an  offence  on  complaint 
shall  at  once  examine  the  complainant  upon 
oath,  and  the  substance  of  the  examination 
shall  be  reduced  to  writing  and  shall  be 
signed  by  the  complainant,  and  also  by  the 
Magistrate:  
Provided as follows:  
(a)  when  the  complaint  is  made  in  writing 
nothing  herein  contained  shall  be  deemed  to 
require a Magistrate to examine the complaint 
before transferring the case under section 192 
or sending it to the Court of Sessions.  
(aa)  when  the  complaint  is  made  in  writing 
nothing  herein  contained  shall  be  deemed  to 
require  the  examination  of  a  complainant  in 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
13 
 
any  case  in  which  the  complainant  has  been 
made by a Court or by a public servant acting 
or  purporting  to  act  in  the  discharge  of  his 
official duties:  
(b) * * * * *  
(c)  when the case has been transferred under 
section 192 and the Magistrate so transferring 
it  has  already  examined  the  complainant, 
Magistrate  to  whom  it  is  so  transferred  shall 
not be bound to re-examine the complainant.  
 
Section 202 in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  
 
202.   Postponement  of  issue  of  process.  (1)  Any 
Court,  on  receipt  of  a  complaint  of  an  offence 
of which it is authorized to take cognizance, or 
which  has  been  sent  to  it  under  Section  190, 
sub-section  (3),  or  transferred  to  it  under 
Section 191 or Section 192, may, if it thinks fit, 
for reasons to be recorded postpone the issue 
of  process  for  compelling  the  attendance  of 
the  person  complained  against,  and  either 
inquire into the case itself or direct an inquiry 
or  investigation  to  be  made  by  any  Justice  of 
the  Peace  or  by  a  police  officer  or  by  such 
other person as it thinks fit, for the purpose of 
ascertaining  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the 
complaint.  
Provided  that,  save  where  the  complaint  has 
been made by a Court, no such direction shall 
be  made  unless  the  complainant  has  been 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
14 
 
examined  on  oath  under  the  provisions  of 
Section 200.  
(2)  A  Court  of  Session  may, 
instead  of 
directing an investigation under the provisions 
of  sub-section  (1),  direct  the  investigation  to 
be  made  by  any  Magistrate  subordinate  to  it 
for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  truth  or 
falsehood of the complaint.  
(3)  If  any  inquiry  or  investigation  under  this 
section  is  made  by  a  person  not  being  a 
Magistrate  or  Justice  of  the  Peace  or  a  police-
officer,  such  person  shall  exercise  all  the 
powers  conferred  by  this  Code  on  an  officer-
in-charge  of  a  police-station,  except  that  he 
shall not have power to arrest without warrant.  
(4)  Any  Court  inquiring  into  a  case  under  this 
section  may,  if  it  thinks  fit,  take  evidence  of 
witnesses on oath.  
Section 203 in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  
 
203.   Dismissal of complaint. The Court before whom 
a  complaint  is  made  or  to  whom  it  has  been 
transferred or sent  may dismiss the complaint, 
if,  after  considering  the  statement  on  oath  (if 
any)  of  the  complainant  and  the  result  of  the 
investigation  or  inquiry  if  any  under  section 
202  there  is  in  his  judgment  no  sufficient 
ground  for  proceeding.  In  such  case  he  shall 
briefly record his reasons for so doing. 
Section 204 in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  
 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
15 
 
204.   Issue of process. (1) If in the opinion of a Court 
taking  cognizance  of  an  offence 
there 
is 
sufficient  ground  for  proceeding  and  the  case 
appears  to  be  one  in  which,  according  to  the 
fourth  column  of 
the  second  schedule  a 
summons  should  issue  in  the  first  instance,  it 
shall  issue  its  summons  for  the  attendance  of 
the  accused.  If  the  case  appears  to  be  one  in 
which,  according  to  that  column,  a  warrant 
should issue in the first instance, it may issue a 
warrant,  or,  if,  it  thinks  fit,  a  summons  for 
causing the accused to be brought or to appear 
at  a  certain  time  before  such  Court  or  if  it  has 
no  jurisdiction  itself  some  other  Court  having 
jurisdiction.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to 
affect the provision of section 90.  
(3)  When  by  any  law  for  the  time  being  in 
force  any  process-fees  or  other  fees  are 
payable,  no  process  shall  be  issued  until  the 
fees  are  paid,  and,  if  such  fees  are  not  paid 
within  a  reasonable  time,  the  Court  may 
dismiss the complaint.  
14.    
The scope of inquiry under section 202 of the Code 
of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898  is  extremely  limited  only  to 
ascertain the truth or falsehood of the allegations made in the 
complaint on the materials placed by the complainant before 
the  Court  for  the  limited  purpose  of  finding  out  whether  a 
prima facie case for issue of process has been made out. It is 
true  that  in  coming  to  a  decision  as  to  whether  a  process 
should  be  issued  the  court  can  take  into  consideration 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
16 
 
inherent  improbabilities  appearing  on  the  face  of  the 
complaint  or  in  the  evidence  led  by  the  complainant  in 
support of the allegations but there appears to be a very thin 
line  of  demarcation  between  a  probability  of  conviction  of 
the  accused  and establishment  of  a prima  facie  case  against 
him/them.  The  Court  has  been  given  an  undoubted 
discretion in the matter but the discretion has to be judicially 
exercised  by  him.  Once  the  Court  has  exercised  his 
discretion  it  is  not  for  the  this  Court,  to  substitute  its  own 
discretion  for  that  of  the  Court  or  to  examine  the  case  on 
merits with a view to find out whether or not the allegations in 
the  complaint,  if  proved,  would  ultimately  end  in  conviction 
of the accused. However, it is clear that to decide whether a 
process  should  or  should  not  be  issued,  the  Court  has  to 
consider  whether  the  complaint  discloses  all  the  essential 
ingredients  of  an  offence.  If  the  complaint  does  not  disclose 
any  essential  ingredient  of  the  offence,  that  will  be  a  case 
where the complaint, taken on its face value, does not make 
out any case for issue of a process.  
15.    
Before  proceeding 
further 
it 
is  necessary 
to 
reproduce for ready reference sections 107, 109, 120-A, 120-
B, 503 and 506 of Pakistan Penal Code 1860 below: 
Sec.107 PPC  
107. Abetment of a thing. A person abets the doing of a 
thing, who: 
 
First.  
Instigates  any  person  to  do  that  thing; 
or 
  
 
Secondly.  Engages  with  one  or  more  other 
person  or  persons  in  any  conspiracy 
for  the  doing  of  that  thing,  if  an  act  or 
illegal  omission 
takes  place 
in 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
17 
 
pursuance  of  that  conspiracy,  and  in 
order to the doing of that thing; or  
Thirdly.  
Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal 
omission, the doing of that thing.  
Explanation 1.  A  person  who,  by  willful 
misrepresentation, 
or  by  willful 
concealment  of  a  material  fact  which 
he  is  bound  to  disclose,  voluntarily 
causes  or  procures,  or  attempts  to 
cause or procure, a thing to be done, is 
said to instigate the doing of that thing.  
Illustration.  1.  A  public  officer,  is  authorized  by  a 
warrant  from  a  Court  of  Justice  to 
apprehend Z.  B,  knowing  that  fact  and 
also that C is not Z, willfully represents 
to  A 
that  C 
is  Z,  and 
thereby 
intentionally causes A to apprehend C. 
Here  B  abets  by 
instigation 
the 
apprehension of C.  
Explanation  2.Whoever,  either  prior  to  or  at  the 
time of the commission of an act, does 
anything 
in  order  to 
facilitate  the 
commission  of  that  act,  and  thereby 
facilitate  the  commission  thereof,  is 
said to aid the doing of that act. 
Sec.109 PPC  
  109.  Punishment  of  abetment  if  the  act  abetted  is 
committed 
in  consequence,  and  where  no 
express  provision  is  made  for  its  punishment. 
Whoever  abets  any  offence  shall,  if  the  act 
abetted  is  committed  in  consequence  of  the 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
18 
 
abetment,  and  no  express  provision  is  made  by 
this  Code  for  the  punishment  of  such  abetment, 
be  punished  with  the  punishment  provided  for 
the offence. 
Provided  that,  except  in  case  of  Ikrah-i-Tam  the 
abettor  of  an  offence  referred  to  in  Chapter  XVI 
shall be liable to punishment of ta’zir specified for 
such offence including death.  
Explanation:  An  act  or  offence  is  said  to  be 
committed 
in 
consequence  of 
abetment,  when  it  is  committed  in 
consequence of the instigation or in 
pursuance of the conspiracy, or with 
the  aid,  which  constitutes 
the 
abetment. 
Illustrations  (a)      A  offers  a  bribe  to  B,  a  public 
servant,  as  a  reward  for  showing  A 
some  favour  in  the  exercise  of  B’s 
official 
functions.  B  accepts 
the 
bribe.  A  has  abetted  the  offence 
defined in section 161.  
(b)  A 
instigates  B 
to  give 
false 
evidence.  B,  in  consequence  of  the 
instigation  commits  that  offence.  A 
is  guilty  of  abetting  that  offence, 
and 
is 
liable 
to 
the 
same 
punishment as B.  
(c) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in 
pursuance  of 
the  conspiracy, 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
19 
 
procures the poison and delivers it 
to  B 
in  order 
that  he  may 
administer  it  to  Z.  B,  in  pursuance 
of  the  conspiracy,  administers  the 
poison  to  Z  in  A's  absence  and 
thereby causes Z’s death. Here B is 
guilty  of  murder.  A  is  guilty  of 
abetting 
that 
offence 
by 
conspiracy,  and  is  liable  to  the 
punishment for murder.  
Sec.120-A PPC  
 
  120A. 
Definition of criminal conspiracy.  
When two or more persons agree to do, or cause 
to be done,  
(1) an illegal act, or  
(2)  an  act  which  is  not  illegal  by  illegal  means, 
such  an  agreement  is  designated  a  criminal 
conspiracy:  
Provided that no agreement except an agreement 
to  commit  an  offence  shall  amount  to  a  criminal 
conspiracy  unless 
some  act  besides 
the 
agreement is done by one or more parties to such 
agreement in pursuance thereof.  
Explanation.-It  is  immaterial  whether  the  illegal 
act is the ultimate object of such agreement, or is 
merely incidental to that object.  
 
Sec.120-B PPC 
  120-B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy  
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
20 
 
(1)   Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy 
to commit an offence punishable with death, 
2[imprisonment 
for 
life]  or 
rigorous 
imprisonment  for  a  term  of  two  years  or 
upwards  shall,  where  no  express  provision 
is  made  in  this  Code  for  the  punishment  of 
such a conspiracy, be punished in the same 
manner as if he had abetted such offence. 
(2)   Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy 
other  than  a  criminal  conspiracy  to  commit 
an  offence  punishable  as  aforesaid  shall  be 
punished  with 
imprisonment  of  either 
description  for  a  term  not  exceeding  six 
months, or with fine or with both. 
Sec.503 PPC 
  503. Criminal intimidation.  
Whoever  threatens  another  with  any  injury 
to  his  person,  reputation  or  property,  or  to 
the person or reputation of anyone in whom 
that person is interested, with intent to cause 
alarm to that person, or to cause that person 
to  do  any  act  which  he  is  not  legally  bound 
to  do,  or  to  omit  to  do  any  act  which  that 
person is legally entitled to do, as the means 
of  avoiding  the  execution  of  such  threat, 
commits criminal intimidation.  
Explanation.-A  threat  to  injure  the  reputation  of 
any  deceased  person  in  whom  the 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
21 
 
person  threatened  is  interested,  is 
within this section.  
Illustration A,  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  B  to 
desist  from  prosecuting  a  civil  suit, 
threatens to burn B’s house. A is guilty 
of criminal intimidation.  
Sec.506 PPC 
506. Punishment for criminal intimidation.  
Whoever  commits 
the  offence  of  criminal 
intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend 
to two years, or with fine, or with both;  
If  threat  be  to  cause  death  or  grievous  hurt,  etc. 
and  if  the  threat  be  to  cause  death  or  grievous 
hurt,  or  to  cause  the  destruction  of  any  property 
by  fire,  or  to  cause  an  offence  punishable  with 
death  or 
imprisonment 
for 
life,  or  with 
imprisonment  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to 
seven  years,  or  to  impute  unchastity  to  a  woman, 
shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  either 
description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or with fine, or with both.  
16.    
There  being  no  presumption  arising  out  of  the 
above  said  contents  of  the  private  complaint  against  the 
respondent  Nos.  1  to  12  for  the  commission  of  criminal 
conspiracy,  abetment  and  criminal 
intimidation  of 
the 
occurrence.  It  is  beyond  the  pale  of  controversy,  that  the 
respondent  Nos.  1  to  12  could  not  be  proceeded  against, 
without  the  petitioner/complainant  having  made  a  prima 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
22 
 
facie  case  against them, that they  hatched  up  conspiracy  for 
commission of this occurrence. At least, what is alleged in the 
private complaint and by the complainant and  witnesses got 
in their cursory statements are not in line with the contents of 
written  complaint/application  dated  19-06-2014. 
It 
is 
admitted  fact  that  the  petitioner/complainant  submitted 
written  complaint/application  dated  19-06-2014  (written 
complaint/application was  placed  on the  record  through  C.M. 
No. 829 of 2018 at page No. 392-B available in volume No. 11) 
before the S.H.O. police station Faisal Town, Lahore, after two 
days 
of 
the 
occurrence. 
The 
belated  written 
complaint/application  was  totally  silent  about  the  three  (3) 
meetings allegedly held on 15-06-2014 and 16-06-2014. Even 
we  observed  that  as  none  of  the  above  said  witnesses  i.e. 
Fiaz  Ahmad  Warriach 
(CW-25)  and  Khurram  Nawaz 
Gandapur  (CW-56)  had  stated  anything  regarding  the  fact 
that  on  15-06-2014  on  their  return  after  attending  meeting 
with  respondent  Nos.  1  to  10  they  informed  about  the 
conversation/threats issued by the respondent Nos. 1 to 10 to 
the 
complainant/petitioner 
(CW-1). 
The 
complainant/petitioner  (CW-1)  also  had  not  uttered  a  single 
word  that  when  and  how  he  came  to  know  about  the 
conversation  between  Fiaz  Ahmad  Warriach  (CW-25), 
Khurram Nawaz Gandapur (CW-56) and respondent Nos. 1 to 
10 nor he (the petitioner/complainant) mentioned this fact in 
the private complaint. 
17.    
The  allegations  leveled  in  the  private  complaint 
are  not  based  on  direct  knowledge  derived  from  any 
individual  but  on  conjectures  and  presumptions.  Evidently, 
conscious of the fact that the respondent Nos. 1 to 12 are not 
responsible  for  offence,  the  complainant  has  sought  aid  of 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
23 
 
sections  109,  120-B  and  506  PPC.  But,  again 
the 
petitioner/complainant  could  not  allege  necessary  facts  to 
show  prior  meeting  of  minds  of  the  accused,  essential  to 
make  out  a  case  of  common  intention  or  participation  of  the 
respondent  Nos.  1  to  12  in  any  abetment  and  criminal 
conspiracy.  The  allegations  do  not  also  make  out  a  case  of 
abetment, criminal conspiracy and criminal intimidation. It is 
not  a  case  of  mere  embellishment;  it  is  an  afterthought  plea 
advanced  by  the  petitioner/complainant  and  is  based  on 
motivation. The petitioner/complainant had not mentioned in 
the 
written 
complaint/application 
(written 
complaint/application was  placed  on the  record  through  C.M. 
No. 829 of 2018 at page No. 392-B available in volume No. 11) 
submitted  before  the  S.H.O.  police  station  Faisal  Town, 
Lahore  on  19-06-2014  that  Khurram  Nawaz  Gandapur  (CW-
56)  was  also  with  at 
the 
time  of  occurrence.  The 
petitioner/complainant  mentioned 
in 
the 
written 
complaint/application  dated  19-06-2014  and  FIR  No. 
696/2014  that  he  along  with  Hafiz  Muhammad  Waqar  and 
Muhammad Tayyab Zia was present at Minhaj-ul-Quran, 365-
M  Model  Town,  Lahore.  They  came  outside  after  hearing 
noise  and  witnessed  that  Rana  Abdul  Jabbar  DIG  Operation, 
Tariq  Aziz  S.P.  Model  Town  along  with  a  large  number  of 
police  personnel  armed  with 
firearm  weapons,  crane, 
bulldozers  and  loader  trucks  were  gathering  around  the 
residence of Dr. Muhammad Tahir-Ul-Qadri No.299-M Model 
Town,  Lahore.  On  his  (the  petitioner/complainant)  asking 
DIG replied as under: - 
 سے فطر کی للہا  ءثنا  ناار  روا یفشر زشہبا ںمیا بپنجا علیٰا یرزو ہمیں کہ کہا نے یشنپرآ
 
DIG 
  باًاجو
 پر یلاواو رور ےرہما۔یںپڑ لینا نیںجا بھی جتنی ہاخو ود مٹا ننشا و منا کا ناندخا یردقا کہ ہے یاآ حکم سخت
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
24 
 
 جہار روا،نؤٹا لڈما یما
 
307
حمدا زممتا ںمیا ،نؤٹا لڈما یما
 
328
نخا حمدا ںمیا لدو لقباا یدوجا ںمیا
 
۔گئے ہو جمع دافرا کے یامیڈ ، گلو ےرسا فیکا ہوعلا کےیرنذ محمد جہار لدو یمند محمد
 
However,  the  petitioner/complainant  (CW-1)  in  his  cursory 
statement stated as under:- 
"I along with Khurram Nawaz Ganda Pur, Hafiz 
Muhammad Waqar s/o Muhammad Ashraf and 
Tayyab Zia Norani s/o Mumtaz Ahmad went to 
police  officers  mentioned  above  and  made 
known  to  them  that  the  barriers  outside  Idara 
Minahaj-ul-Quran  and 
residence  of  Dr. 
Muhammad  Tahir-ul-Qadri  were  installed  by 
the  local  police  under  the  orders  of  Hon'ble 
Lahore High Court, Lahore in respond whereof 
said  police  officers  stated  that  they  stood 
ordered  by  Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz  Shrif, 
Mian  Shehbaz  Sharif,  Ch.  Nisar  Ali  Khan, 
Khawaja  Saad  Rafiq  and  Rana  Sana  Ullah  to 
cause  the  removal  of  barriers  as  well  as 
hurdles from M-Block Model Town, Lahore by 
all means and to eliminate the family members 
of  Dr.  Muhammad  Tahir-Ul-Qadri  as  well  as 
their 
followers 
in 
case  of 
resistance 
whereupon 
I  along  with  my  companions 
mentioned above protested.”  
18.    
However,  from  the  cursory  statement  of  Khurram 
Nawaz  Gandapur  (CW-56)  it  reveals  that  he  (CW-56)  was 
present  at  the  time  of  occurrence,  but  he  did  not  utter  a 
single  word  that  he  informed  about  the  meeting  held  on  15-
06-2014  after  maghrib  prayer  to  the  petitioner/complainant 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
25 
 
before  the  occurrence  or  soon  after  the  occurrence.  This 
creates  doubt  regarding  the  authenticity  of  the  allegations 
leveled  by  Faiz  Ahmad  Warriach  (CW-25)  and  Khurram 
Nawaz  Gandapur  (CW-56).  As  the  petitioner/complainant 
came 
forward  with  his  version 
in  writing 
through 
complaint/application 
dated 
19-06-2014 
(written 
complaint/application was  placed  on the  record  through  C.M. 
No. 829 of 2018 at page No. 392-B available in volume No. 11)  
wherein presence of Khurram Nawaz Gandapur (CW-56) and 
any  conversation  taken  place  in  between  Khurram  Nawaz 
Gandapur (CW-56) and police officers in the presence of the 
petitioner/complainant was not mentioned.  
19.    
On  the  other  hand,  the  petitioner/complainant  has 
specifically  mentioned  in  the  private  complaint  that  soon 
after the occurrence he orally lodged complaint to the S.H.O. 
of concerned police station. But the case FIR No. 510 of 2014 
was lodged on the complaint of S.H.O of police station Faisal 
Town,  Lahore.  This  fact  is  contrary  to  the  contents  of  written 
complaint/application  dated  19-06-2014  and  FIR  No. 
696/2014  wherein 
the  petitioner/complainant  had  not 
mentioned  that  earlier  he  (the  petitioner/complainant)  had 
made  oral  complaint  regarding  the  occurrence  to  SHO  of 
concerned  police  station,  but  his  statement  was  not 
recorded. It will be relevant to mention  here  that, this  is  not 
the  case  of  the  petitioner/complainant  that  above  said 
application was not moved by him or  the contents of the FIR 
No. 696/2014 were not in line with the contents of above said 
application/complaint.  Relevant  portion  of  the  FIR  No. 
696/2014 at the cost of repetition is reproduced below: 
 پھیل ہشتد روا ساہر و فخو میں 
بھر قہعلا سے یدگر ہشتد ستییار سا کی لیسپوپر ءیماا کی ںنواحکمر
 نا پر کہنے کے للہا  ءثنا  ناار  روا یفشر  زشہبا ںمیا  ۔ٹھیا بلبلا  ماعو  رشکا  کا سحساا کے تحفظ  معد
  روا گئی
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
26 
 
 جو  ۔
ئیاوکر  جرد  رہولا  نؤٹا صل ٹ   فتھا
  ٹیجھو یکا فخلا ےرہما لیے کے شیپو  ہدپر  پر  ئماجر
FIR 
 ،زشہبا ہحمز  ، یفشرزشہبا محمد ںمیا  ،یفشر زانو محمد ںمیا قعہاو
  ارسا یہ۔ہے مبنی پر مجر یکا  دخو تابذ
 ۔اہو پر یماا کی  رنثا یرہدچو روا علی شیر بدعا  ، شیدر یزوپر  ، صفآ محمد جہاخو  ،فیقر سعد جہاخو  ،للہا  ءثنا  ناار
 روا 
کے کر جرد مہدمہ بطہضا حسب فخلا کے نماملز جملہ کہ ہے عاستدا میں شنیور کی لابا جہرمند تلاحا
۔ئےجا ید اسز قعیاو راقر کو نا ئےہو تےکر ےرپو ضےتقا کے فنصاا کے کر رفتاگر کو نماملز
 
 
(Emphasis supplied)
20.    
It  is  not  a  case  of  mere  exaggeration,  rather,  the 
plea now advanced is clearly an afterthought to the extent of 
respondent  Nos.  1  to  12.  Interestingly,  in  the  written 
complaint/application  for  registration  of  case  dated  19-06-
2014, no definite roles are ascribed to the respondent Nos. 1 
to 9  and respondent Nos.  10 to 12  have not been arrayed as 
accused for hatching up conspiracy/abetment.  
21.    
In  the  absence  of  the  existence  of  ingredients  to 
constitute 
the  alleged  offence  of  criminal  conspiracy, 
abetment  and  criminal  intimidation,  we  are  of  the  opinion 
that  proceeding  against  the  respondent  Nos.  1  to  12  on  the 
basis  of such  complaint  would  be  abuse  of  process  of  court. 
We are of the opinion that the respondent Nos. 1 to 12 cannot 
summoned by invoking section 120-B or section 109 and 506 
PPC. The words allegedly stated by the respondent Nos.1 to 
10  during  the  meeting  held  on  15-06-2014  do  not  constitute 
commission  of  offence  of  criminal  conspiracy,  abetment  and 
criminal  intimidation.  The  petitioner/complainant  miserably 
failed 
to  prove 
the  prima-facie  existence  of 
factual 
ingredients  constituting  the  offence  falling  under  sections 
107, 120-A and 503 PPC. 
22.  
Though,  the  petitioner/complainant  boycott  the 
investigations  conducted  by  the  two  JITs  formed  in  above 
said two cases as well as proceedings of one man tribunal of 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
27 
 
inquiry  constituted  on  17-06-2014  by  the  Honorable  Chief 
Justice  of  Lahore  High  Court  on 
the  request  of 
the 
Government  of  the  Punjab  for  inquiry  and  to  ascertain  the 
facts  and  circumstances  of  the  incident  at  Minhaj-ul-Quran 
Academy  and  Secretariat  in  Model  Town,  Lahore.  But  it  is 
admitted  fact  that  the  one  man  tribunal  of  inquiry  submitted 
report with the competent Authority on 09-08-2014, whereas 
FIR  was  lodged  on  28-08-2014.  Wherein,  any  information 
given by Muhammad Shakeel son of Abdul Rasheed (CW-18) 
to  the  petitioner/complainant  about  the  alleged  confession 
made  by  the  respondent  Nos.  4,  9  to  12  was  not  mentioned 
nor  in  the  private  complaint  it  was  mentioned  by  the 
complainant/petitioner 
(CW-1) 
that  when  Muhammad 
Shakeel  son  of  Abdul  Rasheed  (CW-18)  and  Mahboob 
Hussain  Ch.  Advocate  High  Court 
informed  him  (the 
petitioner)  about  the  alleged  confession  made  by  the 
respondent Nos. 4, 9 to 12. Besides, Muhammad Shakeel son 
of  Abdul  Rasheed  (CW-18)  in  his  cursory  statement  has  not 
mentioned that when and where he heard alleged confession 
made  by  the  respondent  Nos.  4,  9  to  12  and  when  he 
informed  the  petitioner/complainant  about  said  alleged 
confession.  Even  otherwise  the  statement  made  by  any 
person  before  the  commission  of  Inquiry  is  inadmissible  in 
evidence  in  any  future  proceedings,  civil  or  criminal.  For 
ready  reference  section  6  of  the  Punjab  Tribunals  of  Inquiry 
Ordinance, 1969 are reproduced hereunder: 
6.  Statements made by persons to the Tribunal: 
  No statement made by a person in the course of giving 
evidence before the Tribunal shall subject him to, or be 
used  against  him  in,  any  civil  or  criminal  proceedings 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
28 
 
except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such 
statement:  
  Provided that the statement:  
(a) is made in reply to a question which he is required by 
the Tribunal to answer; or  
(b) is relevant to the subject matter of inquiry.  
23.    
Besides, at no point of time, till registration of case, 
it  was  the  version  of  the  petitioner/complainant  that  he  also 
attended the meeting chaired by Rana Sana Ullah. Even in the 
private  complaint 
the  petitioner/complainant  had  not 
mentioned that he also attended the meeting chaired by Rana 
Sana  Ullah  on  16-06-2014.  However,  during  cursory 
statement  the  petitioner/complainant  (CW-1)  stated  that  he 
attended  the  meeting  chaired  by  Rana  Sana  Ullah  on  16-06-
2014. The following excerpt of his cursory statement reads as 
under:- 
"On  16.06.2014,  a  special  meeting  was 
convened under the chair of Rana Sana Ullah 
Minister  which  was  attended  by 
the 
complaint  against  respondents  No.10  to  16 
and  18  wherein  the  planning  was  made  to 
implement  the  decision  having  been  taken 
by  Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif,  Shehbaz 
Sharif, Hamza Shehbaz and others regarding 
the  arrival  of  Dr. Muhammad  Tahir-ul-Qadri 
and  it  was  unanimously  resolved  that  the 
Government  officials  would  visit  M-Block 
Model  Town,  Lahore  under  the  garb  of 
removing  barriers  and  would 
launch  a 
massive  attack  on  Idara  Minhaj-ul-Quran 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
29 
 
and  whosoever  would  cause  hurdle 
to 
achieve  the  aforesaid  object  he  would  be 
crushed.”   
24.    
The  petitioner/complainant  has  not  uttered  even  a 
single  word  in  his  cursory  statement  about  the  contents 
published  in  different  news  papers  on  05-05-2014,  01-06-
2014, 02-06-2014, 03-06-2014, 06-06-2014, 09-06-2014 and 19-
06-2014. The alleged statements of the respondent Nos. 4 and 
5  are  averred  in  para  No.  9  of  the  private  complaint,  at  the 
cost of repetition same is reproduced herein below: 
 
PARA No.09
 و ننوقا  یرزو  ئیباصو للہا  ءثنا  ناار میں باجو کے نعلاالابا  ہکرمتذ کے فصومو  یردلقاا ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ کہ  یہ
 نکستاپا  یردلقاا  ہرطا محمد کٹراڈ  کہکہا
 ئےہو یتےد باجو نے فیقر سعد جہاخو ےیلوریرزو  قیفاو  روا تیابلد
 متعلقہ کے یزڈ سی
(
ہے لی کر رتیا
 ‘‘
نیھو
د
’’
 نے ںنہوا
 کہ کہا بھی یہ روا گے یںد لنکا
’’جِن ‘‘
 کا نا تو گے ئیںآ
 نجو یکم خہرمو فصاوا مہنازور،
 مئی2014
5 
 خہرمو ند مہنازور بتفصیل
 
شےاتر کے تارخباا
 روا
 
شنرپو
 نجو
خہرمو یسیکسپرا مہنازور ،قلشرا مہنازور ،
3 
2014
2 
 نجو
خہرمو نکستاپا نجہا مہنازور ،
 9 
خہرمو  ںنوود  فصاوا  مہنازور  و یسیکسپرا  مہنازور
،نجو 
 6 
خہر
مو  نکستاپا  نجہا  مہنازور  ،
2014
2014
)۔ہیں لف. 
 
2014
 نجو
 خہرمو زاوآ مہنازور ،
19 
2014
 نجو
Even, the complainant/petitioner (CW-1)  had not mentioned 
above 
said 
facts 
in 
the 
FIR.  Although, 
the 
petitioner/complainant  reported  the  occurrence  through 
written  application/complaint  after 
two  days  of 
the 
occurrence.  
25.    
The claimed media reports are not part of  the FIR, 
although the written complaint/application for registration of 
case  was  submitted  on  19-06-2014.  It  is  settled  law  that  the 
news papers cuttings or video recording of the statements of 
accused, has to be proved by the author or creator and none 
of the author or creator was named as witness in the calendar 
of  the  witnesses.  No  date,  time,  name  of  the  program  aired, 
ُ
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
30 
 
names  of  the  channels  flash  above  said  alleged  statements 
and the names of the channels recorded above said alleged 
statements  accept  Minhaj  TV  had  been  mentioned  in  the 
private  complaint  as  well  as  stated  by  Kashif  Saeed  son  of 
Muhammad  Saeed  (CW-53) 
in  his  cursory  statement. 
Relevant part of deposition is re-produced herein below:- 
"In  retaliation  of  the  pronouncement  of  the 
Dr.  Muhammad  Tahir  Ul  Qadri,  Rana  Sana 
Ullah  provincial  Minister  and 
federal 
Minister  Khawaja  Saad  Rafique  replied  and 
loudly  pronounced  that  if  Dr.  Muhammad 
Tahir  Ul  Qadri  shall  come  to  Pakistan  then 
his “giant” (Jinn) shall be removed and they 
have  prepared  “DHOONI”  which  shall  be 
given  to  him.  This  replies  of  Rana  Sana 
Ullah and Khawaja Saad Rafique was flashed 
in  the  media  and  it  was  also  recorded  by 
the  different  TV  channels  along  Minhaj  TV 
and I prepared the CD from the same and it 
presented  before  this  court  which  is  P.7 
which  is  true  and  original  copy  of  the 
statements  of Rana  Sana  Ullah  and  Khawaja 
Saad  Rafique.  ----------------  On  15.06.2014 
Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif  and  Mian 
Muhammad  Shahbaz  Sharif  meet  at  Jati 
Umra  Raiwind  Lahore  and  they  discussed 
the arrival of Dr. Muhammad Tahir Ul Qadri 
in  Pakistan 
to  agitate  against 
their 
governments  which  was  also  flashed  in  the 
electronic and print media.” 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
31 
 
No  authenticity  to  the  newspapers  cuttings  could  be  given. 
Reliance  is  placed  on  the  judgment  of  the  Honorable 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  titled,  "Malik  Muhammad 
Mumtaz  Qadri  versus  The  State  and  others"  reported  as 
PLD 2016 Supreme Court 17.  
26.    
The petitioner/complainant had also not mentioned 
specific  date,  time  and  name  of  the  aircraft,  which  was 
diverted  to  Lahore  Airport  from  Islamabad  in  the  private 
complaint nor stated in his statement made on oath as CW-1. 
Even the petitioner/complainant had  not  mentioned a single 
word  in  this  regard  in  the  FIR  No.696/14  dated  28-08-2014. 
Relevant  part  of  deposition  of  the  petitioner/complainant 
(CW-1) is as follows:- 
"The 
aforementioned 
conspiracy 
and 
abetment  on  the  part  of  Prime  Minister  of 
Pakistan,  Chief  Minister  and  others 
is 
reflected from the fact that the aircraft of Dr. 
Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri was not allowed 
to be landed at Islamabad airport rather the 
same  was  diverted  to  Lahore  Airport  and 
the  aforesaid  act  on 
the  part  of 
the 
government  has  not  yet  been  justified.  The 
clips  of  daily  newspapers  are  also  made 
available  on the file in support of aforesaid 
contention.” 
That the statement of the petitioner/complainant (CW-1) does 
not disclose the ingredients essential for criminal conspiracy 
and  abetment.  The  petitioner/complainant  (CW-1)  had  not 
stated in his statement that any complaint was lodged by any 
of  the  passengers  or  members  of  crew  of  the  aircraft.  Thus 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
32 
 
the  rule  of  "res  gesta"  in  terms  of  provisions  of  Article  19  of 
Qaunu-e-Shahadat is also not attracted in the instant case. 
27.    
In  above  said  circumstances,  the  order  of  non-
summoning the respondent Nos. 1 to 12, does not suffer from 
any illegality as learned Judge ATC-II, Lahore has examined 
all the witnesses which the petitioner/complainant desired to 
produce  and  intended  to  rely  upon.  There  has  thus  been 
substantial  compliance  of  the  provisions  of  Section  202  of 
Cr.P.C.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  also  stated  at  the 
bar  that  the  complainant  relied  upon  the  evidence  of 
witnesses produced and that he did not desire to produce or 
examine  any  other  witness.  It  is,  thus,  quite  evident  that 
learned  Judge  ATC-II,  Lahore  recoded  the  witnesses  which 
the petitioner/complainant desired to produce and intended 
to  rely  upon and  thus  there  was  compliance  of  provisions  of 
Section  202  Cr.P.C.  The  allegations  averred  in  the  private 
complaint  and  stated  by  the  witnesses  i.e.  Muhammad 
Shakeel  (CW-18),  Ahmad  Warriach  (CW-25),  Kashif  Saeed 
(CW-53)  and  Khurram  Nawaz  Gandapur  (CW-56)  included 
petitioner/complainant  (CW-1)  on  oath  were  found  to  be 
afterthought  and  does  not  disclose  essential  ingredients  for 
constituting the offences punishable under section 409, 120-B 
and  506  PPC.  Thus,  issuance  of  process  would  require 
availability of proof in terms of Articles 117, 118, 119 and 121 
of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  It  may  not  be  proper 
for this Court to enter into reasoning for non-summoning the 
respondent Nos. 1 to 12 as accused at this point of time when 
no allegation is made against the respondent Nos 1 to 12 and 
proceeding  against  the  respondent  Nos  1  to  12  on  the  basis 
of such complaint would be abuse of process of court. So,  in 
the  present  case,  in  above  said  circumstances,  the  matter 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
33 
 
cannot remanded to the learned trial court for the purpose of 
further enquiry in specified manner. Considering the manner 
in  which  the  case  has  been  set  up,  the  inconsistent  stand 
taken  by  the  petitioner/complainant,  it  is  found  that  the 
learned  Judge  Anti-Terrorism  Court  have  applied  his  mind 
while recording order of non-summoning respondent Nos. 1 
to  12  as  accused  and,  therefore,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the 
reasoning given for non summoning respondent Nos. 1 to 12 
as  accused  by  the  learned  Judge  Anti-Terrorism  Court  is 
illegal and perverse. We may observe that the order passed 
under  section  204,  Cr.P.C.,  is  not  a  judgment  and  can  be 
reviewed  by  the  Court,  seized  with  the  matter,  if  some 
incriminating  material  is  brought  on  the  file  during  trial. 
Admittedly,  the  Court  takes  cognizance  of  the  case  as  a 
whole and not regarding some of the accused, thus, the Court 
was  not  debarred  to  summon  a  person  to  face  trial  if 
convincing incriminating material is brought on the file. The 
provisions  of  section  540,  Cr.P.C.,  can  also  be  pressed  into 
service, during trial, if fresh incriminating material comes to 
the knowledge of the complainant. Reliance is placed on the 
cases  reported  as  “Raja  Khush  Bakhtur  Rehman  and 
another versus The State” (1985 SCMR 1314), “Muhammad 
Sharif  versus The State and another” (1995 SCMR 894) and 
“Iqbal  Hussain  Shah  and  another    versus  The  State and  3 
others”  (2012  PCr.L.J  848).  When  the  reasoning  given  for 
non-summoning  is  not  found  to  be  illegal  and  perverse,  it 
would  not  be  open  for  this  Court  to  interfere  with  the  said 
findings  while  exercising  revisional  jurisdiction.  There  is  no 
merit in this revision petition and it is dismissed accordingly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Aalia Neelum) 
   
Judge 
Criminal Revision No.9027 of 2017 
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I fully agreed with the findings entered and the conclusions 
arrived at by my learned sister Aalia Neelum, J. 
     (Sardar Ahmad Naeem) 
 
      Judge 
 
 
 
ORDER OF THE COURT 
By a majority of 2 to 1 (Muhammad Qasim Khan J. dissenting 
by  way  of  his  consolidated  judgment  in  Criminal  Revision 
No.9027/2017, “Muhammad Jawad Hamid versus Mian Muhammad 
Nawaz  Sharif  and  others  &  Criminal  Revision  No.7067/2017, 
“Mushtaq  Ahmad  Sukhera  versus  Judge  Anti-Terrorism  Court  and 
others” instant criminal revision is hereby dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Muhammad Qasim Khan) 
 
Judge 
 
(Sardar Ahmad Naeem) 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Aalia Neelum) 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dated. ________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.S.Khan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Announced in open Court. 
Approved for reporting 
 
    
 
 
 Judge 
