 
 
 
 
1 
 
                                  Form No:HCJD/C-121 
                              ORDER SHEET 
                               IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN. 
                          JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
                                                           Case No. 
 
 
 
 
I.C.A. No.243/2018. 
 
            MEPCO etc. 
Versus              M/s Asima Qaiser & Co. etc. 
 
S. No. of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of 
order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
Parties or Counsel, where necessary. 
Proceeding 
 
 
                           02.07.2018 
 
 
 
Rao Muhammad Iqbal, Advocate. 
 
The constitution petition, filed by respondent No.1, was 
disposed of by this Court vide order dated 25.06.2018 in line 
with  appellants’  claim  that  respondent  No.1  has  alternate 
remedy before the NEPRA, with the direction to the office to 
transmit  copy  of  the same  along  with  all  its  annexures  at the 
expense of said respondent to NEPRA for its decision treating 
it  as  representation  of  the  writ  petitioner  within  a  period  of 
fifteen  days,  however,  disconnected  electricity  of  respondent 
No.1 was ordered to be restored.  
 
2. 
The  appellant  has  brought  this  appeal  being  aggrieved 
from part of the order whereby direction to the department has 
been  issued  for  restoration  of  respondent  No.1’s  electricity 
connection on the ground that when the matter was referred to 
the  competent  authority  then  restoration  order  was  uncalled 
for  and  beyond  the  jurisdiction  exercised  by  the  learned 
Judge-in-Chamber.  While  relying  on  Balochistan  Trading 
Company (Pvt.) Ltd. and others vs. National Bank of Pakistan 
and  another  (1998  SCMR  1899)  contends  that  it  was  out  of 
scope  of  learned  Judge-in-Chamber  to  grant  the  relief  to  the 
writ  petitioner  when  his  default  was  manifest,  therefore,  the 
order  impugned  is  contrary  to  the  law  laid  down  by  Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court.  Further  relies  on  United  Bank  Limited  and 
I.C.A. No.243/2018 
                                                                2 
 
others  vs.  Ahsan  Akhtar  and  others  (1998  SCMR  68)  to 
contend that the interim relief in the nature of final conclusion 
cannot be granted. 
 
3.  We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and 
gone through the available record.  
 
4. 
The  learned counsel for the appellant  when  confronted 
that,  ‘whether  the  writ  petitioner  (respondent  No.1  herein)  is 
defaulter’, he concedes that this Company is not defaulter and 
its  other  units  are  defaulter  and  for  recovery  of  that  default 
amount,  respondent  No.1  had  been  burdened  with  the 
consequence  that  his  electricity  was  disconnected.  When 
further  confronted  that  according  to  Section  24(1)  of  the 
Electricity Act, 1910, the notice of shifting of liability of other 
unit  of  the  company  has  been  issued,  he  by  referring  the 
notices  attached  with  the  written  reply  filed  by  the  appellant 
during pendency  of  writ  petition  (at  Page  36  &  37)  contends 
that  the  said  notices  were  issued  but  perusal  of  same  reveals 
that those notices do not fulfill the requirement as stipulated in 
Section  24(1)  ibid.  Therefore,  these  notices  could  not  be 
termed/treated  notices  as  specified  under  Section  24(1)  of 
Electricity  Act,  1910  inasmuch  as  without  adopting  the  said 
procedure  respondent  No.1  could  not  be  treated  defaulter. 
Clear and obvious requirement of law is that if any unit out of 
total  units  becomes  defaulter,  the  said  liability  can  be 
recovered  from  running  units  provided  owned  by  the  same 
person  but  after  adopting  the  mechanism  mandated  in  law, 
ofcourse  for  that  purpose  the  default  amount  of  default  unit 
may be shifted upon the running units by informing the owner 
in  this  regard  through  written  notice/letter  in  an  unequivocal 
manner  and  on  the  basis  of  shifting  of  liability  the  said 
running  units  be  declared  nonpayer,  where-after  notice  be 
issued  for  recovery  of  the  outstanding  amount  from  the 
I.C.A. No.243/2018 
                                                                2 
 
running  unit  as  stipulated  under  Section  24(1)  of  the  Act, 
1910, but here admittedly the said requirement of law has not 
been  complied  with,  therefore,  notice  issued  to  respondent 
No.1  by  the  appellants,  referred  to  by  the  learned  counsel, 
could  not  be  presumed  to  have  fulfilled  the  essential 
requirement  of  law;  hence  ignored  and  for  this  probable 
reason,  although  not  disclosed  in  the  order  of  the  learned 
Judge-in-Chamber,  the  restoration  of  electricity  connection 
was ordered. The case-law, referred to by the learned counsel 
for the appellant, is distinguishable on facts and circumstances 
of  the  case.  Hence,  we  are  not  inclined  to  interfere  with  the 
order passed by the learned Judge-in-Chamber. This appeal is 
dismissed-in-limine being not maintainable. 
 
 
 
 
     (TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH)     (MUHAMMAD AMEER BHATTI) 
               JUDGE                                                    JUDGE. 
 
 
 
 
 
               JUDGE                                                    JUDGE. 
Approved for reporting. 
Gull* 
