Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.206544 of 2018 
 
Ghulam Muhammad   
S.No. of order/ 
Proceedings 
Date of order/ 
Proceedings 
 
 
Ashiq Hussain, etc. 
VS 
 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of  
parties or counsel, where necessary. 
30.04.2018  Malik Noor Muhammad Awan, Advocate. 
 
 
 
Prayer in this petition is that an order in the 
nature  of  writ  of  certiorari  be  issued  for  quashing 
the  orders  of 
the  Courts  below,  whereby 
application  of  the  plaintiff  under  Order  XXXIX 
Rule 1 & 2 CPC for grant of temporary injunction 
was dismissed. 
2. 
This  constitutional  petition  under  Article 
199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan,  1973  is  of  the  plaintiff  and  arises  from 
his  suit  through  which  he  sought  a  decree  for 
specific  performance  of  oral  agreement  to  sell 
dated 11.07.2004. Alongwith  plaint  an  application 
under  Order  XXXIX  Rule  1  &  2  CPC  was  also 
filed  for  grant  of  temporary  injunction  restraining 
the  defendants 
from 
interfering  with  his 
possession.  The  averments  made  in  the  plaint  as 
well  as  in  the  application  for  grant  of  temporary 
injunction  were  traversed  by  the  defendants  No.1 
to  5,  11  &  12  whereas  the  other  defendants 
submitted  a  joint  consenting  written  reply.  On 
consideration  of  the  matter, 
the  Trial  Court 
dismissed  the  application  for  grant  of  temporary 
injunction  vide  order  dated  08.03.2017  on  the 
ground  that  the  plaintiff  had  failed  to  establish  a 
prima-facie  case  in  his  favour.  The  plaintiff 
thereupon  preferred  an  appeal  before  the  Addl. 
Writ Petition No.206544 of 2018 
 
2 
District Judge, Khushab. On appeal, the plea of the 
plaintiff  was  re-appraised  but  the  same  was  not 
found  sufficient  for 
the  grant  of 
temporary 
injunction.  The  Appellate  Court  relying  upon  the 
case of “Mirza Nazim Baig v. Government of the 
Punjab 
through 
Chief 
Secretary 
and 
others”(NLR  2008  Civil  565)  came 
to 
the 
conclusion  that  the  defendants  being  lessee  of  the 
state land were not entitled to transfer any right or 
interest in state land leased out to them except with 
permission    of  the  competent  authority,  that  is, 
Collector;  and  that  since  the  defendants  had  not 
obtained  any  permission  of  the  Collector,  alleged 
oral  agreement  to  sell  by  virtue  of  provisions  of 
Section  19  of  the  Colonization  of  Government 
Land (Punjab) Act, 1912 was void. On the basis of 
said  conclusion 
the  relief  for 
the  grant  of 
temporary injunction was declined and resultantly, 
the  appeal  was  dismissed  vide  judgment  dated 
11.04.2018. So, this petition.  
3. 
The  grouse  of  the  plaintiff  is  that  he  had 
established  a  case  of  temporary  injunction  in  his 
favour  but  this  fact  was  not  appreciated  properly; 
that  his  possession  over  the  suit  land  is  not 
disputed;  that  the  defendants  being  allottee/tenant 
of the colony land by way of an agreement to sell, 
handed over  possession of the suit land to him and 
undertook  to  execute  sale  deed  in  his  favour  on 
grant of proprietary rights; and that as per principle 
settled  in  the  case  of  “Syed  Hussain  Naqvi  and 
others  v.  Mst.  Begum  Zakara  Chatha  through 
LRs  and  others”(2015  SCMR  1081) 
  such 
contingent 
/prior  agreement 
to  sell  did  not 
necessitate  obtaining  prior  permission  to  transfer 
the  right  in  the  suit  land  in  term  of  Section  19  of 
Writ Petition No.206544 of 2018 
 
3 
the  Colonization  of  Government  Land  (Punjab) 
Act, 1912.  
4. 
Although  the  ground  which  prevailed  upon 
the  Courts  below  to  decline  temporary  injunction 
was  not  valid  yet  the  arguments  canvassed  at  the 
Bar  have  not  persuaded  me  to  grant  the  prayer 
made  in  this  petition.  The  dispute  in  this  case 
related to the land measuring 104-Kanlas 7-Marlas 
which  according  to  record  of  rights  for  the  years 
2003-2004  comprising  Khatta  No.31-Min  and 
Khatooni  No.32-Min  was  situated  within  Chak 
No.6-MB Tehsil Quaidabad District Khushab. This 
is a colony land and was allotted to the defendants 
under  Abaad  Kaari  Scheme.  The  case  of  the 
plaintiff  is  that  on  11.07.2004,  the  defendants  in 
the presence of witnesses sold the suit land to him 
for  consideration  of  Rs.1,500,000/-;  that  upon 
payment  of  the  whole  sale  consideration  amount, 
the  possession  of  the  suit  land  was  delivered  to 
him and since then he is enjoying possession over 
the  suit  land;  and,  that  it  was  agreed  that  the 
defendants  would  transfer  the  suit  land  in  his 
favour  after  getting  proprietary  rights  from  the 
Collector. On the other hand, defendants No.1 to 5 
and 11 in their joint written statement have denied 
the  claim  of  the  plaintiff.  The  defence  of  the  said 
defendants is that they never agreed to sell the suit 
land to the plaintiff; and, that the possession of the 
suit  land  was  never  delivered  to  the  plaintiff.  The 
defendants  No.7  to  10  however,  filed  a  joint 
consenting  written  statement  before  the  Trial 
Court.  The  Province  of  Punjab  through  Collector, 
that 
is,  defendant  No.12  also  submitted  a 
contesting written statement. The plea of defendant 
No.12  is  that  the  alleged  oral  agreement  to  sell 
Writ Petition No.206544 of 2018 
 
4 
dated  11.07.2004  is  not  enforceable  by  law  and, 
therefore,  the  same  cannot  be  got  performed 
through  process  of  the  Court. The  rival  stances  of 
the  parties  to  the  suit  suggest  that  convincing  and 
reliable evidence is required to be produced by the 
plaintiff so as to establish the alleged oral sale; and 
the  reasons  which  led  him  to  wait  for  more  than 
fourteen years to knock at the door of the Court for 
protection of his alleged right. Prior to recording of 
evidence,  it  cannot  be  held  at  this  stage  that  the 
plaintiff  has  established  prima-facie  case  in  his 
favour.  It  is  now  well  established  principle  that 
temporary injunction cannot be allowed as a matter 
of  course  in  those  cases  where  even  to  establish 
prima-facie case evidence is yet to be produced. In 
this regard  reference may  be  made  to  the cases of 
Fazal  Din  v  Mst.  Robeena  Aurgangzeb  and  2 
others 
(1983  CLC  1280)  and  Chairman, 
Municipal  Committee,  Taxila  v  Mohammad  Jan 
and 4 others (1987 CLC 2416)  
5. 
The  argument  that  since  the  possession  of 
the plaintiff is not disputed and thus the balance of 
convenience  lean  in  his  favour      to  get  protection 
of his possession over the suit land as otherwise he 
would  suffer  irreparable  loss  sans  merits.  In  the 
present case, the plaintiff has failed to make out a 
prima-facie case and, thus, as per principle settled 
in the case of Aijaz Hussain Bhatti and another v 
Haji Bagh Ali and 9 others (1985 CLC 261), there 
is  no  need  to  attend  to  other  two  considerations, 
that is, balance of convenience and irreparable loss 
which really belong to one and the same category. 
Even  otherwise  the  monetary  value  is  attached  to 
the suit land and, therefore, question of irreparable 
loss does not arise.  
Writ Petition No.206544 of 2018 
 
5 
6. 
Since  exercise  of  discretion  by  the  Courts 
below  does  not  suffer  from  any  illegality  or 
procedural  irregularity  or  jurisdictional  defect, 
interference with the orders, under challeng, is not 
called for. This petition is, therefore, dismissed.             
 
            
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
      (SHAHID WAHEED) 
 
  JUDGE 
Approved for reporting. 
  Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.R.Shad* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
