Stereo. HC JD A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Writ Petition No.2888 of 2017 
Fayaz Hussain 
Versus 
Addl. District Judge and others 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing: 
30.10.2018 
Petitioner by: 
Mr. Zargham Haider Jafri, Advocate. 
Respondents by: 
Syed Nasir Abbas Bukhari, Advocate. 
 
 
 
MUJAHID MUSTAQEEM AHMED, J:  By invoking the 
Constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  under  Article  199  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  the  petitioner  has 
assailed  the  concurrent  judgments  passed  by  learned  courts  below  by 
which suit of Nargis Batool-respondent No.3 for recovery of dower 10-
Marla house  stood decreed. 
2. 
 
The  concise  facts  of  the  famiy  litigation  culminating  into 
this writ petition and necessary for its fair adjudication are that present 
petitioner  and  respondent  No.3  (respondent)  were  married  on 
15.04.1998  against  consideration  (Haq-ul-Mehr)  of  Rs.500/-  in  cash. 
Vide  column  No.16  of  the  ‘Nikah  Nama’  Annexure-A,  the  petitioner 
also agreed to transfer 5-Marla house in favour of respondent. In year 
2014, respondent alongwith her three minor issues approached learned 
Judge Family Court, Alipur, District Muzaffargarh for multiple reliefs 
including  recovery  of  ‘Haq-ul-Mehr’  i.e  residential  house  measuring 
10-Marla (herein after to be referred ‘dower’). Whereas this claim was 
W.P.No.2888 of 2017 
 
2 
contested by present petitioner denying any such stipulation of Haq-ul-
Mehr against column No.16 of ‘Nikah Nama’ Annexure-A. To resolve 
controvery between parties, following relevant issue was framed:- 
ISSUES 
2.  Whether  plaintiff  No.1  is  entitled  to  get  the  dower 
house  measuring 10 marlas situated in  Mouza  Makwal 
Hadair  valuing  Rs.10,00,000/-  from  the  defendant? 
OPP 
Relief. 
3. 
 
After  recording  evidence  of  the  parties,  vide  consolidated 
judgment  dated  19.04.2016,  learned  Judge  Family  Court  decreed  the 
suit of respondent in the following terms:- 
“The  instant  suit  of  the  plaintiff  No.1  for  recovery  of 
dower  as  constructed  house  measuring  10  marlas 
alongwith  four  wall  boundary    situated  in  Mouza 
Makwal Hadair is decreed.” 
The  petitioner  assailed  the  above  judgment  and  decree  before learned 
Additional  District  Judge,  Alipur  whereas  respondent  also  filed  cross 
appeal  and  vide  impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated  19.11.2016, 
learned  Ist  Appellate  Court  confirmed  the  findings  of  learned  Judge 
Family  Court  regarding  the controversy  in  hand  and  consequently  the 
appeal of the petitioner was dismissed. 
4. 
 
As  such  by  filing  the  instant  writ  petition,  the  petitioner 
while assailing the above judgments/decrees passed by learned Courts 
below has made the following supplications:- 
“….that this petition may kindly be accepted, judgments 
and decrees of both the learned Courts below may be set 
aside,  the  area  of  10-Marla  of  dower  house  may  be 
corrected  as  five  Marla,  plaintiff-1  may  be  directed  to 
join & live with the petitioner/defendant as a friend and 
obedient wife for the betterment of Kids and family- and 
the justice.” 
5. 
 
During  the  course  of  arguments,  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  has  maintained  that  impugned  judgments  are  against  facts 
and law, as such not sustainable. Learned counsel for the petitioner has 
further maintained that as per copy of ‘Nikah Nama’ Annexure-A and 
W.P.No.2888 of 2017 
 
3 
admission  of  respondent  and  her  witnesses,  ‘Haq-ul-Mehr’  5-Marla 
residential  house  was  settled  between  the  parties  and  the  learned 
Courts below were not justified to decree the claimed dower. Whereas 
learned  counsel  for  respondent  has  maintained  that  infact  petitioner 
agreed  to  transfer  10-Marla  residential  house  as  ‘Haq-ul-Mehr’  in 
favour  of  his  wife  but  due  to  inadvertence  5-Marla  residential  house 
has  been  mentioned  in  the  ‘Nikah  Nama’,  as  such  learned  Courts 
below were fully justified to believe the oral version of respondent to 
decree the claimed dower. 
6. 
7. 
 
 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
The  respondent  as  PW-1  in  her  affidavit  Exh.P1  deposed 
that present petitioner at the time of ‘Nikah’ has agreed to transfer 10-
Marla house in  her  favour. During  cross examination she  rejected  the 
suggestion that petitioner has not agreed to give the claimed dower to 
her.  Ghulam  Muhammad-PW2,  father  of  respondent  in  his  affidavit 
Exh.P2  endorsed  the  claim  of  respondent.  However,  during  cross 
examination  he  conceded  that  as  per  entries  of  ‘Nikah  Nama’  the 
petitioner  had  agreed  to  transfer  only  5-Marla  residential  house. 
Muhammad Masood-PW3, real brother of respondent also deposed in 
the  same  fashion.  Whereas  the  petitioner  in  his  affidavit  Exh.D1 
deposed  that  only  Rs.500/-  cash  was  fixed  as  ‘Haq-ul-Mehr’,  which 
stood  paid  at  the  time  of  ‘Nikah’.  During  cross  examination  he 
categorically  denied  the  suggestion  that  he  has  agreed  to  transfer  10-
Marla house with all amenities in favour of respondent. 
8. 
 
As per respondent’s own case in ‘Niakh Nama’  (Annexure-
A) the petitioner has agreed to transfer 05-Marla house in her favour. 
Whereas  respondent  in  her  plaint  has  taken  the  stance  contrary  to 
entries  in  ‘Nikah  Nama’  by  alleging  that  her  ‘Haq-ul-Mehr’  was  10-
Marla house. No  reason  whatsoever  has been  pleaded  in the plaint or 
assigned during evidence of respondent for mentioning 5-Marla house 
as  Haq-ul-Mehr  instead  of  10-Marla  house  in  ‘Nikah  Nama’.  Worth 
mentioning that ‘Nikah’ of the spouses was solemnized in year 1998. It 
is settled law that the presumption of truth is attached to the entries in 
W.P.No.2888 of 2017 
 
4 
“Nikah  Nama”  being  a  public  document.  As  per  respondent’s  own 
case,  she  has  not  assailed  the  “alleged”  incorrect  entries  of  “Nikah 
Nama”  before  Deputy  Commissioner  concerned  or  custodian  of 
‘Nikah  Register’  or  any  other  competent  forum.  Similarly  the 
petitioner  has  also  not  challenged  these  entries  before  any  competent 
forum as per law. It means that plea of the parties to the lis that entries 
in  “Nikah  Nama”  are  not  correct  is  without  any  foundation.  In  case 
reported  as  ‘Jan  Muhammad  Versus  Mst.  Salamat  Bibi  and  others’ 
(2002 SCMR 1408), ‘Abdul Malik and others Versus Mst. Subbha Mai 
alias  Sabbah  Mai’  (2016  MLD  925  Lahore)  and  ‘Mst.  Nabeela 
Shaheen and others Versus Zia Wazeer Bhatti and others’ (PLD 2015 
Lahore  88)  it  has  been  laid  down  that  ‘Nikah  Nama’  is  public 
document  and  presumption  of  truth  is  attached  to  the  entries  made 
therein.  As  such  the  version  of  respondent  contrary  to  ‘Nikah  Nama’ 
regarding claimed ‘Haq-ul-Mehr’ is not entertainable. 
9. 
 
The  careful  examination  and  scrutiny  of  above  evidence 
leads  me  to  conclude  that  the  judgments  of  learned  Courts  below  are 
patently  based  on  mis-reading  and  non-reading of  evidence. It  is  well 
settled that men can but documents cannot tell a lie. It is also one of the 
cardinal  principles  of  appreciation  of  evidence  that  when  there  is 
conflict  in  oral  and  documentary  evidence,  the  latter  (documentary 
evidence)  shall  be  preferred.  While  dealing  with  similar  proposition, 
the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  case  Sher Muhammad and 
others  Versus  Muhamad  Khalid  and  others’  (2004  SCMR  826) 
observed as under:- 
that  oral  evidence  which  was  contrary 
“The  concurrent  findings  of  the  said  learned  Courts  are 
based on the overwhelming documentary evidence available 
on record. Both the Courts were one in holding, and rightly 
so, 
the 
documentary  evidence  could  not  be  given  preference  over 
the  said  documentary  evidence.  The  only  two  entries  i.e. 
relating to Rabi 1973 and Kharif 1973 which stood in favour 
of the petitioner-plaintiff were directed to be removed by the 
Collector  of  the  District  on  an  appeal  filed  before  him.  He 
had  further  ordered  that the  entries  as they  existed  in  Rabi 
to 
W.P.No.2888 of 2017 
 
5 
1972  should  be  restored.  This  order  of  the  Collector  was 
maintained  in  the  second  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner 
before  the  Additional  Commissioner  of  Sargodha  who  had 
dismissed  the  said  appeal  through  an  order  dated  13-6-
1979. In this view of the matter, the Honourable High Court 
and  the  learned  Appellate  Court  were  justified  in  holding 
that  the  oral  evidence  offered  by  the  petitioner-plaintiff 
which  was  not  supported  by  the  strong  documentary 
evidence available on record, could not be given any credit. 
The concurrent conclusions reached and the reasons offered 
therefore could not be said to be based either on misreading 
or non-reading of evidence”. (emphasis supplied)  
Reliance  is  also  placed  on  case  ‘Shamshad  Versus  Arif  Ashraf  Khan 
and  others’  (2010  SCMR  473).  Whereas  the  learned  Courts  below 
have  not  properly 
scanned 
the  evidence,  and 
thus  have 
violated/trampled  the  settled  principles  for  appreciation  of  evidence 
and have failed to scrutinize the evidence as per law. The failure on the 
parts  of  Courts  below  has  resulted  in  miscarriage  of  justice.  In  case 
“Saqib  Pal  vs.  Mst.  Beenish  Khushnud  and  others”  (2017  YLR  252 
Lahore),  this  Court  has  observed  that  as  a  general  rule  appraisal  of 
evidence was the function of courts below and if the findings of courts 
below were based on proper appraisal of evidence, the same could not 
be  interfered  with  by  the  High  Court  in  its  constitutional  jurisdiction. 
However,  if  there  was  gross  mis-reading,  non-reading  of  evidence  or 
jurisdictional  defect  flouting  on  the  surface  of  the  record,  High  Court 
was  justified  to  interfere  with  under  its  constitutional  jurisdiction  to 
undo injustice.  
10.   
Consequently,  the  instant  writ  petition  is  allowed.  The 
impugned judgments and decrees are modified in the terms that suit of 
respondent  for  recovery  of  dower  5-Marla  house  with  necessary 
amenities  or  in  alternate  its  market  price,  to  be  determined  by  the 
learned executing Court, stands decreed, whereas the remaining claim 
of respondent for 5-Marla residential house being contrary to terms and 
conditions of ‘Nikah Nama’ stands dismissed. The order of this Court 
be  conveyed  to  the  presiding  officers  of  both  the  Courts  below  for 
guidance and expectation that in future they will exercise their judicial 
W.P.No.2888 of 2017 
 
6 
powers,  a  trust  reposed  by  the  state  in  their  favour  strictly  in 
accordance  with  law,  rules,  equity  and  conscience  considering 
themselves answerable to Allah Almighty. 
 (Mujahid Mustaqeem Ahmed) 
 
  Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
  Judge 
 
 
*Shahzad Ahmad Nasir* 
