Form HCJDA 38. 
 
    Judgment Sheet 
                     IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
                         MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN 
                           JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT   
            
                                   
                                      RSA No.57/2012 
 
             Mohammad Akram     Versus        Mst. Nooro Mai 
 
                                             JUDGMENT 
Dates of hearing:  
 
 
Appellant by: 
 
 
Respondent  by:  
 
20 and 21.12.2018 
M/s.  Abdul  Rasheed  Bodla  and  Sabir  Ali 
Cheema, Advocates. 
M/s.  Tahir  Mehmood  and  Malik  Mohammad 
Latif Khokhar, Advocates.  
 
 
Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir, J:- The precise facts of 
the  case  emerging  from  the  pleadings  of  parties  are  that  Sajjad 
Ahmad and others, title holders of land measuring 08-Kanals 07-
Marlas falling in Khewat No.73, sold it out to the appellant vide oral 
sale mutation No.2005 of 4th July, 2007, which was pirated through 
institution of a suit for pre-emption by the respondent/pre-emptor 
claiming her superior right being Shafi Shareek, Shafi Khaleet, Shafi 
Jar  as  well  as  due  performance  of  requisite  demands,  averring 
therein  that  she  accompanied by Malik Ghulam Farid (PW8) and 
Riaz Hussain (PW9) was available in her house on 21.10.2007 at 
10.00 a.m. where, Ghulam Rasool (PW5) appeared and passed on 
information about the sale of suit property, the respondent in the 
said gathering spontaneously pronounced her intention to pre-empt 
it.  No  doubt,  it  was  pleaded  that  Notice  Talb-i-Ishhad  through 
registered post was consigned to the appellant, but the date of its 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
2 
execution, dispatch as well as names of the marginal witnesses, who 
attested it were not disclosed. It was also not specified that the Post 
containing  Notice  Talb-i-Ishhad  was  acted  upon  the  vendee  or  it 
being unserved was received back. 
The appellant after his due appearance submitted written statement 
specifically  denying  pre-emptive  right  of  respondent  as  well  as 
performance of requisite Talbs by her. The learned Trial Court after 
settlement of issues recorded evidence of parties and as a result of 
its appreciation decreed the suit vide judgment of 31st May, 2012, 
which was also congealed by the Appellate Court on 11th July, 2012 
and  now  bootless  appellant  has  approached  this  Court  to  assail 
their said concurrent judgments through the Appeal in hand. 
2.  M/s. Abdul Rasheed Bodla and Sabir Ali Cheema, Advocates 
learned  counsel  for  appellant  emphasized  that  the  exact  time  as 
referred  in  plaint  about  fulfillment  of  first  demand  could  not  be 
proved and difference in this regard between the contents of plaint 
as well as disclosure made by PWs in the witness-box was a major 
contradiction,  but  both  the  learned  Courts  below  erred  in  law  to 
ignore  it.  They  further  added  that  non-mentioning  of  date  and 
names of witnesses to divulge that when and by whom the Notice 
Talb-i-Ishhad was scribed, attested as well as dispatched was a vital 
setback, but it was overlooked as well. They also argued that it was 
not pleaded in the plaint that Notice was delivered to the vendee, as 
such the evidence examined to prove a fact not narrated in plaint 
was to be ignored as per principle of secundum allegata et probata. 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
3 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  while  referring  documents 
tendered on behalf of the pre-emptor pleaded that it was sine qua 
non on behalf of the latter to establish her superior pre-emptive right 
at  three  crucial  stages,  but  she  could  not  maintain  the  same, 
whereas both the learned Courts below failed to appreciate Exh.P 4, 
6, 7 and 8 in its true perspective, as such their findings being illegal, 
erroneous and tainted with misreading and non-reading of evidence 
are not sustainable in the eye of law. 
3. 
In contra, M/s. Tahir Mehmood and Malik Mohammad Latif 
Khokhar, Advocates, learned counsel for respondent submitted that 
concurrent findings of fact arrived at by learned Courts below being 
result of well appreciation of the evidence of parties as per its gist 
and  substance  cannot  be  interfered  with  by  this  Court  while 
invoking  jurisdiction  vested  in  it  under  section  100  of  the  Code, 
1908. It was further argued by them that their counterpart could 
only point out minor discrepancies in the statements of PWs, which 
were recorded after a considerable delay and while dispensing with 
justice, these were rightly ignored by the Courts below. It was also 
stressed in the interest of pre-emptor by her counsel that not only 
quantitative  rather  qualitative  evidence  was  examined  to  prove 
superior right as well as performance of due demands and learned 
Courts below  were perfect  to appreciate  it  in  returning affirmative 
finding on the pivotal issues struck in this regard. 
4. 
Arguments  heard.  Record  scanned  with  able  assistance  of 
learned counsel for parties. 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
4 
5. 
The crux of the case detailed by the pre-emptor in para-3(iii) of 
the plaint being significant to comprehend is reproduced below:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
In  the  light  of  above  referred  part  of  pleadings,  the  learned 
Trial Court rightly formulated issues No.2 and 3 among others and 
only the formers being relevant are detailed as under:- 
2.  Whether  the  plaintiff  has  superior  right  of  pre-
emption qua the defendant? OPP 
 
3.  Whether the plaintiff has fulfilled the requirements 
of  Talabs  as  required  under  the  law  of  pre-
emption? OPP 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
5 
 
7.  Dealing with issue No.3, it will be useful to make a reference to 
Section 13 of the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991 in extenso:-  
13.  Demand of pre-emption. (1) The right of pre-
emption of a person shall be extinguished unless such 
person makes demands of pre-emption in the following 
orders, namely:-  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
‘Talb-i-Muwathibat’; 
‘Talb-i-Ishhad’; and  
‘Talb-i-Khusumat’.  
Explanation  
I. ‘Talb-i-Muwathibat’ means  immediate  demand by a 
pre-emptor in the sitting or meeting (Majlis) in which he 
has come to know of the sale, declaring his intention to 
exercise the right of pre-emption.  
Note.  Any  words  indicative  of  intention  to  exercise  the 
right of pre-emption are sufficient.  
II. 
‘Talb-i-Ishhad’  means  demand  by  establishing 
evidence.  
III. 
‘Talb-i-Khusumat’ means demand by filing a suit.  
(2)  When the fact of sale comes within the knowledge 
of a pre-emptor through any source, he shall make Talb-
i-Muwathibat.  
(3)  Where a pre-emptor has made Talb-i-Muwathibat 
under  subsection  (2),  he  shall  as  soon  thereafter  as 
possible but not later than two weeks from the date of 
knowledge make Talb-i-Ishhad by sending a notice  in 
writing  attested  by  two  truthful  witnesses,  under 
registered cover acknowledgement due, to the vendee, 
confirming  his  intention  to  exercise  the  right  of  pre-
emption:  
 
As we all are aware of the fact that a Full Bench of the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan comprising five Hon’ble Judges in the case cited 
as Mian Pir Muhammad  and another Vs. Faqir Muhammad through 
L.Rs. and others (PLD 2007 SC 302) after plausibly discussing all 
the authorities and references has already made it incumbent upon 
the pre-emptor to specifically mention the time, date and place of 
making Talb-i-Muwathibat in the plaint, so that calculation of fixed 
period for the performance of next Talb can be exactly made and 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
6 
possibility of concoction as well as improvement can be eschewed. It 
is  requirement  of  law  that  the  very  right  of  pre-emption  is  not 
activated unless Talb-i-Muwathibat is performed, which should not 
be  dubbed  as  mere  technicality,  but  at  times  it  acquires  such 
dimension that it becomes more important than the superior right 
because  it  essentially  is  a  sine  qua  non  of  the  right  of  the  pre-
emption.  Talb-i-Muwathibat  is  termed  as  immediate  demand  and 
must be performed as early as possible on receiving the information 
about the sale and its immediate performance is, in fact, its beauty 
and if such fact is not proved, then definitely it can safely be held 
that demand was not performed in its true spirit. 
In the present case, as per contents of plaint referred hereinabove, 
the  moment  transaction  was  disclosed  by  the  informer,  Ghulam 
Rasool, pre-emptor vocally announced her intention at 10.00 a.m. 
before Ghulam Farid and Riaz Hussain. No doubt, in his statement 
the informer (PW5) sticked to the timing as specified above, whereas 
Ghulam Farid (PW8) although in first part of his statement-in-chief 
maintained that Majlis was constituted at 10.00 a.m., but in second 
part he stated that after loss of 10 to 15 minutes, the transaction 
was  disclosed  by  the  informer  (PW5),  forcing  pre-emptor  to 
pronounce  Talb-i-Muwathibat.  He  in  his  cross-examination  further 
delineated in the following words:- 
ش
ف
۔تھے منٹ
01 کر بج  01/01 
 کے ند قتو سا کیا ع
 نعلاا نے عیہمد  قتو جس
 
The  other  partaker,  Riaz  Hussain  (PW9)  further  doubted  the 
performance  of  first  demand  by  making  statement  that  after 
 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
7 
another 30 minutes to 10.00 a.m. it was pronounced and the exact 
words, he uttered in his statement-in-chief, are:- 
 کے چک ہی یکا ںنوود ۔ ںہو نتاجا کو یدفر مغلا ۔ ںہو
 نتاجا کو عیہمد میں
 کیا نبیا
 
 
 عہقوو
 کا  
 بجے سد کے ند  ً
 
یباتقر ۔ہے عہقوو کا
خہرمو ۔ہیں 10-  01-00  
ئشیہار
  
 
 اراود ۔ھا۔ دودمو ھر  
 یدفر مغلا
 ما کے عیہمد ئی
ورنو ندو
 ما خا سٹر 
 حسین محمد میں ۔
ہے 
 ئےہو بیٹھے حسینمحمد ندوخا کا سا روا ئیماورنو ۔تھے بیٹھے فطر  پچھلی کے نمکا ۔ھا۔
لدو لسور مغلا بعد منٹ
01/01 
 یباًتقر یرد یڑتھو ۔تھے ہےر کر تیںبا میں پسآ
 
 کہا نے سابعد منٹ
01/01 
 ۔گیا بیٹھ کر آ ۔گیا آ
/030
TDAنمبر چک بخش مماا 
 ود ہے ئیہو ختوفر میں پےور راہز ےنو کھلا یکا مبلغ ضیارا
  و ا لی  
 دسجا کہ  و ڑ ئچا
ش
ف
 
 ع
              ۔کیا
  ا علا ن 
 ورنو ۔ہے کی  یدخر نے  ہلڑکا محمد رنو جیحا لدو مکرا محمد
   ارفو نے ئیما
 
 
On the same motif pre-emptor (PW10) also exposed a difference of 
 
15/20  minutes  about  fulfillment of  first  demand  than pleaded  in 
the plaint. When in Mian Pir Muhammad’s case, the mentioning of 
timing besides other detail was made imperative for the pre-emptor, 
then of course it was also obligatory for him to veraciously prove it. 
The due performance of Talb-i-Muwathibat is the foundation of the 
case of the pre-emptor and once his evidence becomes shaky or his 
rival succeeds to make a dent therein, the superstructure has to 
collapse. The timing being one of the basic/vital ingredients to prove 
the  fact  of  constitution  of  Majlis  and  prompt  performance  of  first 
demand was not maintained as pleaded in this case, but lower fora 
committed material irregularity and illegality to conclude that Talb-i-
Muwathibat was duly performed.  
8. 
The other setback of the case was that pre-emptor failed to 
mention  the  date  of  execution  and  dispatch  of  the  Notice  Talb-i-
Ishhad in the contents of plaint. No doubt, copy of the same was 
 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
8 
brought on record, but as per principle settled by the apex Court in 
cases  reported  Mian  Pir  Muhammad  and  another  Vs.  Faqir 
Muhammad  through  L.Rs.  and  others  (PLD  2007  SC  302),  Mst. 
Saleem  Akhtar  Vs.  Ch.  Shauk  Ahmed  (2009  SCMR  673)  and 
Muhammad  Ismail  Vs.  Muhammad  Yousaf  (2012  SCMR  911),  it 
was  obligatory  upon  the  pre-emptor  to  disclose  the  same  in  the 
plaint, whereas the Courts below again failed to take Notice of the 
ratio  of  the  afore-noted  judgments.  Moreover,  no  doubt,  Ghulam 
Farid  and  Riaz  Hussain,  the  attesting  witnesses  of  Notice  Talb-i-
Ishhad, were examined as PWs 8 and 9, but out of them, the former 
during cross examination (at page 22) in unequivocal terms stated 
as under:- 
 
 
 
تھے کیے نہ ستخطد پر ٹسنو کسی سپا کے لےاو نےکر یرتحر ٹسنو نے ہم 
Although the other attesting witness, PW9 in his statement-in-chief 
stated  that  Notice  was  scribed  and  attested  on  22.10.2007,  but 
during  the  test  of  cross-examination  which  is  a  tool  to  elucidate 
truth, he fairly deposed that:- 
 
گیا بھیجا علیہ عامد نببجا ٹسنو بعد صہعر کتنے کے ع
 نعلاا کہ ںہو سکتا بتا نہ یہ
میں 
ش
ف
Whereas, PW9 was purported participant of the gathering in which 
allegedly one day prior first demand was made. This all proved that 
the PWs were tutees, who exposed only that detail, which was learnt 
to them, but in the cross test they failed to keep up their tuition. 
There is much substance in the argument of learned counsel for the 
appellants  that  pre-emptor  failed  to  plead  that  Notice  Talb-i-Ishhad 
was  acted  upon  the  vendee,  as  such  the  evidence  so  adduced  to 
 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
9 
prove  this  fact  by  the  pre-emptor  could  not  be  considered.  The 
scrutiny  of  record  unfolds  that  mutation  under  pre-emption  was 
sanctioned  on  04.07.2007,  first  talb  on  21.07.2007  and  the  next 
one  was  performed  on  the  following  day.  Whereas  according  to 
Booking  Receipt  (Exh:P1),  the  Notice  was  booked  on  22.07.2007 
and perusal of A.D. Card (Exh:P2) as well as statement of Postmen 
(PW3  and  4),  shows  that  Exh.P1  was  delivered  to  the  vendee  on 
30.07.2007  and  Exh:P2  might  have  been  received  back  to 
addressor/pre-emptor  within  next  two  three  days,  but  suit  was 
instituted  by  the  latter  after  about  three  months  of  the  alleged 
delivery on 30.10.2007. In such situation there was no deterrent to 
plead this fact, but it was held back for the reasons best known to 
the pre-emptor and as per principle secundum allegata et probata 
any evidence led to prove a fact, which was omitted to be pleaded, 
had to be ignored. See  Muhammad  Wali  Khan  &  another  vs. 
Gul  Sarwar  Khan  &  another  (PLD  2010  SC  965)  and 
Haider Ali Bhimji v.  Vith Additional District Judge, Karachi 
(South) & another (2012 SCMR 254). So this lacuna was also 
fatal  for  the  pre-emptor.  In  view  of  above  discussion,  the 
respondent/pre-emptor  failed  to  prove  fulfillment  of  requisite 
demands as per requirement of law and the principles settled by the 
superior  Courts,  but  lower  fora  decided  it  otherwise  and  their 
findings being  illegal  and  result  of  misreading and  non-reading of 
evidence cannot be sustained, hence their decision on issue No.3 is 
reversed and answered against the pre-emptor.  
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
10 
9. 
Adverting  to  issue  No.2,  both  learned  counsel  for  the 
contesting parties are in agreement on the legal phrase that in order 
to succeed in a suit for pre-emption, the pre-emptor has to show 
that he has superior right of pre-emption qua the vendee(s) at three 
stages; firstly on the day of sale, secondly, when the suit  is to be 
instituted and lastly the date when it is finally culminated. In this 
regard, reference may be made to Baldeo Misir Vs. Ramlagan Shukul 
(AIR  1924  Alahabad  82),  Rai  Tulley  Khan  Vs.  Ahmed  Hassan 
Khan and others (1981 SCMR 1075), Muhammad Khan and others 
Vs. Muzaffar (PLD 1983 SC 181) and Hasil and another Vs. Karam 
Hussain  Shah  and  others  (1995  SCMR  1385).  Needless  to  state 
that well-founded rule laid down by the apex Court has also been 
recognized by introducing Section 17 in the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 
1991.  
In  this  case,  the  mutation  (Exh.P4)  under  pre-emption  was 
sanctioned  on  04.07.2007  with  regard  to  land  forming  share  of 
Khewat No.73. To  prove  that pre-emptor  was also  Shafi  Shareek, 
along  with  Exh.P4,  copy  of  Jamabandi  for  the  year  2000-01  was 
tendered as Exh.P6 and its study exposed that pre-emptor was not 
recorded  as  sharers  of  impugned  Khewat,  rather  her  father, 
Ghulaman  was  mentioned  in  the  column  of  owners.  So  this 
document was of no significance for the pre-emptor to prove that 
she was a co-sharer. Moreover, Exh:P6 pertained to an earlier era, 
which otherwise was not relevant. The other two copies of Register 
Haqdaran Zameen (Exh:P7 and 8) for the year 2004-05 and 2008-09 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
11 
respectively although reflected pre-emptor being co-owner but not of 
the disputed Khewat No.73, rather it pertained to Khewat No.74/73 
and  74/74.  No  other  document  was  exhibited  to  prove  that  pre-
emptor was Shafi Shareek, whereas all the documents available on 
her part  were  insufficient  to prove  that at any of  the  three stages 
referred hereinabove the pre-emptor/respondent was sharer in the 
joint  holding  wherefrom  part  of 
it  was  mutated  to  the 
vendee/appellant. Furthermore, there is nothing in black and white 
on the record to prove that property of pre-emptor was adjacent to 
the subject land having common passage and source of irrigation. In 
this  regard,  it  was  imperative  upon  the  pre-emptor  to  bring  on 
record copy of Aks Shajrah besides examination of its maker and 
the  copy  of  Warabani  to  prove  that  she  was  Shafi  Jar  as  well  as 
Shafi  Khaleet,  but  withholding  of  such  evidence  has  forced  this 
Court  to  draw  adverse  inference  against  her  under  Article  129 
illustration (g) of Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 1984, as such, the 
findings of the Courts below on issue No.2 are also not sustainable, 
which  too  are  reversed  and  said  issue  is  answered  against  the 
respondent. 
10.  Now diverting towards the contention of learned counsel for 
the  respondent  that  this  Court  cannot  set  aside  concurrent 
judgments  of  the  lower  Courts  in  exercise  of  the  powers  vested 
under Section 100 of the Code, 1908. No doubt, in Second Appeal 
ordinarily  this  Court  is  reluctant  in  disturbing  the  unanimous 
decisions, but it is not a rule of thumb and this Court cannot close 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
12 
its eyes where Courts below misinterpreted the available material in 
its  true  perspective  or  overlooked  to  comprehend  it.  The  manifest 
injustice  cannot  be  permitted  to  perpetrate  simply  for  the  reason 
that in Second Appeal reappraisal of evidence is not permissible by 
this Court even if ended in wrong conclusion or contrary to law. In 
forming this view, I have to my credit cases titled Muhammad Aslam 
Vs. Mst. Ferozi and others (PLD 2001 SC 213), Khushi Muhammad 
Vs.  Liaquat  Ali  represented  by  Muhammad  Irshad  and  others          
(PLD 2002 SC 581), Iftikhar through legal heirs and others Vs. Capt. 
Khadim Hussain through legal heirs and others (PLD 2002 SC 607) 
and Muhammad Khan Vs. Mst. Rasul Bibi (PLD 2003 SC 676). In 
the latter case, the apex Court held:- 
Ordinarily  concurrent  findings  recorded  by  the  Courts 
below could not be interfered with by the High Courts 
while  exercising  jurisdiction  in  the  Second  Appeal, 
howsoever erroneous the findings may be, unless such 
findings had been arrived at by the Courts below either 
by  ignoring  a  piece  of  evidence  on  record  or  through 
perverse  appreciation  of  evidence.  High  Court,  in  the 
present case, was justified in interfering with concurrent 
findings, after noticing that the judgments of the Courts 
below  suffer  from  acute  miscarriage  of  evidence  and 
exclusive of material available on the record, resulting in 
gross miscarriage of justice. 
 
This view has again been affirmed by the same Court in Muhammad 
Yousaf Baig Vs. Rehmat Ali (2009 SCMR 642). 
11.  The epitome of the above discussion is that both the Courts 
below failed to appreciate evidenced in its true perspective as well as 
applying correct law on the subject and it is a fit case to be interfered 
with by this Court while invoking jurisdiction vested u/s 100 of the 
Code,  1908.  Hence  this  Appeal  is  allowed,  judgments  of  the  two 
RSA No.57 of 2012 
 
13 
Courts  below  are  hereby  set  aside  and  suit  of  the  pre-emptor  is 
dismissed with no order as to costs.       
  
 
 
 
          (Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir)  
                                    Judge            
                                       Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
                                        Judge 
 
 
 
 
*A.H.Qamar*  
