Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP 
Peeru Ram v. The State etc.) 
and 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
(The State v. Peeru Ram) 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
       Date of hearing:  13.09.2018 
 
 
           
 
Appellant  by: 
Complainant by:   Mr. Saleem Gill, Advocate. 
State by: 
Ch. Imran Ashraf, Advocate. 
Mr. Asghar Ali Gill, Deputy Prosecutor General 
along with Khalid ASI. 
----------------------------------- 
 
Ch.  Abdul  Aziz,  J.  Peeru  Ram  (appellant)  had  allegedly 
murdered his wife named Kammo Mai on 08.04.2013 in his house 
situated  in  Chak  No.61/DB  in  the  area  of  Police  Station  Yazman. 
For committing the said offence, appellant was booked in case FIR 
No.82/2013 registered at the said Police Station on the same day for 
an  offence  under  section  302  PPC.  After  trial,    Peeru  Ram 
(appellant)  was  convicted  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 
Yazman, District Bahawalpur on 31.05.2014 and was sentenced in 
the following terms:- 
“Under section  302 (b) PPC: awarded death sentence. He was 
also  directed  to  pay  compensation  of  Rs.500,000/-  to  the  legal 
heirs  of  deceased  and  in  default  thereof  to  undergo  SI  for  six 
months”. 
 
Challenging  his  conviction  and  sentence,  Peeru  Ram 
(appellant)  filed  Criminal  Appeal  No.275  of  2014.  On  the  other 
hand, the trial court sent reference under section 374, Cr.P.C. which 
was  numbered  as  Murder  Reference  No.29  of  2014  for  the 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
2 
confirmation or otherwise of death sentence awarded to Peeru Ram 
(convict).  Both  these  matters  are  being  disposed  of  through  this 
single judgment.  
2. 
Briefly  stated  the  story  of  the  prosecution  as  unveiled  by 
complainant  Markas  Ram  (PW.1)  in  FIR (Exh.PB)  is  to  the  effect 
that  Kammo  Mai  (deceased)  was  married  with  Peeru  Ram 
(appellant) way back in August, 2006; that Kammo Mai (deceased) 
along with Peeru Ram, came to the house of her parents situated in 
Chak No.18/DNB on 06.04.2010 to attend marriage function of her 
brother,  namely,  Ajmal  Ram;  that  the  marriage  function  was  over 
on  07.04.2013  and  thereafter  Peeru  Ram  (appellant)  asked  the 
deceased to accompany him back to their house; that Markas Ram 
(PW.1) asked the couple to spend another day in his house; the said  
request was acceded to by Kammo Mai (deceased), however, Peeru 
Ram  (appellant)  expressed  his  resentment  over  the  decision  and 
took  her  to  his  house  situated  in  Chak  No.61/DB;  on  the  next 
morning,  Markas  Ram  (PW.1)  received  a  call  from  his  deceased 
sister, whereby she voiced her apprehension of murder from Peeru 
Ram  and  further  complained  about  the  receipt  of  beating;  that  on 
the receipt of such information, Markas Ram (PW.1) along with his 
brother  Amarya  Ram  (PW.2)  and  brother  in  law  Beeba  Ram 
(PW.3)  arrived  at  the  house  of  ill-fated  couple  at  about  9:00  a.m. 
and  witnessed  Peeru  Ram  while  inflicting  successive  blows  to 
deceased  through  handle  of  hatchets,  due  to  which  she  fell  on  a 
ground and subsequently was strangulated to death by him through 
a rope; that on an attempt of witnesses to apprehend Peeru Ram, he 
made  good  his  escape  from  the  crime  scene  while  brandishing  his 
hatchet. 
3. 
The law was set into  motion on the  application (Exh.PA) of 
Markas  Ram  (complainant)  presented  before  Sajjad  Hussain  SI 
(PW.9)  during  his  visit  to  the  crime  scene.  Subsequent  thereto  he 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
3 
examined  the  dead  body  of  Kamoon  Mai  (deceased),  prepared 
injury  statement  and  inquest  report  (Exh.PH  &  Exh.PJ).  From  the 
spot,  he  secured  rope  (P.1)  which  was  taken  into  possession  vide 
memo  Exh.PC.  He  sent  the  application  (Exh.PA)  to  the  Police 
Station  through  Muhammad  Imran  Razakar  for  the  registration  of 
formal FIR (Exh.PB). He also dispatched the dead body of Kamoon 
Mai  to  the  hospital  for  the  post-mortem  examination  through 
Rashid Bashir Constable. Sajjad Hussain SI (PW.9) arrested Peeru 
Ram  on  25.04.2013, who  on  29.04.2013  made  a  disclosure  and  in 
pursuance  thereof  led  to  the  recovery  of  hatchet  (P.2)  which  was 
taken  into  possession  vide  memo  Exh.PD.  On  30.04.2013,  he  got 
prepared  scaled  site  plan  through  Saeed  Akhtar  Sub-Engineer.  He 
recorded the statements of witnesses under section 161, Cr.P.C. and 
thereafter  delivered  the  file  to  SHO  for  the  preparation  of  report 
under section 173, Cr.P.C. 
4. 
Prosecution  in  order  to  prove  its  case  against  the  appellant 
produced  nine  PWs  including  Markas  Ram  (PW.1),  Amarya 
Ram  (PW.2),  Beeba  Ram  (PW.3),  who  are  eye-witnesses  of  the 
occurrence,  Dr.Bushra  Tariq  (PW.6)  who  furnished  medical 
evidence  and  Sajjad  Hussain  SI  (PW.9)  who  is  Investigating 
Officer  of  the  case.  The  remaining  witnesses,  more  or  less,  were 
formal in nature.  
5. 
Dr.  Bushra  Tariq  (PW.6)  on  08.04.2013  at  2:30  p.m. 
conducted 
the  post-mortem  examination  of  Kamoon  Mai 
(deceased) and observed the following injuries:- 
“1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
A scratch 1 x 1 cm on left side of forehead. 
A bruise of reddish colour 3 x 3 cm on back of left ear. 
A ligature mark horizontal 15 cm x 1 cm encircling front 
of neck extending from right side of neck to left side of 
neck.  Mark  is  of  reddish  blue  colour.  Ligature  mark  is 
absent at back. 
A  scratch  2  x  2  cm  on  posterior  aspect  of  right  elbow 
joint. 
An  abrasion  3  x  2  cm  on  upper  medial  aspect  of  right 
forearm.  
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
4 
A bruise of reddish blue colour 4 x 3 cm  on top of left 
shoulder. 
Three bruises of reddish blue colour 6 x 3 cm on antero 
lateral aspect of left thigh. 
A  bruise  2  x  1  cm  on  right  side  of  back  of  abdomen. 
Bruise is of reddish blue colour. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
 
She gave the following opinion:- 
“On  careful  external  and  internal  post  mortem  examination,  I 
am of the opinion that death occurred due to asphyxia which is 
due  to  blockage  of  air  passages  as  neck.  I  have  collected  the 
hyoid bone, sealed and sent to Histopathologist Government of 
Punjab  Lahore  for  any  microscopist  ante-mortem  and  post-
mortem  injury. All injuries on dead body are by blunt weapon 
and are ante-mortem in nature. Post mortem examination report 
Exh.PB  is  computerized  copy  which  bears  my  signature. 
Exh.PB/1 is pictorial diagram which also bears my signature.”   
 
 
6. 
After  the  conclusion  of  prosecution  evidence,  the  learned 
trial  court  examined  the  appellant  under  section  342,  Cr.P.C.  who 
in  response  to  question  “why  this  case  against  you  and  why  the 
PWs have deposed against you” made the following reply:- 
“I am innocent. I have falsely been involved in this case by the 
complainant  party.  In  fact,  Atam  Ram  son  of  Mansha  Ram  is 
brother-in-law of complainant. Kamoon Mai had illicit relations 
with  Atam  Ram.  Kamoon  Mai  was  caught  hold  of  in 
objectionable condition with Atam Ram on the day of marriage 
of  Ajmal  Ram,  complainant  party  felt  it  ashamed  in  the 
presence  of  their  brotheri.  Her  father  stopped  her  visits  to  his 
house  due  to  her  above  said  illicit  relations  with  Atam  Ram. 
Kamoon Mai stated to her father that now he would come to her 
house within one or two days. Kamoon Mai was not murdered 
by any one, she committed suicide by strangulation. Beerki Mai 
wife  of  Asu  Ram  untied  the  knot  of  Kamoon  Mai,  when  she 
was  hanging.  Kamoon  Mai  received  injuries  when  Beerki  Mai 
untying  her  knot,  the  dead  body  was  fallen  on  the  grass-pot 
(Khurli)  and  injuries  came  on  the  dead  body  of  Kamoon  Mai, 
Balam  Ram  informed  me  through  his  cell  No.0346-71561`58, 
when  I  was  present  at  the  daira  of  Khalid  Waraich  at  Chak 
No.62/DB on his cell No.0343-7029823. The complainant came 
to  my  house  on  my  information.  The  complainant  concocted 
false story just to falsely involve me in this case. 
The  PWs  are  close  relative  of  the  complainant  and  PWs  are 
resident  of  11  K.M  away  from  the  place  of  occurrence, 
therefore, 
the  asking  of 
complainant”. 
 
 
they  deposed  against  me  on 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
5 
The appellant neither opted to make statement under section 
340 (2) of Cr.P.C. nor produced any witness in his defence. On the 
conclusion  of  trial,  the  appellant  was  convicted  and  sentenced  as 
mentioned above, hence, the instant appeal and murder reference. 
7. 
It is contended by the learned counsel that the instant case is 
arising  out  of  a  crime  report  which  though  was  apparently 
registered  within  three  hours  of  the  occurrence,  however,  the 
perusal of record reflects that it was registered much thereafter; that 
the eye-witnesses, contradicted each other regarding the manner in 
which  information  of  occurrence  was  conveyed  to  police;  that  the 
eye-witnesses of the occurrence, were residents of a place situated 
at  a  distance  of  about  30-32  kilometers  from  the  crime  scene  and 
miserably  failed  to  justify  their  presence  at  the  eventful  time;  that 
this aspect makes them as chance witnesses and on this score alone 
their  evidence  is  liable  to  be  discarded;  that  the  absence  of  eye-
witnesses  from  the  crime  scene  is  further  evident  from  their 
response which they demonstrated at the time of occurrence by not 
making  any  effort  to  save  the  life  of  Kammo  Mai  deceased;  that 
had  the  witnesses  been  present  at  place of  occurrence, they  would 
have  restrained  the  appellant  from  strangulating  the  deceased  to 
death or at least should have raised some hue and cry to attract the 
people  of  vicinity  for  an  intervention;  that  the  appellant  came 
forward with the specific stance that deceased died a suicidal death; 
that such defence of the appellant is strongly supported by position 
of ligature mark on the neck of deceased; that though a reasonable 
doubt emerges from the plain recital of prosecution case, however, 
its  benefit  was  not  extended  to  appellant  which  is  contrary  to  the 
basic principle of Criminal Jurisprudence. With these submissions, 
it was urged by the learned counsel that conviction awarded to the 
appellant is not maintainable.  
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
6 
8. 
On  the  other  hand  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General 
assisted  by 
learned  counsel 
for 
the  complainant  strongly 
controverted  the  arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  appellant  and 
submitted that instant case is arising out of a promptly lodged First 
Information  Report;  that  appellant  is  the  only  person  nominated 
therein for having committed the murder of deceased; that the eye-
witnesses  not  only  explained  their  presence  at  the  crime  scene 
beyond  any  shadow  of  doubt  but  they  also  provided  all  the 
necessary details of the occurrence; that the narration of occurrence 
put  forth  by  the  witnesses  is  strongly  supported  by  the  medical 
evidence; that as per admitted facts, none of the eye-witnesses had 
any  grudge  or  animosity  against  the  appellant  so  as  to  falsely 
implicate him in the commission of crime; that though the appellant 
came  forward  with  the  plea  that  deceased  committed  suicide, 
however, miserably failed to substantiate it and that since the guilt 
of  appellant  is  well  established  from  the  prosecution  evidence, 
hence,  the  conviction  awarded  to  him  needs  no  interference  from 
this Court.  
9. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
10.  A  wade  through  the  record  reveals  that  the  case  in  hand 
pertains  to  the  death  of  Kammo  Mai  (deceased)  who  took  last 
breath  in  the  house  of  her  husband,  Peeru  Raam,  situated  in  Chak 
No.61/DB. According to the detail of events mentioned in the crime 
report  (Exh.PB),  Kammo  Mai  (deceased)  was  married  with  Peeru 
Ram  (appellant)  way  back  in  August,  2006.  Kammo  Mai 
(deceased)  along  with  Peeru  Raam,  came  to  the  house  of  her 
parents  situated  in  Chak  No.18/DNB  on  06.04.2010  to  attend 
marriage  function  of  her  brother,  namely,  Ajmal  Ram.  The 
marriage  function  was  over  on  07.04.2013  and  thereafter  Peeru 
Ram (appellant) asked the deceased to accompany him back to their 
house.  However,  Markas  Ram  (PW.1)  asked  the  couple  to  spend 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
7 
another day in his house. Such request was acceded to by Kammo 
Mai  (deceased),  however,  Peeru  Ram  (appellant)  expressed  his 
resentment  over  the  decision  and  took  her  to  his  house  situated  in 
Chak  No.61/DB.  On  the  following  morning,  Markas  Ram  (PW.1) 
received  a  call  from  his  deceased  sister,  whereby  she  voiced  her 
apprehension  of  murder  from  Peeru  Ram  and  further  complained 
about  the  receipt  of  beating.  On  the  receipt  of  such  information, 
Markas  Ram  (PW.1)  along  with  his  brother  Amarya  Ram  (PW.2) 
and  brother  in  law  Beeba  Ram  (PW.3)  arrived  at  the  house  of  ill-
fated couple at about 9:00 a.m. Upon their arrival, the three persons 
witnessed Peeru Ram while inflicting successive blows to deceased 
through  handle  of  hatchets,  due  to  which  she  fell  on  a  ground. 
Immediately  thereafter,  the  deceased  was  strangulated  to  death  by 
the  appellant  through  a  rope.  On  an  attempt  of  witnesses  to 
apprehend  Peeru  Raam,  he  made  good  his  escape  from  the  crime 
scene while brandishing his hatchet. 
11.  The wheel of law regarding this occurrence was set in motion 
through  written  application  (Exh.PA)  of  Markas  Ram  (PW.1), 
presented  before  Sajjad  Hussain  SI  (PW.9)  during  his  visit  to  the 
crime scene at about 11:30 a.m. which later formed basis of crime 
report No.882/13 (Exh.PB) registered at about 6:05 p.m. 
 
Though from above, it insinuates that the case is arising out 
of  First  Information  Report,  registered  with  all  promptitude, 
however, an in-depth analysis of the record reveals otherwise. It is 
observed by us that the scene of crime was situated at a distance of 
9-kilometer  from  Police  Station  Yazman  and  the  complaint 
(Exh.PA) was forwarded to Police Station through Imran PQR who 
was not produced during trial. It needs no mention that the prompt 
registration of FIR in a criminal case is an important feature and is 
to be proved by prosecution and that too by leading some evidence. 
From such omission, we are left with no other option but to draw an 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
8 
inference in consonance with Article 129 Illustration (g) of Qanun-
e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  that  had  Imran  been  produced  as  witness, 
he  would  not  have  supported  the  case  of  prosecution.  It  is  also 
noticed  by  us  that  the  three  eye-witnesses  stated  consistently  that 
the  information  of  occurrence  was  conveyed  to  police  by  Beeba 
Ram in the Police Station and thereafter Police arrived at the crime 
scene.  However,  Sajjad  Hussain  SI  (PW.9)  stated  during  cross-
examination  regarding  the  receipt  of  information  in  question 
through  a  telephonic  call  of  Moharrar.  Swayed  by  these  features, 
we  are  constrained  to  hold  that  claim  of  prosecution  regarding 
prompt registration of FIR is not free from doubts.  
12. 
In the above backdrop, we have made a meticulous analysis 
of  the  ocular  account  from  which  it  is  borne  out  that  all  the  three 
eye-witnesses  were  residents  of  a  vicinity  known  as  Chak 
No.18/DNB, whereas the murder incident occurred in the house of 
appellant  situated  in  Chak  No.61/DB.  The  intervening  distance 
between the two places  was described by the Investigating Officer 
of the case, namely, Sajjad Hussain SI (PW.9) as 30/32 kilometers. 
For advantage sake an extract from his cross-examination is being 
reproduced below:- 
“It  is  correct  that all the PWs of this case except Mansha Ram 
were  resident  of  Chak  No.18/DNB.  There  is  distance  of  30/32 
K.M. between Chak No.18/DNB and Chak No.61/DB.” 
 
 
From  the  above  feature  it  reasonably  spells  out  that  as  per 
their daily routine, the eye-witnesses should not have been present 
at  the  crime  scene.  Keeping  in  view  the  fact  that  just  two  days 
before  the  occurrence,  marriage  ceremony  of  Ajmal  Raam  brother 
of  Markas  Ram  and  Amarya  Ram  (PW.1  &  PW.2)  and  brother  in 
law  of  Beeba  Ram  (PW.3)  took  place,  hence,  it  appears  more 
improbable for them to be present at the eventful place. This aspect 
goes  long  way  in  making  all  the  afore-mentioned  three  persons  as 
chance witnesses. We are not oblivious of the fact that evidence of 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
9 
such  witness  is  not  to  be  brushed  aside  straightway  and  instead  it 
can be given legal credence if such person reasonably explains and 
justifies  his  presence  at  the  crime  scene  during  occurrence. 
Likewise, the testimony of such a witness, as an abundant caution, 
is to be scrutinized on the touchstone of corroboration. Reliance in 
this  respect  can  be  made  on  the  case  of  Mst.  Sughra  Begum  and 
another  v.  Qaiser  Pervez  and others  (2015  SCMR  1142)  wherein 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan while dealing with a case of 
chance witness observed as under:- 
“A chance witness, in legal parlance is the one who claims that 
he was present  on the crime spot at the fateful  time, albeit,  his 
presence there was a sheer chance as in  the ordinary course of 
business,  place  of  residence  and  normal  course  of  events,  he 
was not supposed to be present on the spot but at a place where 
he resides, carries on business or runs day to day life affairs. It 
is  in  this  context  that  the  testimony  of  chance  witness, 
ordinarily,  is  not  accepted  unless  justifiable  reasons  are  shown 
to establish his presence at the crime scene at the relevant time. 
In normal course, the presumption under the law would operate 
about  his  absence  from  the  crime  spot.  True  that  in  rare  cases, 
the  testimony  of  chance  witness  may  be  relied  upon,  provided 
some convincing explanations appealing to prudent mind for his 
presence  on  the  crime  spot  are  put  forth,  when  the  occurrence 
took  place  otherwise,  his  testimony  would  fall  within  the 
category of suspect  evidence and cannot be accepted without a 
pinch of salt”. 
 
In order to justify their presence at the crime scene, the eye-
witnesses came forward with the stance that in the earlier hours of 
the  day,  Markas  Ram  (PW.1)  received  a  telephonic  message  from 
Kammo  Mai  (deceased),  whereby  she  complained  about  a 
maltreatment  in  the  form  of  physical  torture  and  apprehension  of 
her  death  from  the  hands  of  Peeru  Ram  (appellant).  At  the  very 
outset,  it  is  noticed  from  a  peep  through  the  prosecution  evidence 
that the call was received at about 8:00 a.m. whereas the witnesses 
made  it  to  the  crime  spot  at  about  9:00  a.m.  on  their  bicycles. 
Keeping  in  view  the  intervening  distance  between  the  place  of 
abode of witnesses and the house of deceased as 30/32 Kilometers, 
it does not appear to be even a remotely possible to make it and that 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
10 
too  on  the  saddles  of  cycles.    On  their  arrival  at  the  spot,  the 
witnesses  saw  Peeru  Ram  (appellant)  while  inflicting  blows  to 
deceased  through  the  handle  of  hatchets.  According  to  them, 
Kammo  Mai  after  receiving  successive  blows  fell  on  the  ground 
and immediately thereafter was strangulated to death through a rope 
by Peeru Raam. It further evinces from the ocular account that the 
aggression  of  appellant  lasted  about  one/two  minutes,  however, 
none of the three eye-witnesses made any serious effort to intervene 
for  saving  Kammo  Mai  (deceased)  from  the  deadly  clutches  of 
appellant. In our considered view, the conduct demonstrated by the 
witnesses in no manner befits with natural human response to such 
an occurrence, where a lady having same blood line was being done 
to  death.  Such  response  suggests  nothing  but  the  absence  of  eye-
witnesses  from  the  eventful  place.  In  order  to  justify  their  non-
interference,  the  witnesses  stated  to  opt  silence  due  to  fear  of 
hatchet  in  the  hand  of  appellant.  Such  explanation  besides  being 
lame in nature is preposterous as well, since it was improbable for 
appellant to hold two corners of rope and hatchet at same time and 
then to strangulate the deceased.  
13.  We  have  not  been  able  to  form  a  consensus  with the  theory 
of crime advanced by prosecution whereby the appellant resorted to 
extreme  step  of  taking  the  life  of  deceased  only  when  the  PWs 
arrived  at  the  place  of  homicide.  Their  entry  into  the  house  at  the 
thick  of  moments  and  peek  of  aggression  is  giving  rise  to  many 
questions  adverse  to  the  case  of  prosecution  as  this  is  not 
understandable as to why the appellant dispensed the strangulation 
of  deceased  till  the  arrival  of  PWs.  Needless  to  mention  here  that 
such  narration  of  facts  is  always  looked  with  suspicion.  In  this 
respect, reference can be made to the case of Irshad Ahmed v. The 
State  (2011  SCMR  1190)  wherein  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan observed as under:- 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
11 
“We have found it to be quite strange that if the appellant had to 
murder the deceased then he did not have to wait for arrival of 
the  said  witnesses  for  starting  infliction  of  injuries  upon  the 
deceased.  It  is  also  noticeable  that  despite  their  claimed 
presence at the scene of crime at the relevant time the said eye-
witnesses  had  not  tried  to  stop  the  appellant  from  inflicting 
injuries  upon  the  deceased  especially  when  the  appellant  was 
not  armed  with  any  firearm  to  ward  the  said  eye-witnesses  off 
or to keep them away.” 
 
14.  We  have  noticed  another  aspect  which  without  an 
exaggeration can be termed as final nail in the coffin of prosecution 
case.  It  divulges  from  the  picture  canvassed  by  the  eye-witnesses 
that  at  the  eventful  time  Peeru  Ram  (appellant)  was  all  set  to  slay 
Kammo Mai. If it was so, the question arises as to what precluded 
the  appellant  to  achieve  his  designs  through  the  hatchet  blows 
which was in his hand.  
15.  A  review  of  medical  evidence  reveals  that  autopsy  was 
conducted by Dr. Bushra Tariq (PW.6) on 08.04.2013 at about 2:30 
p.m.  Though  the  intervening  duration  between  death  and  post-
mortem  was  5-1/2  hours,  however,  it  was  described  by  PW.6  in 
post-mortem  report  (Exh.PG)  as  within  24-hours  which  does  not 
coincide  with  prosecution  case.  This  anomaly  when  seen  in  the 
context  of  the  defence  plea  of  appellant,  according  to  which 
Kammo  Mai  (deceased)  died  suicidal  death,  gives  rise  to  a 
convincing  doubt.  It  is  also  observed  that  during  post-mortem 
examination,  a  ligature  mark  was  noted  by  the  doctor  around  the 
neck  of  deceased.  However,  a  close  look  of  the  medical  evidence 
unveils  that  the  ligature  mark  was  absent  at  the  back  of  neck. 
Likewise,  it  further  emerges  from  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Bushra 
Tariq  (PW.6)  that  the  hyoid  bone  of  the  deceased  was  found  not 
fractured.  According  to  the  prosecution  case,  the  deceased  died 
homicidal  death,  whereas  the  appellant  came  forward  with  the 
stance that it was suicidal in nature. We consider it to be in fitness 
of  things  to  embark  upon  this  issue  in  depth  as  it  is  essential  to 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
12 
decide the truth of two theories regarding the death of deceased. In 
our  considered  view,  which  is  formed  after  going  through  the 
medical jurisprudence and other material, the ill-fated lady became 
victim  of  suicidal  death.  According  to  the  view  of  Dr.  S.  Siddiq 
expressed in A Text Book of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, 
the  difference  between  suicidal  and  homicidal  death  by 
strangulation  through  rope  lies  in  the  nature  of  ligature  mark  and 
the  fracture  of  hyoid  bone.  It  is  found  mentioned  in  the  afore-
mentioned  book  of  Medical  Jurisprudence  that  ligature  in  suicidal 
death is mostly oblique in nature and fracture of hyoid bone is very 
rare.  Similar  view  was  expressed  by  C.K.  Parikh  in  his  book 
Parikh’s  Textbook  of  Medical  Jurisprudence  and  Toxicology. 
While drawing a distinguishing line between death by hanging and 
death  through  strangulation,  Dr.  Parikh  observed  that  in  former 
kind  of  death,  the  ligature  is  found  in  position  above  hyoid 
cartilage, mark incomplete, directed obliquely upward with the gap 
indicating  position  of  the  knot  and  with  no  damage  to  the  skin  in 
the  gap.  He  further  opined  that  fracture  of  hyoid  is  very  rare  in 
death by hanging.  
 
The fracture of hyoid bone always remained under debate for 
differentiating  the  cases  of  homicidal  and  suicidal  death  through 
strangulation.  In  a  research  paper  published  in  J.  Indian  Acad 
Forensic  Med.  Jul-September  2013,  Vol.35,  No.3  for  Study  of 
Fracture  of  Hyoid  Bone  in  Hanging  Cases,  on  the  basis  of  data 
collected  from  different  hospitals  during  a  period  commencing 
from 2009 to 2012 it was concluded by Abhishek Yadev et al, that 
fracture  of  hyoid  bone  is  a  rare  phenomenon  in  cases  of  death  by 
hanging. We are also mindful of the fact that 6/7 injuries other than 
the  ligature  mark  on  the  neck  were  observed  by  the  doctor  during 
autopsy on the body of deceased. These injuries are in the nature of 
bruises, abrasion and a scratch. In our view, probably, the deceased 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
13 
was  maltreated  and  beaten  by  the  appellant  which  led  to  the 
frustration and decision to commit suicide. From above discussion, 
we  are  persuaded  to  hold  that  the  prosecution  cannot  seek  refuge 
under the shelter of medical evidence as it runs contrary to it. 
16.  The  superstructure  of  Criminal  Jurisprudence  rests  on  the 
theory that if any legitimate benefit arises out of a case, the accused 
cannot  be  deprived  of  it.  While  following  the  afore-mentioned 
principle  we  have  observed  that  there  are  two  interpretations 
possible from the record i.e. either the death of deceased is suicidal 
or  homicidal  and  according  to  aged  old  principle  the  one  which 
favours the accused is to be followed. Same view was expressed by 
the  Hon’ble  Apex  Court  of  the  Country,  the  supreme  forum  to 
interpret  law,  in  case  reported  as  Qurban  Hussain  alias  Ashiq  v. 
The State (2010 SCMR 1592) which for the purposes of guidance 
is reproduced as under:- 
“…..it  is  settled  that  the  interpretation  or  theory  favourable  to 
the  accused  is  to  be  accepted.  Reference  is  invited  to  Wali 
Muhammad  v.  Nawab  and  others  (1984  SCMR  914),  Kazi 
Abdul Jamil and others v. The State (PLD 1958 SC (Pak.) 12)”. 
 
 
If  any  further  reference  on  the  subject  is  required,  it  can  be 
made  to  the  case  of  Muhammad  Shah  and  another  v.  State  and 
others  (PLJ  2011  Supreme  Court  348).  While  following  the 
afore-mentioned  thumb  rule  laid  down  arising  out  of  Criminal 
Jurisprudence,  we  are  persuaded  to  hold  that  theory  of  crime  put 
forth  by  the  defence  appears  to  be  more  probable  and  favours  the 
accused, hence, merits acceptance.  
17. 
In  accordance  with  our  findings,  mentioned  above,  we  are 
inclined  to  lean  in  favour  of  appellant  and  to  acquit  him  from  the 
charge  by  declaring  him  entitled  to  get  the  benefit  of  doubt 
emerging  from  the  record.  Consequently,  we  accept  Criminal 
Appeal No.275 of 2014 and while setting aside the conviction and 
sentence  of  Peeru  Ram  (appellant),  acquit  him  of  the  charge.  He 
Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2014/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.29 of 2014/BWP 
 
14 
shall  be  released  forthwith  if  not  required  to  be  detained  in  any 
other criminal case.  
18.  Resultantly,  Murder  Reference  No.29  of  2014  is  answered 
in  the  NEGATIVE  and  Death  Sentence  awarded  to  Peeru  Ram 
(appellant) IS NOT CONFIRMED. 
 
 
    
 
 
(Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed) 
                      Judge 
 
 
  (Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
                        Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
(Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
Najum* 
