       Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN 
    JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
Writ Petition No.17142/2018 
Hafiz Muhammad Saif Ullah 
 
Vs  DSP etc. 
S.No.of 
order/ 
Proceedings. 
Date of 
order/ 
Proceedings 
 
Order with signature of judge, and that of parties or counsel, 
where necessary. 
20.11.2018  Malik Iftikhar Arif Joyia, Advocate for the petitioner. 
 
The petitioner has filed the instant petition with following 
prayer: - 
“Under the circumstances, it is most respectfully prayed 
that instant application may kindly be accepted and the 
proceedings  conducted  by  the  respondents  in  police 
station P/S Saddar, U/S 107/150 and other proceedings 
written by Vasiqa Zafar may kindly be declared illegal, 
null  and  void  without  lawful  authority  and  be  quashed 
in the interest of justice and direction may graciously be 
issued  to  respondents  not  interfere  in  the  affair  of 
Masjid”. 
 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  in  support  of  instant 
petition  submits  that  police  was  not  competent  to  initiate 
proceedings  under  Section  107/150  Cr.P.C.  and  agreement 
written  by  Vasiqa  Navees  Zafar  is  also  illegal, hence  these  both 
are liable to be declared as null and void, and quashed. 
2. 
3. 
Heard. 
Part  IV  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898 
(hereinafter  referred  as  Code)  deals  with 
the  subject  of 
“PREVENTION OF OFFENCES” and its Chapter-VIII relates 
to  “OF  SECURITY  OF  KEEPING  THE  PEACE  AND  FOR 
GOOD  BEHAVIOUR”, its  Part-B  relates  to  “SECURITY  FOR 
 
 
Writ Petition No.17142/2018 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
KEEPING THE PEACE IN OTHER CASES AND SECURITY 
FOR  GOOD  BEHAVIOR”.    Section  107  of  the  Code  falls  in 
Part-B and being reproduced for ready reference: - 
107. Security for keeping the peace in other cases. (1) Whenever 
(the  Magistrate  Ist  Class)  is  informed  that  any  person  is  likely  to 
commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility or to 
do  any  wrongful  act  that  may  probably  occasion  a  breach  of  the 
peace  or  disturb  the  public  tranquility,  the  Magistrate  if  in  his 
opinion  there  is  sufficient  ground  for  proceeding  may,  in  manner 
hereinafter  provided,  require  such  person  to  show  cause  why  he 
should not be ordered to execute a bond with or without sureties, 
for keeping the peace for such period not exceeding [three years] 
as the Magistrate thinks fit to fix. 
(2) Proceedings shall not be taken under this section unless 
either the person  informed against or the place  where the breach 
of  the  peace  or  disturbance  is  apprehended,  is  within  the  local 
limits  of  such  Magistrate's  jurisdiction,  and  no  proceedings  shall 
be  taken  before  any  Magistrate,  [except  with  the  approval  of 
Sessions Judge], unless both the persons informed against and the 
place  where 
is 
apprehended,  are  within  the  local  limits  of  the  Magistrate's 
jurisdiction. 
the  peace  or  disturbance 
the  breach  of 
(3)  Procedure  of  Magistrate  not  empowered  to  act  under 
sub-section  (1).  When  any  Magistrate  not  empowered  to  proceed 
under  sub-section  (1)  has  reason  to  believe  that  any  person  is 
likely  to  commit  a  breach  of  the  peace  or  disturb  the  public 
tranquility or to do any wrongful act that may probably occasion a 
breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility, and that such 
breach of the peace or disturbance cannot be prevented otherwise 
than  by  detaining  such  person  in  custody,  such  Magistrate  may, 
after recording his  reason, issue a warrant for his  arrest (if he is 
not  already  in  custody  or  before  the  Court),  and  may  send  him 
before  a  Magistrate  empowered  to  deal  with  the  case,  together 
with a copy of his reasons. 
(4) A Magistrate before whom a person is sent under [sub-
section  (3)]  may  in  his  discretion  detain  such  person  in  custody 
[pending further action by himself under this Chapter]. 
 
Then  Chapter-XIII  of  the  Code  deals  with  the  subject  of 
“preventive action of the police” and Sections 150 and 151 of the 
Code  fall  in  this  chapter  and  are  being  reproduced  for  ready 
reference: - 
“150.  Information  of  design  to  commit  such  offences. 
Every  police-officer  receiving  information  of  a  design  to 
commit  any  cognizable  offence,  shall  communicate  such 
information to the police officer to whom he is subordinate, 
 
 
Writ Petition No.17142/2018 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or take 
cognizance of the commission of any such offence. 
151.  Arrest  to  prevent  such  offences.  A  police-officer 
knowing of a design to commit any cognizable offence may 
arrest,  without  orders  from  a  Magistrate  and  without  a 
warrant,  the  person  so  designing,  if  it  appears  to  such 
officer  that  the  commission  of  the  offence  cannot  be 
otherwise prevented.” 
 
Perusal  of  above  provisions  of  law  reveals  that  it  is  duty  of  the 
police  to  act  under  Section  107, 150  or  151  of  the  Code  (as  the 
case may be) for the purpose of keeping security, peace and also 
for taking measure for preventing commission of offence, hence 
proceedings under Section 107/150 of the Code statedly initiated 
by  the police in  the instant  case  are  not  without  jurisdiction  and 
in  this  regard  if  petitioner  has  any  grievance, he  can  contest  the 
same  before  the  Area  Magistrate  concerned,  however,  said 
exercise  cannot  be  done  through  instant  constitutional  petition.  
Similarly for getting any agreement (statedly prepared by Vasiqa 
Navees Zafar) declared as illegal, petitioner can avail appropriate 
remedy before the  Civil Court and said target cannot be achieved 
through instant constitutional petition. 
4. 
In view of the above, instant petition is meritless and thus 
dismissed in limine. 
Naeem 
(Farooq Haider) 
Judge 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
Judge 
