CJDA 38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.251/J/2012 
(Farzand Ali vs. The State) 
Date of hearing: 
01.11.2018 
Appellant: 
Ms. Malka Saba, Advocate. 
State: 
Mr.  Muhammad  Arshad  Farooqi, 
Deputy Prosecutor General. 
 
 
FAROOQ  HAIDER,  J.:  This  appeal  has  been  filed 
against  judgment  dated  29.5.2012  passed  by  the  learned 
Additional  Sessions  Judge  empowered  Judge  Special  Court 
under CNSA, Kasur (whereby Farzand Ali (appellant) has been 
convicted under Section 9 (c) of Control of Narcotic Substances 
Act,  1997  and  sentenced  to  undergo  imprisonment  for  life  with 
payment  of  fine  Rs.4,00,000/-  and  in  default  thereof  to  further 
undergo one year S.I., with benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C.). 
2. 
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  on  25.8.2009  at  7.00  a.m. 
complainant  Nadeem  Abbas,  DSR  Rangers  C-Company  87 
Wing,  Ganda  Singh  wala,  Kasur  alongwith  Nike  Nazir  Ahmad  
R-26252, Sepoy Javed Iqbal R-40895 and Sepoy Rehmat Ali R-
42744  were  deputed  for  patrolling  in  the  area  and  they  were 
present  at the  bank of  River  Satluj,  they  saw  three suspects  and 
through lalkara  asked  them  to  stop.   Said  suspects started  firing 
upon  Rangers  Party  with  T.T.  pistols. 
  However,  above 
mentioned  patrolling  party  encircled  and  arrested  one  of  them 
namely  Farzand  Ali  (present  appellant)  and  “13  kilograms  and 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
2 
910  grams  heroin”,  150  grams  opium  alongwith  packing  and 
one T.T. pistol alongwith two live bullets were recovered.  Said 
recovered  case  property  was  taken  into  possession  by  the 
Rangers  for  subsequently  depositing  the  same  in  Warehouse 
Lahore.    Farzand  Ali  (present  appellant)  made  disclosure  that 
said  case  property  has  been  given  to  them  by  Munir  Ahmad 
(since acquitted) for onward transmission to  India.  Farzand Ali 
further disclosed the names of his co-accused who had fled away 
from  there  as  Riaz  and  Nannah.    Incident  Report  was  prepared 
and  sent  to  the  Police  Station  Ganda  Singh  Wala,  Tehsil  and 
District  Kasur  for  registration  of  case  under  Section  9  (c)  of 
Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 read with Articles 3/4 
of Prohibition (Enforcement of Hadd) Order, 1979, Sections 324, 
353  PPC  and  Section  13/20/65  of  Arms  Ordinance.    Through 
Incident  Report,  it  was  also  asked  that  after  registration  of  the 
case, copy of the F.I.R be sent to Akhtar Hussain, Inspector RI-
3539,  who  is  conducting  the  investigation  to  the  extent  of 
offence under Section 9 (c) Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 
1997,  whereas  for  the  remaining  offences  some  police  officer 
from  police  station  be  deputed  for  investigation.    Copy  of 
Incident Report is Ex.PB. 
  
Recovery  Memo  Ex.PA  was  also  prepared  by  Nadeem 
Abbas  and  attested  by  Nike  Nazir  Ahmad  R-26252  and  Sepoy 
Rehmat Ali R-42744. 
 
After receipt of Incident Report, on 25.8.2009 Shoukat Ali 
ASI  recorded  F.I.R  No.213/2009  at  5.10  p.m.  under  Sections 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
3 
324,  353,  PPC,  13/20/65  Arms  Ordinance,  9  (c)  of  Control  of 
Narcotic  Substances  Act,  1997  and  Articles  3/4  of  Prohibition 
(Enforcement  of  Hadd)  Order,  1979  at  Police  Station  Ganda 
Singh Wala, Tehsil and District Kasur, which is Ex.PB/1. 
 
Akhtar Hussain Shah, Inspector RI-3539 handed over case 
property to Inspector Kashif Nadeem RI-3118, Headquarters F.S. 
Wing on 29.8.2009. 
 
Site  plan  of  the  place  of  occurrence  Ex.PC  was  also 
prepared.  Farzand Ali allegedly arrested at the alleged place of 
occurrence  on  25.8.2009  and  was  handed  over  to  Muhammad 
Jehangir, SI/IO on 27.8.2009  while producing him  in  the police 
station  by  Rangers,  who  accordingly  arrested  him  on  27.8.2009 
and  sent  him  to  judicial  lock  up  on  31.8.2009.    On  8.9.2009 
Muhammad  Jehangir,  SI/IO  moved  application  Ex.PD  for 
issuance  of  warrant  of  arrest  of  accused  Riaz  Ahmad,  Munir 
Ahmad  and  Nannah  and  thereafter  obtained  proclamation  qua 
them  vide  application  Ex.PE  on  17.9.2009.    He  sent  challan 
report  under  Section  173  Cr.P.C.  to  the  Court  against  Farzand 
Ali  (present  appellant)  on  20.9.2009.    Whereafter  on  different 
dates  Munir  Ahmad,  Riaz  Ahmad  and  Shamsher  Ali  alias 
Nannah had also joined the investigation and on 15.4.2010 report 
under  Section  173  Cr.P.C.  qua  them  was  also  submitted  in  the 
Court. 
 
Learned  trial  Court  on  31.3.2011  framed  the  charge 
against  all  the  four  above  mentioned  accused  namely  Farzand 
Ali,  Riaz,  Shamsher  and  Munir  Ahmad,  to  which  they  pleaded 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
4 
not  guilty  and  claimed  trial,  whereupon  the  learned  trial  Court 
summoned  the  prosecution  evidence  and  in  order  to  prove  its 
case,  prosecution  produced  as  many  as  ten  witnesses  including 
Nadeem  Abbas  DSR  Rangers  as  PW-1;  Nazir  Ahmad 
Constable/Hawaldar  as  PW-2;  Sepoy  Rehmat  Ali  as  PW-3; 
Sepoy  Javed  Iqbal  as  PW-4;  Shoukat  Ali  ASI  as  PW-5;  Akhtar 
Hussain  Inspector  Rangers  as  PW-6;  Kashif  Nadeem  DSR  as 
PW-7; Muhammad Jehangir SI (Retd.) as PW-8, Mansab Ali SI 
as PW-9 and Muhammad Mansha C-637 as PW-10.  Prosecution 
has  also  got  exhibited  recovery  memo  of  contraband  heroin  P1, 
opium  P2,  T.T.  pistol  p3  alongwith  two  live  bullets  P4/1-2  as 
Ex.PA; Incident Report/complaint Ex.PB; formal F.I.R Ex.PB/1, 
Receipt  of  Contraband  by  Incharge  State  Warehouse  Ex.PC.  
Thereafter  tendering  report  of  Chemical  Examiner  as  Ex.PF, 
prosecution closed its evidence.  Whereafter all the four accused 
persons  including  Farzand  Ali  (present  appellant)  got  recorded 
their  statements  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  however,  none  of 
them  opted  to  appear  under  Section  340  (2)  Cr.P.C.,  while 
replying  to  question  No.5  during  statement  under  Section  342 
Cr.P.C. Farzand Ali appellant stated as under: - 
“I  have  been  falsely  involved  in  this  case  on  the  behest  of 
our enemies who were in league with the ranger  personnel.  
In  fact,  the  ranger  employees  let  off  the  real  culprits  and 
planted the narcotics on me on the asking of our enemies.  I 
have  no  previous  history  of  such  like  case.    I  am  quite 
innocent,  and  put  myself  at  the  mercy  of  this  honorable 
Court.  The P.Ws are official witnesses who deposed against 
me  just  to  strengthen  the  prosecution  case,  moreover,  there 
are  a  numbers  of  contradictions  and  discrepancies  in  the 
statements of the witnesses” 
 
Riaz Ahmad accused produced Ghafoor and Akbar Ali as DW-1 
and  DW-2  respectively  in  his  defence.    Muhammad  Nawaz  son 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
5 
of  Amraiz  DW-3, Nawaz  son of  Nawab  Din  DW-4  appeared in 
defence 
of  Munir 
accused. 
  Muhammad  Arif  
DW-5,  Jafar  Ali  DW-6  appeared  in  defence  of  Shamsher  alias 
Nannah  accused.    Muhammad  Ashiq  DW-7,  Abdul  Rasheed 
DW-8,  Ahmad  Din  DW-9,  Muhammad  Arhsad  DW-10,  Sadiq 
DW-11,  Nazir  Ahmad  son  of  Muhammad  Sadiq  DW-12,  Nazir 
Ahmad  son  of  Ahmad  Din  DW-13  appeared  in  defence  of 
Farzand Ali accused and thereafter defence evidence was closed. 
 
After  conclusion  of  the  trial,  learned  trial  Court  vide 
judgment  dated  29.5.2012  acquitted  accused  Riaz,  Shamsher 
alias  Nannah  and  Munir  Ahmad  of  the  charge,  however, 
convicted  and  sentenced  Farzand  Ali  (present  appellant)  as 
mentioned above.  Hence, this appeal. 
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submits  that  impugned 
judgment  is  against  the  law  and  facts  of  the  case;  that 
prosecution  case  is  full  of  contradictions  and  prosecution 
witnesses have falsified each other; that Farzand Ali appellant is 
innocent;  that  prosecution  could  not  discharge  its  initial  burden 
of  proving  charge  against  Farzand  Ali  appellant,  hence 
conviction  and  sentence  recorded 
through 
the 
impugned 
judgment to the extent of Farzand Ali appellant is liable to be set 
aside and the appellant deserves acquittal in the case. 
4. 
Conversely 
learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  has 
supported  the  impugned  judgment  by  contending  that  huge 
quantity  of  contraband  has  been  recovered  from  Farzand  Ali 
appellant  and  there  is  no  reason  to  falsely  plant  such  huge 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
6 
quantity  of  contraband  upon  Farzand  Ali  appellant  by  the 
complainant; that minor contradictions are to be overlooked and 
finally prayed for dismissal of the appeal. 
5. 
6. 
Arguments heard.  Record perused. 
Following aspects of the case are of vital importance:- 
(a)  Registration of the Case: 
Time  of  preparing  and  sending 
Incident Report/Complaint Ex.PB is not mentioned on the same.  
According  to  the  Incident  Report  Ex.PB,  occurrence  has 
allegedly  taken  place  on  25.8.2009  at  7.30  a.m.  but  F.I.R 
Ex.PB/1 has been lodged at 5.10 p.m., for which, no explanation 
whatsoever is available on the record.  Similarly at the bottom of 
Incident  Report  Ex.PB, it  has  not  been  mentioned that  at  which 
time it was sent to police station and even no police proceedings 
are available on the Incident Report Ex.PB about its receipt at the 
police station and recording of F.I.R on the basis of same.  Sepoy 
Rehmat Ali (PW-3) deposed in his statement that Incident Report 
Ex.PB  was  prepared  while  sitting  in  C-Company  Jalal  Khan 
Shaheed Post at 7.30/8.00 a.m. which is 2-kilometers away from 
the  alleged  place  of  recovery,  this  deposition  has  smashed  the 
case  of  the  prosecution  and  established  that  neither  any 
occurrence has taken place at 7.30 a.m. nor any Incident Report 
has  been  prepared  at  the  stated  time  and  place.    In  this  regard, 
statement  of  PW-4  Javed  Iqbal  is  also  very  interesting  who  has 
categorically  stated  that  Incident  Report  Ex.PB  was  prepared 
while 
sitting 
in 
the 
office 
of  
C-Company  Jalal  Shaheed  Khan  Post  and  not  at  the  place  of 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
7 
occurrence, he further deposed that his statement was recorded at 
7.30  a.m.  after  15-minutes  of  preparing  Incident  Report,  which 
means  that  the  alleged  occurrence  has  not  taken  place  at  7.30 
a.m.  as  claimed  by  the  prosecution.    In  view  of  above,  it  has 
come on record that Incident Report Ex.PB was neither prepared 
at the place of occurrence nor at the alleged time of occurrence.  
So,  no  legal  sanctity  can  be  attached  to  such  document,  which 
lay basis of registration of this case; in this regard guidance can 
be  had  from  the  case  of  “Abdul  Basit  Versus  The  State  and 
others” (2018 SCMR 1425).  Nutshell is that registration of the 
case  at  the  alleged  time  and  place  has  not  been  proved  in  this 
case by the prosecution. 
(b)  Recovery of narcotics and preparation of samples:  According  to 
recovery  memo  Ex.PA  abovementioned  contraband  was 
recovered from Farzand Ali appellant whereas in Incident Report 
Ex.PB  above  said  contraband  alongwith  T.T.  Pistol  was 
recovered from the accused persons.  It is very important to note 
here that according to Incident Report Ex.PB and recovery memo 
Ex.PA  allegedly  recovered  case  property  was  not  sealed  at  the 
spot,  no  samples  were  taken  out  from  the  allegedly  recovered 
heroin  and  opium  at  the  spot  and  also  no  parcel  of  any  such 
samples was prepared.  In Incident Report Ex.PB, it has not been 
mentioned  that  either  allegedly  heroin  was  in  packets  and  if  so, 
then  in  how  many  packets  and  same  is  the  position  about 
allegedly  recovered  opium.    It  is  not  mentioned  in  Incident 
Report  Ex.PB that  if  allegedly  recovered heroin  was  in packets, 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
8 
then what was weight of each packet.  Another glaring aspect is 
that  in  Incident  Report,  it  is  not  mentioned  that  allegedly 
recovered heroin and opium were weighed at the spot.  Perusal of 
Incident Report Ex.PB and recovery memo Ex.PA makes it clear 
that  samples  have  neither  been  taken  out  from  allegedly 
recovered  heroin  and  opium  nor  sealed  at  the  alleged  place  of 
recovery  for  the  purpose  of  sending  the  same  to  the  office  of 
Chemical Examiner.  It is mystery that when and where fourteen 
parcels of heroin and one parcel of opium were prepared because 
Incident  Report  Ex.PB  and  recovery  memo  Ex.PA  are  silent  in 
this regard.  During investigation, it could not be ascertained that 
who  is  owner  of  alleged  place  of  occurrence.    Nadeem  Abbas 
(PW-1)  further  deposed  that  he  handed  over  Incident  Report 
Ex.PB and recovery memo Ex.PA to Akhtar Hussain Inspector at 
10.00  a.m.  at  the  place  of  occurrence  but  strange  enough  that 
Akhtar  Hussain  has  straightaway  refused  to  receive  the  same  in 
his  statement  before  the  Court.    Nazir  Ahmad  (PW-2)  in  his 
statement  before  the  Court  has  never  stated  preparation  of 
attestation  of  recovery  memo 
in  his  presence,  he  has 
categorically  stated  that  neither  Akhtar  Hussain  Inspector  nor 
Jehangir  S.I./I.O. recorded his  statement, he  stated that  Nadeem 
Abbas  PW-1  recorded  his  statement,  however,  Nadeem  Abbas 
PW-1 has not admitted recording of statement of said witnesses.  
It  is  important  to  mention  here  that  case  of  prosecution  is  that 
three suspects including Farzand Ali appellant made firing upon 
the rangers party, out of which, two suspects fled away whereas 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
9 
Farzand Ali appellant was apprehended at the spot but no crime 
empty  shell  of  any  firearm  weapon  could  be  found  from  the 
place  of  occurrence  by  the  rangers  or  Investigating  Officer 
inspite of the fact that alleged place of occurrence was in total 
supervision  and  control  of  rangers,  which  fact  is  sufficient  to 
discard  the  case  of  prosecution  about  making  firing  and  also 
raises eyebrows towards veracity of prosecution evidence.  Nazir 
Ahmad  PW-2  further  deposed  that  they  started  patrolling  from 
the  ranger  post  at  7.30  a.m.  and  reached  at  the  place  of 
occurrence after half an hour, meaning thereby that they reached 
at  the  place  of  occurrence  at  8.00  a.m.  then  what  to  speak  of 
taking  place  this  occurrence  at  7.30  a.m.    Rehmat  Ali  PW-3 
states that three suspects started firing upon them with T.T. pistol 
upon which they encircled them and apprehended.  Here question 
does  arise  that  in  such  situation,  when  Rangers  party  had 
encircled suspects, then how it is possible that any of them could 
flee  away  from  the  place  of  occurrence  inasmuch  as  none  from 
the rangers party received any injury, which aspect speaks about 
doubtful  phenomenon  of  the  case  of  prosecution.    Strange 
enough  to  note  that  Rehmat  Ali  PW-3  introduced  dishonest 
improvement in his statement by mentioning that Nadeem Abbas 
complainant separated ten gram for sample from each packet of 
allegedly recovered narcotics and then Nadeem Abbas sealed the 
narcotics  whereas  no  such  fact  is  mentioned  in  the  recovery 
memo 
and 
even 
Nadeem 
Abbas  
PW-1  did  not  depose  so.    PW-3  Rehmat  Ali  stated  that  Akhtar 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
10 
Hussain  Inspector  reached  at  the  place  of  occurrence  and  we 
handed  over  accused,  case  property  and  all  documents  to  him, 
however, Akhtar Hussain did not accept it, even Nadeem Abbas 
PW-1  has  also  not  stated  so.    PW-3  also  clearly  stated  that  his 
statement  was  not  recorded  by  any  Investigating  Officer  rather 
Nadeem  Abbas  recorded  his  statement  whereas  Nadeem  Abbas 
did not say so.  Another important factor is that PW-3 says that 
case  number  available  on  recovery  memo  was  written  by 
Nadeem Abbas whereas Nadeem Abbas has not stated so.  PW-4 
Sepoy  Javed  Iqbal  further  stated  that  he  has  not  given  any 
statement  to  the  Investigating  Officer  in  this  case.    He  further 
states that his statement was recorded by Nadeem Abbas at 7.30 
a.m. and prior to that recovery memo Ex.PA and Incident Report 
Ex.PB  were  already  prepared.    Here  it  has  been  proved  that  no 
occurrence  has  taken  place  at  7.30  a.m.  when  Incident  Report 
Ex.PB  and  recovery  memo  Ex.PA  have  been  prepared  prior  to 
7.30 a.m.  Nadeem Abbas also did not admit writing of statement 
of  this  witness.    In  view  of  above,  recovery  of  narcotics  and 
preparation of samples has not been proved by the prosecution. 
(c) 
Safe Custody of Case Property and Samples: Allegedly 
case 
property  was  recovered  on  25.8.2009  but  statedly  deposited  in 
Warehouse Lahore on 29.8.2009.  It is also important to mention 
here  that  as  per  case  of  the  prosecution  fourteen  samples  of 
heroin  weighing  10  gram  each  and  one  sample  of  opium 
weighing 10 gram were sent to the office of Chemical Examiner 
through  Akhtar  Hussain  Inspector  Ranger  meaning  thereby  that 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
11 
neither case property nor any sample was received in the police 
station  and  similarly  these  alleged  samples  were  never  sent  by 
the  Investigating  Officer  of  the  case  to  the  office  of  Chemical 
Examiner.    Here  question  does  arise  that  if  after  recovery,  any 
sample  was  prepared  from  the  case  property  i.e.  narcotics,  then 
where  said  case  property  remained  till  its  receipt  in  Warehouse 
Lahore  on  29.8.2009  and  where samples, allegedly  taken  out of 
narcotics  remained  till  their  deposit  in  the  office  of  Chemical 
Examiner  on  28.8.2009.    It  is  very  much  important  to  note  that 
no  official  of  rangers  or  police  has  been  produced  by  the 
prosecution to solve this mystery.  It could not come on record 
that who kept samples in the safe custody and then handed over 
the same to Akhtar Hussain Inspector for depositing the same 
in the office of Chemical Examiner.  Javed Iqbal PW-4 states in 
his statement before the Court that Investigating Officer reached 
at  the  place  of  occurrence  where  Nadeem  Abbas  PW-1  handed 
over  accused,  case  property  and  documents  to  him,  whereas 
Akhtar  Hussain  Inspector  and  Jehangir,  SI  (both  Investigating 
Officers) have straightaway negated the same rather it has come 
on  record  that  accused  was  produced  in  the  police  station  on 
27.8.2009 and case property was deposited in Warehouse Lahore 
on  29.8.2009  whereas  alleged  samples  were  deposited  on 
28.8.2009  by  the  rangers  and  not  by  the  Investigating  Officer.  
PW-5  Shoukat  Ali  ASI  in  his  statement  has  clearly  stated  that 
case  property  was  never  received  in  this  case  in  the  police 
station.    PW-6  Akhtar  Hussain  in  his  statement  has  also 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
12 
categorically stated that on 28.8.2011 he received sample parcels 
by the order of 87-Wing Commander and deposited the same on 
28.8.2009  in  the  office  of  Chemical  Examiner.    Now  here 
question  arises 
that  where  these  samples  remained  from 
25.8.2009 to 28.8.2009 when admittedly these were not received 
at  the  police  station  neither  by  Jehangir  SI/IO  nor  by  the 
Moharrar of the police station.  It is also very much important to 
mention  here  that  Wing  Commander  has  not  appeared  in  the 
Court  to  depose  about  safe  custody  of  the  parcels  and  handing 
over the same to Akhtar Hussain Inspector on 28.8.2011.  As per 
case of prosecution, remaining case property was handed over to 
Akhtar  Hussain  Inspector  but  he  has  categorically  refuted  the 
same  rather  he  has  stated  that  on  29.8.2011  remaining  case 
property  was  handed  over  to  him  and  he  deposited  the  same  in 
Warehouse  Lahore  on  the  same  day.    Now  here  again  question 
arises where case property remained from the date of its alleged 
recovery  till  29.8.2011  and  particularly  when  concerned  Wing 
Commander  did  not  appear  before  the  Court  as  stated  above  to 
resolve the mystery.  Another important aspect of the case is that 
according  to  Kashif  Nadeem  DSR  Incharge  Warehouse  Lahore 
(PW-7),  case  property  was  deposited  by  Akhtar  Hussain 
Inspector in the Warehouse Lahore on 28.8.2009 whereas Akhtar 
Hussain deposed that he did so on 29.8.2009.  In view of above 
discussion,  safe  custody  of  the  case  property  and  samples  and 
then  onward  transmission  of  these  samples  to  the  office  to 
Chemical Examiner could not be proved by the prosecution and 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
13 
in  this  scenario  report  of  Chemical  Examiner  is  of  no  avail  and 
reliance  can  safely  be  placed  upon  the  case  of  “Amjad  Ali 
Versus The State” (2012 SCMR 577).  It is also not out of place 
to mention here that prosecution is also silent on the subject that 
how  many  number  of  seal  were  embossed  on  the  case  property 
and  samples  and  it  has  also  not  come  on  record  that  which 
abbreviation i.e. letters of alphabet was written  on any stamp of 
said  seals,  which  fact  also  gives  support  to  the  view  that  safe 
custody  of  case  property,  samples  and  despatch  of  samples  to 
Chemical Examiner has not been proved by the prosecution. 
(d)  Place of Occurrence:  Muhammad  Jehangir,  SI  PW-8 
in his statement before the Court clearly deposed that he visited 
the  place  of  occurrence  on  26.8.2009  and  prepared  site  plan 
Ex.PC  but  in  said  site  plan  Akhtar  Hussain  Inspector  has  been 
shown  as  its  scribe.    It  has  come  on  record  that  ownership  of 
alleged  place  of  occurrence  also  could  not  be  ascertained,  so, 
place  of  occurrence  cold  also  not  be  established  by  the 
prosecution. 
(e)  Arrest of Accused:  Muhammad Jehangir SI (PW-8) clearly 
stated  in  his  statement  before  the  Court  that  on  27.8.2009 
Farzand Ali accused (appellant) was brought to the police station 
and  handed  over  to  him  and  then  he  arrested  him.    Now  very 
important  question  does  arise  that  where  appellant  remained 
from  25.8.2009  till  27.8.2009,  if  he  was  arrested  at  the  spot  by 
the  rangers  on  25.8.2009.    Now  in  this  scenario,  when  it  is  the 
case of the prosecution that appellant Farzand Ali was arrested at 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
14 
the place of occurrence on 25.8.2009 but his arrest has  not been 
shown  anywhere,  Rapat  of  any  Roznamcha  has  not  been 
produced  in  this  regard,  no  record  has  been  produced  by  the 
prosecution to show that he was produced before any Magistrate 
for  the  purpose  of  physical  remand  on  25.8.2009  or  27.8.2009, 
and  it  has  come  on  record  that  he  was  produced  before 
Muhammad  Jehangir  (PW-8)  on  27.8.2009,  then  arrest  of 
Farzand Ali appellant could not be proved on 25.8.2009. 
(f) 
Investigation:  Muhammad  Jehangir,  SI/IO  (PW-8) 
neither  received  any  case  property  nor  any  sample  and  he  also 
did  not  deposit  any  case  property  to  the  office  of  Chemical 
Examiner.    Said  Investigating  Officer  was  not  given  custody  of 
Farzand  Ali  appellant  on  25.8.2009,  then  these  all  aspects  are 
sufficient  to  establish  that  investigation  in  the  case  was  mere  a 
colourful  exercise  of  the  powers  under  the  influence  of  rangers 
and  in  this  regard  it  could  safely  be  quoted  that  Muhammad 
Jehangir S.I/I.O admitted that he challaned Farzand Ali appellant 
without  verification  about  nature  of  allegedly  recovered 
narcotics/articles,  and  then  he  stated  that  it  is  not  in  his 
knowledge  “where  Farzand  Ali  appellant  remained  from 
25.8.2009  till  27.8.2009”.    This  all  speaks  about  dishonest 
investigation. 
 
In  view  of  above  discussion,  we  have  reached  at  the 
conclusion that prosecution could not discharge its initial burden 
to  prove  the  charge  against  the  appellant  and  has  been  failed  to 
prove its case against the appellant beyond shadow of doubt. 
 
Criminal Appeal  No.251/J2012 
15 
7. 
Though  appellant  produced  DWs  in  his  defence  to  prove 
his innocence yet when in the peculiar circumstances of the case, 
prosecution has failed to discharge its initial burden to prove the 
charge  against  the  appellant,  then  no  question  does  arise  that 
either  appellant  proved  his  innocence  through  defence  evidence 
or  not.    It  goes  without  saying  that  three  co-accused  of  the 
appellant  have  already  been  acquitted  on  the  basis  of  same 
evidence. 
8. 
Resultantly, we allow this appeal, set aside conviction and 
sentences  recorded  against  the  appellant  by  the  learned  trial 
Court  vide  impugned  judgment  dated  29.5.2012,  as  a  result  of 
which Farzand Ali appellant is acquitted of the charge.  He shall 
immediately  be  released  from  jail,  if  not  required  in  any  other 
case. 
 
(Ch. Mushtaq Ahmad) 
               Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Farooq Haider) 
 
Judge 
Naeem 
 
Approved for reporting. 
               Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
