Crl. Misc. No.213411-B/2018 
 
Muhammad Afzal   
 
 
    The State & another 
 
 
 
 
05.06.2018  Mr. Aazar Latif Khan, Advocate with the petitioner. 
Mr. Khurram Khan, Deputy Prosecutor General. 
Mr. Muhammad Ahsan Bhoon, Advocate for the complainant. 
Durrani DSP and Ghulam Muhammad, S.I. with police record. 
 
Apprehending  his  arrest  at  the  hands  of  police  through 
the  instant  petition  filed  under  Section  498/497,  Cr.P.C, 
Muhammad Afzal/petitioner seeks  his  pre-arrest bail in  a  case 
registered  vide  FIR  No.210/2018,  dated  20.02.2018,  offence 
under  Sections  302,  34,  109,  PPC,  read  with  Section  7  of  the 
Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, Police Station Islampura, Lahore.  
2. 
Prosecution  story  in  brief,  as  per  contents  of  the  crime 
report  is  that  the  complainant  is  a  professional  lawyer.  On 
20.02.2018 at 10:15 a.m. she along her husband Rana Nadeem 
Anjum,  Advocate  was  present  in  Sessions  Court,  Lahore  when 
accused  Muhammad  Afzal/petitioner  armed  with  pistol  along 
with  Kashif  Raj  also  armed  with  pistol  and  two  unknown 
persons emerged there. The present petitioner raised lalkara to 
teach  lesson  to  Rana  Nadeem  Anjum,  Advocate  upon  which 
Kashif Raj accused made fire shots with his pistol out of which 
five  fire  shots  hit  Rana  Nadeem  Anjum  Advocate.  Other 
advocates tried to overpower the accused; however, during this 
process 
Idrees  Awan  also  received 
fire  arm 
injuries. 
Subsequently both of them succumbed to the injuries. 
3. 
At  the  very  outset  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 
contends  that  the  petitioner  is  innocent,  who  has  falsely  been 
involved  in the instant case  by the complainant with mala fide 
Crl. Misc. No.213411-B/2018 
2 
intention  in  connivance  with  the  local  police.  Main  crux  of 
arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  is  that  the 
petitioner has no concern whatsoever with the occurrence  and 
even  he  was  not  present  at  the  spot  at  the  relevant  time,  who 
has been roped by the complainant while spreading wider-net. 
It  is  next  argued  that  after  obtaining  ad-interim  bail  from  the 
court of first instance, the petitioner joined investigation during 
the  course  of  which  he  has  been  found  innocent.  Further 
contends that though the investigation has been transferred but 
uptill  now,  no  findings  have  been  given  by  the  Investigating 
Officer  qua  culpability  of  the  petitioner.  Learned  counsel 
vehemently argues that allegation against the petitioner is that 
he  was  present  at  the  spot  while  armed  with  pistol,  however, 
only  role  of  lalkara  has  been  ascribed  to  him.  It  is  further 
argued that two prosecution witnesses have been introduced at 
a  belated  stage  on  14.05.2018,  who  made  statements  under 
Section 161, Cr.P.C to establish that the petitioner had hatched 
conspiracy of the instant occurrence. Learned counsel contends 
that  there  is  no  evidence  available,  which  could  establish  that 
the  petitioner  was  either  present  at  the  spot  or  had  hatched 
conspiracy qua the occurrence, hence, his case falls within the 
ambit  of  Section  497(2),  Cr.P.C.  In  the  end  learned  counsel 
prays for admitting the petitioner to pre-arrest bail. 
4. 
On  the  other  hand  while  resisting  the  arguments 
advanced  by  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  learned  Law 
Officer  assisted  by  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant 
contends 
that 
the  petitioner  has  direct  nexus  with 
the 
occurrence in which two practicing lawyers were done to death 
in a brutal manner in front of court of law. Learned counsel for 
the complainant contends that there is number of criminal and 
civil  hostilities  between  the  parties  wherein  the  petitioner  is 
Crl. Misc. No.213411-B/2018 
3 
active  participant.  Further  contends  that  the  petitioner  was 
present  at  the  spot  armed  with  pistol  along  with  his  other  co-
accused. It is next argued that if the petitioner would have not 
been  actively  participating,  the  occurrence  ought  not  to  have 
been committed. Learned counsel contends that pre-arrest bail 
is an extra-ordinary relief, which has to be exercised sparingly 
and  keeping  in  view  heinousness  of  the  occurrence,  the 
petitioner is entitled to the relief sought for at this stage. 
5.  We have considered the arguments advanced by learned 
counsel  for  the  parties  and  gone  through  the  record  available 
on file. 
6. 
There  is  no  cavil  to  this  proposition  that  the  instant 
occurrence is one of the unfortunate occurrences in which two 
innocent 
lawyers,  who  had  reached  Sessions  Court 
in 
connection  with  their  professional  obligations,  were  done  to 
death  and  it  has  also  created  panic  in  the  society  particularly 
when  the  occurrence  had  taken  place  in  front  of  the  court  of 
law. Although it is a pre-arrest bail matter, however, this Court 
feels  itself  under  bounden  duty  to  ensure  that  no  one  is  dealt 
with  beyond  the  scope  of  safe  administration  of  justice.  The 
parameters of pre-arrest bail have already been widened by the 
august  Supreme  Court of  Pakistan  while  elaborating  the  same 
in  a  salutary  judgment  reported  as  Meeran  Bux  vs.  The  State 
and another (PLJ 1989 SC 526); wherein it was held that while 
dealing with pre-arrest bail matters, even merits of the case can 
be touched upon.  
7. 
In the instant case there is no denial to this fact that only 
allegation of lalkara has been ascribed to the petitioner. As far 
as allegation of abetment is concerned, when it is alleged by the 
prosecution  that  the  petitioner  was  present  at  the  spot,  prima 
Crl. Misc. No.213411-B/2018 
4 
facie provisions of Section 109, PPC, are not applicable and at 
the most it is a case of Section 114, PPC, however, there is no 
material  to  substantiate  this  provision  of  law.  As  far  as  the 
allegation  of  hatching  the  conspiracy  is  concerned,  it  is  an 
admitted  fact  that  the  statements  of  the  prosecution  witnesses 
under Section 161, Cr.P.C. were recorded on 14.05.2018 with a 
delay  of  three  months  after  the  occurrence.  It  is  established 
principle  of  law  that  delayed  recording  of  statement  under 
Section 161, Cr.P.C. is without any legal credence.  Therefore, 
the same is hit by the ratio decidendi of august Supreme Court 
of  Pakistan  laid  down  in  the  case  of  “Abdul  Khaliq  vs.  The 
State” (1996 SCMR 1553) where it was held as under:- 
“---S. 161---Penal Code (XLV of 1860), S. 302/34-
--Late  recording  of  statement  under  S.  161, 
Cr.P.C.---Value ---Late recording of a statement of 
a  prosecution  witness  under  S.  161,  Cr.P.C. 
reduces  its  value  to  nil  unless  delay  is  plausibly 
explained.” 
Reference  is  also  placed  on  the  dictum  of  law  laid  down  in 
SAHIB  GUL  vs.  ZIARAT  GUL  and  others  (1976  SCMR  236) 
and MUHAMMAD IQBAL vs. The SATE (1984 SCMR 930). 
8. 
Apart  from  this  during  the  course  of  investigation 
allegation of lalkara ascribed to the petitioner was found false 
and  he  was  declared  innocent.  Co-accused  of  the  petitioner 
with  the  allegation  of  abetment  namely  Ashiq  Hussain  has 
already  been  admitted  to  bail  by  the  learned  trial  court. 
Keeping  in  view  the  previous  civil/criminal  hostility  between 
the  parties  possibility  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  the  petitioner 
was  dragged  falsely  in  this  case.  Needless  to  mention  that 
liberty of a person is the constitutional/guaranteed right, which 
cannot be curtailed on the basis of bald allegations. 
Crl. Misc. No.213411-B/2018 
5 
9. 
For  the  foregoing  reasons  we  have  been  persuaded  to 
hold  that  by  sending  the  petitioner  behind  the  bars  no  useful 
purpose  would  be  served.  Resultantly,  while  allowing  this 
petition  ad-interim  bail  already  granted  to  the  petitioner  vide 
order  dated  23.05.2018  is  hereby  confirmed  subject  to  his 
furnishing fresh bail bonds in the sum of Rs.1,00,000/- with one 
surety  in  the  like  amount  to  the  satisfaction  of  learned  trial 
court. 
 
 
(Sardar Ahmed Naeem) 
Judge 
(Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi) 
Judge 
Approved for Reporting 
 
Riaz 
