Stereo.HCJDA 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
MULTAN BENCH MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
…. 
 
REGULAR SECOND APPEAL NO.18 of 2004 
SAJJAD HUSSAIN and 4 others  
Versus 
MUHAMMAD YOUSAF and another  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing:   
26.03.2018 
Appellants by: 
Mirza  Aziz  Akbar  Baig, 
Advocate. 
Respondent No.1 by:  Mr.  Muhammad  Masood  Bilal, 
Advocate. 
Respondent No.2 by:  Mr.  Aziz-ur-Rehman  Khan, 
Assistant  Advocate  General  for 
Punjab. 
 
 
MIRZA  VIQAS  RAUF,  J.This  regular  second  appeal  in 
terms  of  Section 100  of  The  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  (V of 1908) 
(hereinafter  referred  as  “CPC”)  arises  out  of  judgment  and  decree 
dated  17th  March,  2004,  whereby  the  learned  Additional  District 
Judge, Muzaffargarh, while dismissing the regular first appeal filed 
by 
the  appellants  upheld 
the 
judgment  and  decree  dated 
27thNovember,  2000  passed  by  the  learned  Civil  Judge  1st  Class, 
Muzaffargarh. 
2. 
Epitomized facts necessary for adjudication of instant appeal 
are  that  respondent  No.1  (hereinafter  referred  as  “respondent”) 
instituted  a  suit  for  declaration  averring  therein  that  his  father 
R.S.A.No.18 of2004 
 
 
~2~ 
namely Makhdoom Haider Bakhsh, who died in January, 1992 was 
owner  of  land  measuring  859  Kanals  01  Marla  falling  in  Khewat 
No.336,  355  and  364  situated  in  the  revenue  estate  of  Hanjra  and 
Ghair  Musaqil  Gharbi  Tehsil  Kot  Addu  District  Muzaffargarh 
(hereinafter  referred  as  “suit 
land”)  which  was  gifted 
to 
“respondent” in the year 1952 when he was five years old through 
mutation No.1306 and possession was also delivered to his mother 
namely  Iqbal  Begum.  As  per  averments  contained  in  the  plaint, 
after  death  of  father  of  “respondent”,  he  came  to  know  that  his 
father  executed  a  cancellation  document  on  25th  July,  1970 
regarding  gift  executed  in  his  favour  and  mutation  No.2174  dated 
04th February, 1971 was also sanctioned in this regard, as a result, 
gift mutation No.2189 dated 20th April, 1971 was got sanctioned in 
favour  of  the  appellants,  which  are  against  the  law  and  facts  and 
liable  to  be  cancelled.  The  appellants  resisted  the  suit,  being  the 
defendants.  While  submitting 
their  written  statement, 
they 
controverted the  assertions contained in the plaint. The respondent 
No.2  was,  however,  proceeded  ex-parte.  From  the  divergent 
pleadings  of  the  contested  parties  following  multiple  issues  were 
framed :- 
ISSUES 
1.  Whether the suit is barred by time? OPD 
2.  Whether  the  suit  is  not  maintainable  in  its  present  form? 
OPD 
3.  Whether  the  suit  is  not  correctly  valued  for  the  purposes  of 
court  fee  and  jurisdiction  if  so,  its  correct  valuation  for  the 
both? OPD 
4.  Whether  the  description  of  the  suit  land  has  not  been 
correctly described in the plaint, if so, its effect? OPD 
5.  Whether the plaintiff is estopped by his words and conduct to 
file this suit? OPD 
6.  Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file this suit? 
OPD 
R.S.A.No.18 of2004 
 
 
~3~ 
7.  Whether the plaintiff is owner in possession of the usit land 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  defendants  No.2  to  6  and  the 
cancellation  deed  dated  25.07.1970  in  respect  of  the 
cancellation  of  gift  of  the  suit  land  by  the  father  of  the 
plaintiff  and  on  the  basis  of  which  mutation  No.2174  dated 
04.02.1971  and  mutation  of  gift  No.2189  by  Hyder  Bakhsh 
etc. and on the basis of these entries in the revenue papers in 
respect  of 
the  suit 
land  are 
illegal,  against 
facts, 
unauthorized, fictitious, collusive and void, hence liable to be 
declared not binding upon the plaintiff? OPP 
8.  Whether  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  consequential  relief  of 
permanent injunction as prayed for? OPP 
8.A.Whetherthe  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  get  possession  of  the  suit 
land? OPP 
9.  Relief. 
After framing of issues, parties to the suit produced their respective 
evidence  and  on  completion  of  the  same,  suit  was  decreed  vide 
judgment dated 27thNovember, 2000. The appellants, while feeling 
dissatisfied  from  the  said  judgment  and  decree  preferred  a  regular 
first  appeal  before 
the 
learned  Additional  District  Judge, 
Muzaffargarh,  which  was  dismissed  vide  judgment  and  decree 
dated 17thMarch, 2004. 
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  submitted  that  suit  was 
barred by time and though to this effect issue No.1 was framed but 
same was not attended properly by the courts below. He added that 
concurrent  conclusion  drawn  by  both  the  courts  below  is  the 
outcome of gross misreading and non-reading of evidence. Learned 
counsel,  while  making  reference  to  the  statement  of  “respondent”, 
who  appeared  as  PW1  submitted  that  he  was  the  sole  witness  and 
his  evidence  was  deficient  in  all  respects.  Argued  that  the 
“respondent”  was  estopped  by  his  words  and  conduct  to  file  the 
suit. 
R.S.A.No.18 of2004 
 
 
~4~ 
4. 
Conversely, 
learned  counsel 
for  “respondent”,  while 
defending the  impugned  judgments  and decrees  submitted  that  the 
appellants have failed to prove the  cancellation of gift mutation in 
favour  of  “respondent”.  He  added  that  the  appellants  have  also 
failed  to  lead  any  cogent  evidence  in  support  of  their  claim. 
Learned counsel maintained that evidence led by the appellants was 
not  confidence  inspiring  and  both  the  courts  below  were  right  in 
their  approach  to  decree  the  suit  filed  by  “respondent”.  Learned 
counsel  contended  that  there  are  concurrent  findings  of  facts 
recorded  by  both  the  courts  below,  which  are  completely  in 
consonance  with  law,  warranting  no  interference  by  this  Court  in 
exercise of appellate jurisdiction, which has a very limited scope in 
terms of Section 100 of “CPC”. 
5. 
On the other hand, learned law officer adopted the arguments 
advanced by learned counsel for “respondent”.  
6. 
I  have  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  as  well  as 
“respondent” at considerable length and also perused the record. 
7. 
By  way  of  suit  the  “respondent”  assailed  the  vires  of 
revocation  deed  (Exhibit-P2)  which  was  purportedly  executed  on 
25th  July,  1970.  The  revocation  deed  was  an  offshoot  of  gift 
mutation  No.1306  dated  24th  December,  1953  (Exhibit-P1), 
whereby  Makhdoom  Haider  Bakhsh  gifted  his  property 
to 
“respondent”, who was his son. The controversy interse parties thus 
hinges upon the revocation deed (Exhibit-P2). 
8. 
Before  adverting  to  the  validity  of  revocation  deed,  it  is 
pertinent to observe that donor namely Makhdoom Haider Bakhsh 
was  father  of  respondent,  who  gifted  “suit  land”  through  mutation 
No.1306  dated  24th  December,  1953  and  at  the  time  of  gift,  the 
donee was minor. There is no challenge to the gift mutation which 
is even evident from the revocation deed. The gift was revoked by 
way of deed (Exhibit-P2) on account of non-delivery of possession 
to the donee.  
R.S.A.No.18 of2004 
 
 
~5~ 
9. 
The  question  arises  as 
to  “whether  under  what 
circumstances  a  gift  can  be  revoked?”  Chapter  XI  of  The 
Muhammadan Law by D.F. Mulla’s deals with the “gifts”. In terms 
of  Para  138  hiba  or  gift  is  “a  transfer  of  property,  made 
immediately, and without any exchange,” by one person to another, 
and accepted by or on behalf of the latter. A donor can part with his 
property through a gift either orally or through a written instrument. 
Para No.155 of The Muhammadan Law prescribes that no transfer 
of  possession  is  required  in  the  case  of  a  gift  by  a  father  to  his 
minor child or by a guardian to his ward.All that is necessary is to 
establish  a  bonafide  intention  to  gift.  Para  No.167  provides 
eventualities when a gift can be revoked which reads as under :- 
“167.  Revocation of gifts.--(1)  A  gift  may  be  revoked 
by  the  donor  at  any  time  before  delivery  of  possession. 
The  reason  is  that  before  delivery  there  is  no  completed 
gift at all. 
(2) 
Subject  to  the  provision  of  subsection  (4),  a  gift 
may  be  revoked  even  after  delivery  of  possession  except 
in the following cases-- 
(a)  when the gift is made by a husband to his wife 
or by wife to her husband; 
(b)  when the donee is related to the donor within 
the prohibited degrees; 
(c)  when the donee is dead; 
(d)  when  the  thing  given  has  passed  out  of  the 
donee’s possession by sale, gift or otherwise; 
(e)  when the thing given is lost or destroyed; 
(f)  when  the  thing  given  has  increased  in  value, 
whatever, be the cause of the increase; 
(g)  when  the  thing  given  is  so  changed  that  it 
cannot  be 
identified,  as  when  wheat 
is 
converted into flour by grinding; 
(h)  when  the  donor  has  received  something  in 
exchange (iwaz) for the gift. 
R.S.A.No.18 of2004 
 
 
~6~ 
(3)  A gift may be revoked by the donor, but not by his 
heirs after his death. It is the donor’s law that will apply to 
a revocation and not of the donee. 
(4)  Once  possession  is  delivered,  nothing  short  of  a 
decree of the Court is sufficient to revoke the gift. Neither 
a  declaration  of  revocation  by  the  donor  nor  even  to 
revoke the gift.” 
It is manifestly clear from the above that donor can revoke the gift 
at  any  time  before  delivery  of  possession  and  if  the  possession  is 
delivered then the donor can only revoke the gift through a decree 
of  the  court.  Reference  in  this  respect  if  needed  can  be  made  to 
“RIAZ ULLAH KHAN versus ASGHAR ALI and 2 others”(2004 SCMR 1701), 
“Mst.  KANEEZ  BIBI  and  another  versus  SHER  MUHAMMAD  and  2 
others”(PLD 1991 Supreme Court 466). Even this Court in the case of 
“Mst.  NOOR  BEGUM  and  6  others  versus  MUHAMMAD  AKRAM  and  17 
others”(2013 MLD 1323) has adopted the same principles. 
10.  After having an overview of the law on the subject, I have no 
doubt  in  my  mind  to  hold  that  revocation  deed  (Exhibit-P2)  is 
inconsequential and without any substance. 
11.  While  pondering  upon  the  question  of  limitation,  it  is 
observed  that  in  Para  No.3  of  the  plaint,  the  “respondent”  has 
specifically asserted that donor died in the year 1992 and after his 
death,  he  was  informed  by  the  appellants  about  the  deed  of 
cancellation. These specific facts which were asserted in plaint and 
were  even  deposed  by  the  “respondent”, while  appearing  as  PW1, 
remained  unrefuted.  The  statement  of  Sabir  Hussain  one  of  the 
appellants,  who  appeared  as  DW1  also  gives  due  support  to  the 
claim  of  the  “respondent”  and  affirms  that  suit  was  brought  well 
within  time  from  the  date  of  knowledge.  The  learned  Civil  Judge, 
while  capsulating  the  question  of  limitation  framed  issue  no.1 
which  was  decided  in  favour  of  “respondent”  and  suit  was  held 
within time. After  having  examined  the  judgments  of  both  the 
courts  below,  I  am  of  the  considered  opinion  that  mandate  of 
R.S.A.No.18 of2004 
 
 
~7~ 
Section 3 of The Limitation Act, 1908 has been properly adhered to 
by courts below, while forming their concurrent view qua question 
of limitation.  
12. 
I  have  examined  the  judgments  passed  by  the  learned  Civil 
Judge  as  well  as  learned  Additional  District  Judge  and  unable  to 
find any misreading or non-reading of evidence. The learned Civil 
Judge  decreed  the  suit  after  carefully  analyzing  the  material 
available on the record. The said judgment was further affirmed by 
the  learned  Additional  District  Judge  in  appeal  filed  by  the 
appellants by way of judgment dated 17th March, 2004. 
13.  This  is  a  regular  second  appeal  which  has  a  very  limited 
scope  as  provided  under  Section  100  of  “CPC”.  The  concurrent 
findings  cannot  be  interfered  with  unless  some  procedural  defect, 
materially  effecting  such  findings  is pointed out by  the appellants. 
Reliance  in  this  respect  can  be  placed  on“BASHIR  AHMED  versus  Mst. 
TAJA  BEGUM  and  others”(PLD  2010  Supreme  Court  906)and“MUHAMMAD 
FEROZE and others versus MUHAMMAD JAMAAT ALI”(2006 SCMR 1304). 
14.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  I  have  no  hesitation  in 
my  mind  to  hold  that  the  concurrent  findings  of  facts  recorded  by 
both  the  courts  below  are  neither  perverse  nor  arbitrary,  so  as  to 
justify  the  interference  in  exercise  of  jurisdiction  contemplated  in 
Section  100  of  “CPC”.  Consequently  the  instant  second  appeal, 
being without any merit is dismissed with no order as to costs. 
 
 
(MIRZA VIQAS RAUF) 
JUDGE 
Shahbaz Ali* 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
