     Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.40835/2016  
(Shehzad Ali Khan Vs. Election Commission of Pakistan etc.)  
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
16.01.2017  
Petitioner by: 
Mr. Hafeez Saeed Akhtar, Advocate.  
Respondent No.3 by:  
Mr. Azam Nazir Tarar, Advocate.  
Barrister Lehrasip Hayat Dahar, Advocate.  
Mazhar Ali Ghallu, Advocate.  
Ch. Naveed Akhtar Bajwa, Advocate.  
Election Commission by:  Mr. Nasir Javaid Ghuman, Advocate.  
Amer Raza, Returning Officer.  
 
 
Atir Mahmood, J.   Through  this  constitutional  writ  petition, 
the  petitioner  seeks  disqualification  of  respondent  No.3  (hereinafter 
called  “the  respondent”)  from  being  the  Member  and  Chairman  of 
Municipal  Committee,  Teshil  Daska,  District  Sialkot  while  asserting 
that  a  decree  regarding  loan  taken  by  the  respondent  duly  stands 
against  him  which  has  not  been  declared  by  him  while  filing  the 
nomination  papers.  The  petitioner  has  also  prayed  that  Section  27  of 
the Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 be declared ultra vires to the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner  is 
a  voter  of  Ward  No.23  of  the  Municipal  Committee,  Tehsil  Daska; 
that  the  respondent  obtained  loan  from  the  National  Bank;  that  since 
the respondent did not return the said loan to the bank, a suit was filed 
wherein  a  decree  of  Rs.11,743,159/-  has  been  passed  against  the 
respondent vide judgment dated 12.04.2016 but the same has not been 
mentioned  by  him  while  filing  the  nomination  papers;  that  the 
respondent  being  an  ‘undischarged  insolvent’  is  liable  to  be 
disqualified;  that  Section  27  of  the  Punjab  Local  Government  Act, 
Writ Petition No.40835/2016 
2 
2013 being against Articles 62 and 63 of the Constitution be declared 
ultra  vires  the  Constitution.  He  has  relied upon  the  law  laid  down  in 
cases titled Ch. Muhammad Yusaf Kaselia v. Peer Ghulam Mohy-
ud-Din  Chishti  and  others  (PLD  2016  SC  689),  Muhammad 
Ahmad  Chatta  v.  Iftikhar  Ahmad  Cheema  and  others  (2016 
SCMR 763), Allied Bank Ltd. through Authorized person v. Inam 
Ullah Khan and another (2013 CLC 1310 Lahore), Worker’s Party 
Pakistan through General Secretary and 6 others v. Federation of 
Pakistan  and  2  others  (PLD  2013  SC  406),  Rana  Muhammad 
Hayat  Khan  v.  Rana  Imtiaz  Ahmad  Khan  (PLD  2008  SC  85), 
Rana Muhammad Arshad v. Additional Commissioner (Revenue), 
Multan  Divison and  others  (1998  SCMR  1462),  Ch. Tanvir  Khan 
v.  President,  Cantt.  Board,  Rawalpindi  and  2  others  (1999  MLD 
721  Lahore),  Ghulam  Mustafa  Jatoi  v.  Additional  District  and 
Sessions  Judge/Returning  Officer,  No.A.  158,  Naushero  Feroze 
and others (1994 SCMR 1299),  
3. 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent as well as 
learned  counsel  for  the  Election  Commission  have  vehemently 
opposed this writ petition on legal as well as factual grounds. He has 
relied  upon  the  law  laid  down  in  cases  reported  as  Zahid  Iqbal  v. 
Hafiz  Muhammad  Adnan  and  others  (2016  SCMR  430),  Liaquat 
Ali  and  others  v.  Returning  Officer  and  others  (2016  MLD  846), 
Muhammad  Mujtaba  Abdullah  and  another  v.  Appellate 
Authority/Additional  Sessions  Judge  Tehsil  Liaquatpur  District 
Rahim  Yar  Khan  and  others  (2016  SCMR  893)  and  Abdul 
Rasheed  and  another  v.  Election  Appellate  Authority  and  others 
(2016 SCMR 1215).  
4. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
5. 
Scanning of record reveals that the respondent filed nomination 
papers  alongwith  others  for  contesting  the  seat  of  Councillor, 
Municipal Committee, Tehsil Daska, District Sialkot. He was declared 
as  the  Returned  Candidate.  Then  he  contested  for  the  seat  of 
Writ Petition No.40835/2016 
3 
Chairman, Municipal Committee and was elected so. The petitioner is 
a voter of the Halqa.  
6.  Main  emphasis  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  is  on  the 
point that the respondent while filing the nomination papers has since 
failed to  mention the  decree passed  against  him, he  is  not  entitled  to 
hold the Office of the Member as well as Chairman of the Municipal 
Committee. In this regard, he has referred to Sub-Rule (5) of Rule 12 
of the Punjab Local Government (Conduct of Elections), Rules, 2013 
(hereinafter  called  “the  Rules”).  I  have  gone  through  the  said 
provision of law which duly demands for declaration of the assets and 
liabilities  by  the  contesting  candidate.  I  have  also  perused  the 
nomination papers filed by the respondent, a copy of which has been 
placed before this Court. There is Annexure A to the nomination form 
which is regarding declaration of assets and liabilities. After declaring 
the assets in Annexure A, the respondent has mentioned regarding his 
liability  while  submitting  that  there  is  a  house  mortgaged  with  the 
National Bank, Sialkot and the amount in this regard is yet to be paid, 
although  he  has  not  given  details  of  the  loan.  In  this  view  of  the 
matter, I am not in consonance with argument of learned counsel for 
the  petitioner  that  the  respondent  has  not  mentioned  the  liability  of 
loan to be paid by him.  
7. 
Section 14 of the Rules being relevant in this case is reproduced 
below:  
“14.      Scrutiny.–    (1)  The  scrutiny  of  nomination papers  shall 
be  open  to  the  candidates,  their  election  agents, 
proposers  and  seconders,  or  the  persons  who  made 
objections against the nomination papers, and any voter 
of the constituency with the permission of the Returning 
Officer,  before  the  commencement  of  the  scrutiny,  and 
the  Returning  Officer  shall  give  all  those  present 
reasonable  opportunity  for  examining  all  nomination 
papers delivered to him under rule 12. 
(2)     The  Returning  Officer  shall,  in  the  presence  of  the 
persons  attending  the  scrutiny  under  sub-rule  (1), 
examine the nomination papers and decide an objection 
raised by any such person to a nomination. 
Writ Petition No.40835/2016 
4 
(3)    The Returning Officer may, either on his own accord or 
on  an  objection,  conduct  such  summary  inquiry  as  he 
may  think  fit  and  reject  a  nomination  paper  if  he  is 
satisfied that: 
(a)   
the  candidate  is  not  qualified  to  be  elected  as  a 
member,  a  Chairman  and  a  Vice  Chairman,  or  a 
Mayor and a Deputy Mayor; 
(b)      the  proposer  or  the  seconder  is  not  qualified  to 
subscribe to the nomination paper; 
(c)      any  provision  of  rule  12  or  rule  13  has  not  been 
complied with; or 
(d)      the  signature or  thumb  impression of the proposer 
or the seconder is not genuine. 
(4)    The  rejection  of  a  nomination  paper  shall  not  invalidate 
the  nomination  of  a  candidate  by  any  other  valid 
nomination paper. 
(5)      The  Returning  officer  may,  for  purposes  of  scrutiny, 
require any agency or authority to produce any document 
or record.  
(6)   
joint  candidacy, 
the 
In  case  of 
nomination of either a Chairman or a Vice Chairman or a 
Mayor or a Deputy Mayor shall be construed as rejection 
of nomination of all those joint candidates. 
the  rejection  of 
(7)    The Returning officer shall not reject a nomination paper 
on the ground of any defect which is not of a substantial 
nature  and  may  allow  such  defect  to  be  remedied 
forthwith,  including  an  error  with  regard  to  the  name, 
serial number in the electoral roll or other particulars of 
the  candidate or  his  proposer  or seconder  so  as  to  bring 
them in conformity with the corresponding entries in the 
electoral rolls. 
(8)    The  Returning  Officer  shall  not  enquire  into  the 
correctness or validity of any entry in the electoral roll. 
(9)    The Returning Officer shall endorse on each nomination 
paper his decision accepting or rejecting it and, in case of 
rejection, record brief reasons therefor.  
(10)      An  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Returning  Officer 
rejecting  or  accepting  the  nomination  paper  of  the 
candidate(s)  may  be  preferred  by  any  person  present  at 
the  time  of  scrutiny  under  sub-rule  (1)  to  the  appellate 
authority, who shall be the District and Sessions Judge or 
Writ Petition No.40835/2016 
5 
any  other  judicial  officer,  appointed  for  the  purpose  by 
the Election Commission. 
(11)    The  appeal  under  sub-rule  (10)  shall  be  summarily 
decided  within  such  time  as  may  be  notified  by  the 
Election Commission and any order passed thereon shall 
be final. 
(12)    An  appeal  not  disposed  of  within  the  period  as  notified 
by  the  Election  Commission  shall  be  deemed  to  have 
been rejected.” 
(Emphasis provided) 
Perusal of Sub-Rules (1) and (2) of Rule 14 of the Rules reflects that 
these provisions do not restrict objections by a contesting candidate, a 
proposer  or  a  seconder,  rather  they  state  that  any  person  or  even  a 
voter of the constituency can raise objection to the nomination papers 
of  a  contesting  candidate.  Such  objections  are  required  to  be  looked 
into  by  the  Returning  Officer  which  may  lead  to  acceptance  or 
rejection  of  nomination  papers.  Against  decision  of  the  Returning 
Officer,  an  appeal  before  the  appellate  authority  appointed  by  the 
Election Commission in light of Sub-Rule 10 of the Rules can also be 
made. Admittedly, the petitioner is a voter of the concerned Halqa. He 
had  every  right  to  raise  objection  upon  nomination  papers  of  the 
respondent at the time of scrutiny of the nomination papers but he did 
not  do  so. Nor  he  went to the  appellate  authority  for  redressal  of  his 
grievance. Even  the petitioner has not disclosed  as  to  when and  how 
he  came  to  know  about  liability  of  the  respondent.  This  leads  me  to 
the  conclusion  that the  petitioner has  not approached this  Court  with 
bona  fide  intention  rather  he  has  approached  the  Court  with  some 
mala fide or for the benefit of some other candidate. It is well settled 
law  that  any  person  not  approaching  the  court  bonafidely  is  not 
entitled  to  any  relief.  Therefore,  this  writ  petition  is  liable  to  be 
dismissed on this score alone.  
8. 
As  far  as  the  contention  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 
that  a  decree  has  been  passed  against  the  respondent  which  has  not 
been  mentioned  in  the  column  of  liabilities  by  him  is  concerned, 
suffice it to say that the respondent has challenged the validity of the 
Writ Petition No.40835/2016 
6 
decree  passed  against  him  by  filing  RFA  No.916/2016  which  is  still 
pending decision. It is well-settled proposition of law that an appeal is 
continuation  of  the  proceedings  in  the  suit,  therefore,  the  decree 
passed  by  the  banking  court  being  under-challenge  cannot  be said  to 
be the final decree against the respondent. The decision in appeal may 
come  in  favour  of  or  against  the  respondent.  If  the  respondent  is 
disqualified  on  the  basis  of  the  said  decree  but  the  decree  awarded 
against him is set aside at a later stage, there will be no compensation 
available for the respondent for the intervening period when he is out 
of  the  said  offices.  Even  otherwise,  clause  (j)  regarding  the 
disqualification  of  a  candidate  on  the  basis  of  default  specifically 
provided  under  Sub-section  (1)  of  Section  152  of  Local  Government 
Ordinance,  2001  has  been  excluded  in  the  Local  Government  Act, 
2013. This  Court  can  only  interpret the  statue  but  cannot  circumvent 
the  intention  of  the  legislator.  In  this  view  of  the  matter,  I  am  not 
inclined to upset the election of the respondent merely on the basis of 
the decree which is under challenge so far.  
9. 
Another  aspect of  the  matter is that  an  election petition on  the 
same  allegation  of  non-disclosure  of  the  liabilities  against  the 
respondent  is  pending  adjudication  before  the  Election  Tribunal.  If 
this Court in its constitutional jurisdiction disqualifies the respondent 
from  the  positions  of  the  Member  and  the  Chairman,  the  election 
petition  on  the  same  set  of  facts  and  allegations  filed  against  the 
respondent  will  become  infructuous  and  the  purpose  of  the  remedy 
available  before  the  Election  Tribunal  will  stand  circumvented. 
Moreover,  parallel  proceedings  for  one  and  the  same  cause  are  not 
permitted  under  the  law.  The  petitioner  either  should  approach  the 
Election  Tribunal  for  redress of his  grievance  or  wait  for decision of 
the Election Tribunal and then approach this Court for redressal of his 
grievance if still persists at that time.  
10.  On one hand, the petitioner on the strength of Section 27 of the 
Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 has sought disqualification of the 
respondent on the ground that he is a “discharged insolvent” whereas 
Writ Petition No.40835/2016 
7 
on the other hand, he has prayed that the said section be declared ultra 
vires  to  the  Constitution.  So  far  as  the  disqualification  of  the 
respondent  on  the  ground  of  non-disclosure  of  the  decree  passed 
against  him  is  concerned,  no  such  ground  is  provided  under  Sub-
Section (2) of Section 27 of the Act which deals with disqualification 
of  a  returned  candidate.  The  disqualification of  the  respondent  under 
Section  27(2)(c)  of  the  Act,  i.e.  on  the  ground  of  “undischarged 
insolvent”,  there  is  no  definition  provided  in  the  Punjab  Local 
Government Act of “undischarged insolvent”. In absence of definition 
of  “undischarged  insolvent”  in  the  Act,  the  applicable  law  is  the 
Provincial  Insolvency  Act,  1920  (hereinafter  called  the  PIA,  1920”) 
which deals with the subject of insolvency.  Section 6 of the Act ibid  
being relevant is reproduced as under: 
“6. Acts of insolvency. A debtor commits an act of insolvency 
in each of the following cases namely:-- 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
if,  in  the  Provinces  and  the  Capital  of  the  Federation  or 
elsewhere,  he  makes  a  transfer  of  all  or  substantially  all 
his  property  to  a  third  person  for  the  benefit  of  his 
creditors generally;  
if,  in  the  Provinces  and  the  Capital  of  the  Federation  or 
elsewhere, he  makes a  transfer  of  his  property  or of  any 
part thereof with intent to defeat or delay his creditors;  
if,  in  the  Provinces  and  the  Capital  of  the  Federation  or 
elsewhere,  he  makes  any  transfer  of  his  property,  or  of 
any  part  thereof,  which  would,  under  this  or  any  other 
enactment  for  the  time  being  in  force,  be  void  as  a 
fraudulent preference if he were adjudged an insolvent;  
(d) 
if, with intent to defeat or delay his creditors, --- 
(i)  He  departs  or  remains  out  of  the  Provinces  and  the 
Capital of the Federation;  
(ii)  He  departs  from  his  dwelling-house  or  usual  place  of 
business or otherwise absents himself;  
(iii)  He secludes himself so as to deprive his creditors of the 
means of communicating with him; 
(e) 
If  any  of  his  property  has  been  sold  in  execution  of  the 
decree of any Court for the payment of money;  
Writ Petition No.40835/2016 
8 
(f) 
(g) 
If  the  petitions  to  be  adjudged  an  insolvent  under  the 
provisions of this Act;  
If  he  gives  notice  to  any  of  his  creditors  that  he  has 
suspended, or that he is about to suspend, payment of his 
debts; or  
(h) 
If  he  is  imprisoned  in  execution  of  the  decree  of  any 
Court for payment of money.” 
The  minute  perusal  of  the  above  provisions  coupled  with  the 
allegation levelled by the petitioner against the respondent that he has 
not  specifically  mentioned  the  decree  passed  against  him  clearly 
reveals  that  the  respondent  has  not  committed  any  of  the  acts  of 
insolvency detailed in Section 6 of the PIA, 1920, as such, he cannot 
be  termed  as  “undischarged  insolvent”.  Therefore, the  respondent, in 
my opinion, cannot be disqualified on the said ground of insolvency in 
constitutional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court.  The  case  law  reported  as 
Liaqat Ali and others v. Returning Officer and others (2016 MLD 
846 Lahore) is referred in this regard.  
11.  Regarding  assertion  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  that 
Section 27 of the Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 is ultra vires to 
the Constitution, the same  matter came before the apex court in case 
reported  as  Zahid  Iqbal  v.  Hafiz  Muhammad  Adnan  and  others 
(2016 SCMR 430) wherein it has been held that:  
“It  is  not  the  function  of  the  Court  to  read  into  any  provision 
and or words that are not part of the statute, unless imported or 
made applicable specifically as has been done under the Sindh 
Local  Government  Act,  2013,  wherein  section  36(j)  clearly 
imports  disqualification  “under  any  law  it  reads  for  the  time 
being  in  force”.  It  is  neither  the  duty  nor  the  function  of  the 
Court  to  read  into  or  delete  any  word  and  or  provisions  in  an 
enactment,  unless  specifically  adopted  or 
imported  by 
reference. Courts do no legislate but interpret statute according 
to  their  ordinary  and  plain  meaning  and  do  not  import  and  or 
supply word or provisions from “any other law”, no matter how 
laudable  and desirable  it  may  appear  to be.  In this view  of  the 
matter,  disqualification  prescribed  under  “any  law”  or  even  in 
“The Constitution” unless as noted above are specifically made 
applicable  or  adopted  by  reference,  specially  penal  and  or 
castigatory  provisions  contained  in  “any  law”  cannot  be 
imported,  read  into  or  inflicted  on  a  person  who  put  forth  his 
Writ Petition No.40835/2016 
9 
candidature  to  be  elected  as  a  Member  or  to  hold  an  elected 
office of Punjab Local Government but his qualification and or 
disqualification for any office of the Punjab Local Government 
is  to  be  adjudged  strictly  under  the  provisions  of  “the  Act, 
2013” only.” 
(Underline is mine) 
In  view  of  the  dictums  laid  down  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan in the above case, this Court cannot legislate but interpret the 
law  or  statute  passed  by  the  legislature.  Therefore,  the  prayer  of  the 
petitioner in this regard is not acceded to.  
12.  The  argument  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  is  that 
Section 154 of the Punjab Local Government Ordinance, 2001 has not 
been  repealed  in  the  Punjab  Local  Government  Act,  2013  as  per 
notification dated 13.09.2013. When confronted with, learned counsel 
for  the  respondent  as  well  as  learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of 
the  Election  Commission  submit  that  non-repealing  of  Section  154 
ibid  was  an  interim  arrangement  only  in  order  to  protect  day-to-day 
affairs of the local bodies and it has no bearing in the election matters. 
Even otherwise, when the new law on a subject has come into force, 
there is no fun to continue the previous law on the same subject. The 
said argument of learned counsel for the respondents has force which 
is accordingly accepted. The case law relied upon by learned counsel 
for the petitioner pertains to the elections of Members of National and 
Provincial  Assemblies  as  well  as  that  of  the  Senate  and  is  not 
applicable to the case in hand. 
13.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  this  writ  petition  has  no 
force, hence dismissed.   
 
  
Approved for reporting.  
 
 
Akram* 
 
 
Judge 
 
(ATIR MAHMOOD) 
Judge 
