Form No.HCJD/C-121 
 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 
              W.P. No.6224 of 2017. 
 
 
 
 
GEPCO etc. 
         VERSUS    
Pakistan Television 
Corporation Ltd. etc. 
        
S. No. of order/ 
proceedings 
 
Date of order/ 
Proceedings 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties of counsel, 
where necessary 
                              
 
06.11.2017.  Mr.  Aurangzeb  Mirza,  Advocate  for  the 
petitioner in WP No.6224 of 2017. 
Mian  Muhammad  Javed,  Advocate  for  the 
petitioner in WP No. 5035 of 2017. 
Mian Muhammad Mudassar Bodla, Advocate 
for the petitioner in WP No. 31335 of 2012. 
Mr.  Imran  Aziz  Khan  Deputy  Attorney 
General for Pakistan. 
Mr. Umer Sharif Advocate for NEPRA. 
M/s  Salman  Mansoor  &  Ahmed  Qayyum 
Advocates for the respondents.  
 
 
This  order  shall  decide  the  present  writ  petition  as 
well  as  writ  petition  No.5035  of  2017  and  writ  petition 
No.31335  of  2012  on  account  of  common  question  of  law 
involved in all these writ petitions. 
2. 
The  critical  question  requiring  determination  is  the 
identity  of  the  proper  appellate  forum  competent  to  hear 
appeal against the decision of the Electric Inspector.  
3. 
The  facts  of  the  present  case  are  that  the  petitioner 
challenged  order  dated  30.04.2012  passed  by  the  Electric 
Inspector  by  filing  an  appeal  before  the  Advisory  Board 
constituted under section 35 of the Electricity Act, 1910. It is 
the  case  of  the  petitioner  that  the  record  of  the  appeal  was 
misplaced in the Advisory Board. On discovery of the record, 
the same was returned to the petitioner advising it to file the 
appeal  before  National  Electric  &  Power  Regulatory 
Authority (NEPRA) in terms of section 38 (3) of Regulation 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 2 ~ 
 
of  Generation,  Transmission  and  Distribution  of  Electric 
Power  Act,  1997  (NEPRA  Act).  The  appeal  filed  by  the 
petitioner was dismissed by NEPRA by holding it to be time 
barred.  
4. 
In  writ  petition  No.5035  of  2017,  the  Electric 
Inspector  passed  his  decision  on  07.01.2012  against  which 
appeal  was  filed  before  the  Advisory  Board  on  02.04.2012. 
The petitioner was advised through letter dated 26.01.2016 to 
file  its  appeal  before  NEPRA  under  section  38(3)  of  the 
NEPRA Act as the record of its appeal was not available with 
Advisory Board.  
5. 
In  writ  petition  No.31335  of  2012,  order  dated 
18.07.2012  passed  by  the  Electric  Inspector  was  challenged 
before  the  Advisory  Board  on  31.07.2012,  which  by  a 
majority  decision  dismissed  the said  appeal  and directed the 
petitioner  to  file  the  appeal  under  section  38  (3)  of  the 
NEPRA Act.   
6. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  in  writ  petition 
No.6224  of  2017  referred  to  order  dated  02.12.2016  passed 
by  the  Appellate  Board  of  NEPRA  through  which  the 
petitioner’s appeal was dismissed. It was stated that the said 
appeal  was  dismissed  on  the  assumption  that  the  petitioner 
filed  its  appeal  before  the  Advisory  Board  beyond  the  time 
limit  of  30 days. Learned  counsel  stated  that the  time  frame 
within  which  an  appeal  could  be  preferred  before  the 
Advisory  Board  is  90  days  in  terms  of  Rule  37  of  the  1964 
Rules.  It  was  thus  contended  that  the  Appellate  Board  of 
NEPRA  fell  in  error in dismissing  the  petitioner’s  appeal. It 
was  furthermore  stated  by  the  counsel  that  the  petitioner  by 
way  of  abundant  caution had  also  filed  an  application  under 
section 14  of  the  Limitation  Act, 1908 along  with its  appeal 
before  NEPRA,  the  contents  whereof  were  not  taken  into 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 3 ~ 
 
account  by  the  Appellate  Board  of  NEPRA.  The  learned 
counsels  in  the  other  two  writ  petitions  stated  that  the 
complaints  were  filed  by  the  consumers  before  the  Electric 
Inspector  under  the  provisions  of  Electricity  Act,  1910  and, 
therefore,  the  appeal  against  the  decision  could  only  lie 
before the Advisory Board. It was furthermore submitted that 
under  the  NEPRA  Act,  it  is  the  Provincial  Office  of 
Inspection created by the respective Provincial Governments 
which  adjudicates  upon  the  disputes  whereas  under  the 
Electricity  Act,  1910  the  Electric  Inspector  is  the  authority 
for adjudication of disputes. It was thus contended that where 
Electric  Inspector  exercising  powers  under  section  26  of 
Electricity  Act, 1910  passes  the decision, the same  can  only 
be  challenged  before  Advisory  Board  and  not  before 
NEPRA.  The  learned  counsels  for  the  respondents,  on  the 
other  hand,  took  the  position  that  after  the  promulgation  of 
sub-section  (3)  of  section  38  of  NEPRA  Act,  the  appeal 
against  the  decision  of  Electric  Inspector  could  not  be  filed 
before the Advisory Board. 
7. 
8. 
Arguments heard and record perused.  
Section  26(6)  of  the  Electricity  Act,  1910  deals  with 
the  disputes  between  consumers  and  a 
licensee  over 
electricity  meters  and  grants  power  unto  the  Electric 
Inspector  to  resolve  the  same.  The  said  provision  reads  as 
under: 
Where any difference or dispute arises between a licensee and a 
consumer as to whether any meter, maximum demand indicator 
or  other  measuring  apparatus  is  or  is  not  correct  the  matter 
shall  be  decided,  upon  the  application  of  either  party,  by  an 
Electric Inspector, within a period of ninety days from the date 
of  receipt  of  such  application,  after  affording  the  parties  and 
opportunity  of  being  heard,  and  where  the  meter,  maximum 
demand  indicator  or  other  measuring  apparatus  has,  in  the 
opinion  of  an  Electric  Inspector,  ceased  to  be  correct,  the 
Electric Inspector shall estimate the amount of energy supplied 
to  the  consumer  or  the  electrical  quantity  contained  in  the 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 4 ~ 
 
supply,  during  such  time  as  the  meter,  indicator  or  apparatus 
has  not,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Electric  Inspector,  been  correct; 
and  where  the  Electric  Inspector,  fails  to  decide  the  matter  of 
difference or dispute within the said period or where either the 
licensee  of  the  consumer  decline  to  accept  the  decision  of  the 
Electric Inspector, the matter shall be referred to the Provincial 
Government whose decision shall be final:  
Provided that, before either a licensee or a consumer applies to 
the Electric Inspector under this sub-section, he shall give to the 
other party not less than seven days’ notice of this intention to 
do so. 
 
 
The  appeal  by  any  aggrieved  person  against  the 
decision of the Electric Inspector can be instituted before the 
Advisory Board under the provisions of section 36(3) of the 
Electricity Act.  
9. 
Section  38  of  the  NEPRA  Act  also  provides  a 
mechanism  for  determination  of  disputes  between  the 
consumers  and  the  distributors.  The  said  provision  reads  as 
under: 
38.  Provincial offices of inspection. — (1) Each Provincial 
Government shall—  
(a)  establish offices of inspection that shall be empowered to—  
(i)  enforce 
companies’ 
instructions 
electricity 
consumption  charges  and  decision  of  cases  of  theft  of 
energy; and  
respecting  metering,  billing, 
compliance  with 
distribution 
(ii)  make  determination  in  respect  of  disputes  over  metering, 
billing  and  collection  of  tariff  and  such  powers  may  be 
conferred  on  the  Electric  Inspectors  appointed  by  the 
Provincial  Government  under  section  36  of  the  Electricity 
Act,  1910  (Act  IX  of  1910),  exercisable,  in  addition  to  their 
duties under the said Act.  
(b)  Establish  procedures  whereby  distribution  companies  and 
consumers may bring violations of the instructions in respect 
of  metering,  billing  and  collection  of  tariff  and  other 
connected matters before the office of inspection; and  
(c)  Enforce penalties determined, by the Provincial Government 
for any such violation. 
(2)  ………………………………………………………………… 
(3)  Any  person  aggrieved  by  any  decision  or  order  of  the 
Provincial Office of Inspection may, within thirty days of the 
receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to the Authority in the 
prescribed  manner  and  the  Authority  shall  decide  such 
appeal within sixty days. 
 
 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 5 ~ 
 
10. 
The  two  enactments  i.e.  Electricity  Act,  1910  and 
NEPRA  Act  continue  to  exist  side  by  side  providing  two 
different  appellate  fora  to  hear  appeals  against  the  orders  of 
the Electric Inspector and the Provincial Office of Inspection. 
Both enactments are special laws. In a similar situation, this 
Court  while  rendering  judgment  in  writ  petition  No.6940  of 
2013  titled  “S.M.  Food  Makers  and  others  v.  Sui  Northern 
Gas Pipelines etc” held as follows:  
The two are inconsistent with each other    
There  is  some  express  reference  in  the  later  to  the 
It is by now well settled that the general rule to be followed in 
case of conflict between two statutes is that the later abrogates 
the earlier one. In Ajay Kumar Banerjee and Others v. Union of 
India  and  Others  AIR  1984  SC  1130,  the  Indian  Supreme  Court 
laid down the following two tests for ascertaining where a prior 
special law would yield to a later general law.   
(i) 
(ii) 
earlier enactment.  
If either of these two conditions is fulfilled, the later law, even 
though general, would prevail.  
From  the  text  and  the  decisions,  four  tests  are  deducible  and 
these are: (i) The legislature has the undoubted right to alter a 
law  already  promulgated  through  subsequent  legislation,  (ii)  A 
special law may be altered or repealed by a later general law by 
an express provision, (iii) A later general law will override a prior 
special law if the two are so repugnant to each other that they 
cannot co-exist even though no express provision in that behalf 
is found in the general law, and (iv) It is only in the absence of a 
provision  to  the  contrary  and  of  a  clear  inconsistency  that  a 
special law will remain wholly unaffected by a later general law. 
8. 
In  Ashok  Marketing  Limited  v.  Punjab  National  Bank 
(1990)  4  SCC  406,  the  Indian  Supreme  Court  after  taking  into 
account  a  number  of  judgments  on  the  interpretation  of 
statutes held as follows:  
 
The principle which emerges from these decisions is that in 
the  case  of  inconsistency  between  the  provisions  of  two 
enactments,  both  of  which  can  be  regarded  as  special  in 
nature, the conflict has to be resolved by reference to the 
purpose and policy underlying the two enactments and the 
clear intendment conveyed by the language of the relevant 
provisions therein. 
 
11. 
The Electricity Act, 1910 created the basic framework 
for  electric  supply  industry  and  envisaged  growth  of  the 
electricity  industry  through  private  licensees.  It  created  the 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 6 ~ 
 
legal  framework  to  lay  down  the  wires  and  other  works 
relating to the supply of electricity. In line with the policy of 
deregulating  and 
reforming 
the  power 
sector, 
the 
Government  of  Pakistan  bifurcated  the  power  wing  of 
WAPDA 
into 
separate  generation, 
transmission  and 
distribution  companies.  The  details  of  the  deregulation  of 
power  sector  do  not  form  part  of  this  judgment  and  are  not 
necessary  for  determination  of  the  issue  involved  in  these 
writ petitions. Suffice it to state that electricity is now being 
distributed 
to 
the  consumers  by  various  Distribution 
Companies  (DISCOs).  Along  with  these  developments,  the 
Federation  enacted  NEPRA  Act,  the  reading  whereof  shows 
that the main responsibilities of NEPRA are to issue licenses 
for  generation,  transmission  and  distribution  of  electric 
power;  to  establish  and  enforce  standards  to  ensure  quality 
and  safety  of  operation  and  supply  of  electric  power  to 
consumers;  and 
to  determine 
tariffs 
for  generation, 
transmission  and  distribution  of  electric  power.  It 
is 
furthermore  clear  from  the  reading  of  the  NEPRA  Act  that 
the  policy  objective  and  purposes 
in  relation 
to 
its 
promulgation  were  to  create  an  independent,  autonomous 
regulatory  agency  for  improving  the  efficiency  of  electric 
power services and for protecting the interests of the investor, 
the  operator  and  the  consumer.  DISCOs,  which  are  now 
charged  with the  duty  to  supply  electricity  to  the  consumers 
are  directly  regulated  by  and  come  within  the  purview  of 
NEPRA Act. NEPRA Act particularly puts in place a dispute 
resolution regime in regard to the disputes the consumers had 
with their distributors.  
12.  Under  section  26(6)  of  the  Electricity  Act,  1910,  the 
ambit and scope of dispute is confined only to the electricity 
meters/other  measuring  apparatuses  while  the  scope  of 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 7 ~ 
 
section  38  of  NEPRA  Act  is  much  wider  in  comparison. 
Section  38  of  the  NEPRA  Act  empowers  the  Provincial 
Office  of  Inspection  not  only  to  enforce  compliance  of  the 
instructions of the distribution companies regarding metering, 
billing, electricity consumption charges and decision of cases 
of theft of energy but also requires it to make determination 
in respect of disputes over metering, billing and collection of 
tariff.  Not  only  this,  section  38  furthermore  commands  that 
the  Provincial  Office  of  Inspection  and  its  powers  can  be 
conferred  on  the  Electric  Inspector  appointed  by 
the 
Provincial Governments under the Electricity Act, 1910. The 
argument  that  any  decision  on  the  dispute  rendered  by  the 
Electric  Inspector  can  only  be  challenged  before  the 
Advisory  Board  in  terms  of  the  section  36  (3)  of  the 
Electricity Act, 1910 thus loses all force and is not valid.  
13. 
The  reading  of 
the  NEPRA  Act  quite  clearly 
demonstrates that the dispute resolution mechanism provided 
in  Electricity  Act,  1910  has  now  been  replaced  by  NEPRA 
Act, which law is later in time and is also much wider in its 
scope  as  it  encompasses  disputes  over  metering,  billing  and 
collection  of  tariff.  Electricity  now  exclusively  being  the 
Federal  subject,  any  dispute  in  regard  thereto  between 
distribution  companies  and  their  consumers  will  necessarily 
has  to  be  adjudicated  upon  by  the  Provincial  Office  of 
Inspection  as  per  the  dictate  of  NEPRA  Act.  The  tests  laid 
down  in  the  judgment  rendered  in  S.M.  Food  Makers  case 
with  regard  to  the  purpose  and  policy  underlying  the  two 
special  laws  are  clearly  satisfied  in  the  present  case  to  hold 
that  the  dispute  resolution  mechanism  specified  in  NEPRA 
Act  displaced  the  one  provided  through  section  26  of  the 
Electricity Act, 1910. 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 8 ~ 
 
14. 
In  order  to  give  effect  to  the  mandate  of  sub-section 
(1)  of  section  38  of  the  NEPRA  Act,  the  Government  of 
Punjab, 
Irrigation 
and  Power  Department 
through 
Notification  dated  19.04.2005  issued  in  pursuance  of  sub-
section (1) of section 38 of the NEPRA Act promulgated the 
Punjab  (Establishment  and  Powers  of  Office  of  Inspection) 
Order, 2005  (the  Order  of  2005). Section  3  of  the  Order  of 
2005 created the Office of Inspection with the powers to deal 
with  and  to  pass  orders  on  the  complaints  in  respect  of 
metering, billing and collection of tariff and other connected 
matters under the NEPRA Act. The definition of “Violation” 
as  contained  in  section  2(viii)  of  the  Order  is  also  worth 
noting  which  stipulates  that  the  violation  means  any  act  or 
omission  contrary 
to  any  of 
the 
instructions  of 
the 
distribution  companies  with  respect  to  metering,  billing, 
collection  of  tariff  and  other  connected  matters.  These 
expression  are  identical  to  the  ones  used  in  Section 
38(1)(a)(ii)  of  NEPRA  Act.  The  Order  of  2005  defined  the 
“Electric  Inspector”  to  mean  any  person  appointed  under 
section 36 of the Electricity Act, 1910 and conferred with the 
powers  of  Office  of  Inspection  under  section  38  (1)  of  the 
NEPRA  Act.  Section  4  of  the  Order  of  2005  clinches  the 
issue  as  according  the  said  provision,  the  jurisdiction  now 
vests  with  the  Office  of  Inspection  to  entertain,  hear  and 
decide the complaints. The said provision reads as under. 
Filing of Complaint. 
 
 
(1) 
An aggrieved person, consumer  or  a  licensee  shall  file 
separate  complaints  for  each  violation,  which  shall  contain  full 
name  and  address  of  the  complainant,  the  grounds  of  the 
complaint and the name and address of the violator. 
(2) 
The complaint shall be duly signed by the complainant 
or  his  authorized  representative  shall  be  supported  by  a 
summary  of  evidence  giving  brief 
facts/data  and  any 
documentary  evidence  alongwith  such  number  of  envelopes 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 9 ~ 
 
 
 
 
bearing postal stamps as may, from time to time, be directed by 
the  Office  of  Inspection  and  the  statement  of  the  complainant 
shall be verified by an affidavit. 
(3) 
The complaint shall  be  lodged  with  the  Office  of 
Inspection during office hours along with such number of copies 
as  the  Office  of  Inspection  may,  from  time  to  time,  direct  and 
each set of the complaint shall be complete in all respect. 
(4)  
The  contents  of  the  complaint  shall  be  examined  by 
the  Office  of  Inspection  so  as  to  satisfy  itself  of  the  conformity 
thereof with the procedure mentioned above. 
(5)  
In  case  the  complaint  is  not  in  accordance  with  the 
aforementioned procedure, the Office of Inspection, shall return 
the  complaint  to  the  complainant  within  three  days  of  filling 
thereof with the direction to rectify the defect, if any and made 
the  complaint  afresh  in  accordance  with  the  above  mentioned 
procedure: 
Provided that the complaint shall be returned for one time only 
and where it is re-filed it shall not be rejected on the ground of 
any  defect  without  giving  the  complainant  an  opportunity  of 
rectifying  the  defect  within  the  time  specified  by  the  Office  of 
Inspection. 
(6)  Where the complaint is found to be inconformity with the above 
mentioned  procedure,  the  filing  of  the  complaint  shall  be 
acknowledged,  stamped,  entered  into  a  register  maintained  for 
the purpose and assigned a number and date thereto.  
(7)  All proceedings in respect of a complaint shall ordinarily be held 
at the office of Inspection or any other place as may be directed 
by the office of inspection. (Emphasis supplied)  
 
The  combined  reading  of  various  provisions  of  the 
Order  of  2005  and  particularly  section  4  unambiguously 
brings  out  the  fact  that  complaints  by  aggrieved  person, 
consumer  or  licensee  concerning  disputes  with  regard  to 
metering, billing and collection of tariff and other connected 
matters  shall  be  dealt  with  by  the  Office  of  Inspection  in 
terms of section 38 of the NEPRA Act and not by the Electric 
Inspector acting under section 26 of the Electricity Act, 1910. 
There  should,  therefore,  remain  no  doubt  that  all  the 
complaints  in  regard  to  disputes  of  metering,  billing  and 
collection of tariff and other connected matters are to be filed 
before  and  decided  upon  by  the  Office  of  Inspection.  It  is 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 10 ~ 
 
furthermore  apparent  that  the  Electric  Inspector  constituted 
under  Electricity  Act,  1910  has  been  conferred  with  the 
powers of Office of Inspection. 
15. 
Prior  to  the  passing  of  the  Eighteenth  amendment  in 
the Constitution, electricity was placed in the concurrent list. 
With  the  introduction  of  Eighteenth  Amendment  through 
Constitution 
(Eighteenth  Amendment)  Act,  2010, 
the 
concurrent  list  was  abolished  and  electricity  was  placed  at 
Entry  4  of  Part  II  of  the  Fourth  Schedule  whereafter  it 
became exclusively a Federal subject. No doubt, an appeal is 
provided  against  the  final  order  passed  by  the  Office  of 
Inspection  before  the  Government  of  Punjab  in  terms  of 
section 10 of the Order of 2005. However, sub-section (3) of 
section  38  of  the  NEPRA  Act  was  brought  on  the  statute 
through  Regulation  of  Generation,  Transmission  and 
Distribution  of  Electric  Power  (Amendment)  Act,  2011, 
which  provision  stipulated  that  any  person  aggrieved  by  an 
order/decision  of  the  Provincial  Office  of  Inspection  may 
within  thirty  days  of  the  receipt  of  the  order  file  an  appeal 
before  the  Authority  (NEPRA)  in  the  prescribed  manner. 
Suffice  it  to  state  that  sub-section  (3)  of  section  38  of  the 
NEPRA Act being the federal law will take precedence over 
the  Order of 2005, which is  a provincial  law. Consequently, 
the appellate forum (Government) as provided by section 10 
of  the  Order  of  2005  against  the  decisions  of  the  Provincial 
Office of Inspection has now been replaced by the Authority 
(NEPRA). All the three appeals filed by the petitioners were 
filed before the Advisory Board in the year 2012 i.e. after the 
promulgation of sub-section (3) of section 38 of the NEPRA 
Act. It is thus clear that the petitioners approached the wrong 
forum (Advisory Board) against the decisions of the Electric 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 11 ~ 
 
Inspector.  Their  appeals  were, 
therefore, 
rightly  not 
entertained by the Advisory Board. 
16. 
The learned counsel for the petitioner in writ petition 
No.6224  of 2017  stated  that  an  application  under  section  14 
of the Limitation Act, 1908 was filed before the NEPRA and 
that its finding that the appeal before the Advisory Board was 
also  time  barred  had  no  merit  and  that  the  Authority  fell  in 
error in rejecting the appeal. The arguments advanced by the 
learned  counsel  are  not  tenable.  In  a  judgment  reported  as 
Khushi  Muhammad  through  LRs  and  others  v.  Mst.  Fazal 
Bibi and others PLD 2016 SC 872, a full Bench of Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court  after  reviewing  the  entire  case  law  on  the 
subject held that section 14 is restricted only to the suits and 
cannot  be  resorted  to  for  seeking  condonation  of  delay  in 
filing  appeals  before  the  right  forum.  With  regard  to  the 
grounds seeking condonation of delay, it was further held in 
the judgment as follows: 
in  terms  of  approaching  a  wrong 
Time  spent  pursuing  an  appeal  before  a  wrong  forum,  in  good 
faith  and  with  due  diligence  ought  in  our  view  to  constitute 
sufficient  cause  for  condonation  of  delay.  But  the  act  of 
approaching a wrong forum must be accounted for: It should be 
established  that  due  to  some  honest,  bona  fide  and  genuine 
ambiguity  in  the  law  or  in  fact,  a  party  or  his  counsel  was  led 
astray 
forum.  Mere 
incompetence  of  the  counsel,  inadvertence,  negligence  or 
ignorance  of  law  attributable  to  him  and/or  overlooking  of the 
record  by  the  counsel  cannot  constitute  sufficient  cause  ipso 
facto,  but  the  factors(s)  which  misled  the 
legal  counsel, 
including  any  ambiguity  in  the  law,  causing  him  to  file  the 
appeal before the wrong forum must be indicated. Mere wrong 
advice of counsel is not an adequate ground per se to constitute 
sufficient  cause  because  if  this  rule  is  accepted,  the  centuries 
tested  rule  that  ignorance  of  law  is  no  excuse  would  stand 
violated. Besides, the above factors which caused ambiguity and 
misled the appellant (or his counsel as the case may be) have to 
be  stated  with  clarity  and  precision  in  the  application  for 
condonation  of  delay  and  proved  on  the  record.  (emphasis 
supplied) 
 
 
                     W.P. No.6224 of 2017.                                            ~ 12 ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The perusal of the order passed by NEPRA shows that 
it rightly came to the conclusion on the strength of section 10 
of  the  Order  of  2005  that  the  appeal  before  the  Advisory 
Board  ought  to  have  been  filed  within  a  period  of  30  days 
whereas the petitioner filed the said appeal after a delay of 71 
days  without  any  explanation.  The  petitioner,  therefore, 
failed to make out any case for condonation under section 14 
of the Limitation Act, 1908. NEPRA thus rightly rejected the 
appeal filed by the petitioner. 
17. 
In  the  circumstances,  it  is  declared  that  after  the 
promulgation  of  Order  of  2005,  the  decision  rendered  on  a 
complaint  filed before  the  Electric  Inspector  shall be  treated 
to have been given by the Provincial Office of Inspection and 
that 
the  appeal  against 
the  decision  of 
the  Electric 
Inspector/Provincial Office of Inspection after the enactment 
of  sub-section  (3)  of  section  38  of  the  NEPRA  Act  shall  lie 
before the Authority as defined in NEPRA Act. In the result, 
this  writ  petition  and  other  connected  writ  petitions  fail  and 
are accordingly dismissed. 
 
                                        (Shams Mehmood Mirza) 
                                                        Judge 
 
    Announced in open Court on 12.02.2018. 
 
                                                       Judge 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
    Judge 
Ihsan/Javed 
