 
 
 
 
          Form No:HCJD/C-121 
             ORDER SHEET 
                                   IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
                   JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
                                                           Case No.  
Writ Petition No.222355 /2018 
 
 
 
          Muhammad Ramzan                           Vs 
 
            Election Commission of Pakistan etc. 
S. No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
Proceeding 
Proceeding 
Parties or Counsel, where necessary. 
 
 
 
 
 
                 28.06.2018  M/s  Saad  Rasool,  Aitzaz  Aslam  Chaudhry,  Faiz 
Ullah  Khan  Niazi  and  Muhammad  Ramzan 
Chaudhry, Advocates for the petitioner. 
Mr.  Waqar  Ahmad  Rais,  Assistant  Attorney 
General for Pakistan. 
Barrister  Haris  Azmat,  Advocate  for  respondent 
No.6. 
Zafar 
Provincial  Election 
Commissioner, Punjab, Ch. Umar Hayat, Director 
(Legal),  ECP, 
Irfan  Kausar,  Delimitation 
Committee  Member  and  Hafiz  Adeel  Ashraf, 
Assistant Law Officer.  
Iqbal  Hassan, 
 
 
 
 
This  constitution  petition  has  been  filed  against  the 
decision  of  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  dated  25.06.2018 
whereby  Election  Appeal  No.88-A  of  2018,  filed  by 
respondent No.6 was allowed on the ground that the petitioner 
holds dual nationality, therefore, he is not eligible to be chosen 
as a Member Provincial Assembly from a constituency PP-120 
(Toba  Tek  Singh)  and  consequently  his  nomination  papers 
were rejected.  
 
2. 
This  case  was  presented  today  before  us  and  we  were 
inclined to issue notice to all the respondents and at that stage 
the  representatives  of  Election  Commission  along  with  their 
learned  counsel,  who  were  present  in  connection  with  other 
Writ Petition No.222355/2018 
 
2 
election matters fixed today before this Bench, and the counsel 
for  respondent  No.6-appellant  before  the  learned  Appellate 
Tribunal,  have  entered  appearance  and  not  only  accepted 
notice but also agreed to argue the case even today, therefore, 
we,  by  permitting  them  to  address  arguments  today,  are 
inclined  to  treat  it  as  ‘pacca  case’  and  decide  the  same 
accordingly. 
 
3. 
 The 
learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.6,  with 
permission  of  the  Court,  has  argued  the  case  first  in  order  to 
highlight  the  unattended  objections,  which  were  part  of  their 
appeal  but  had  not  been  considered  by  the  learned  Appellate 
Tribunal,  which  confined  its  findings  only  on  one  point  of 
‘dual  nationality’,  however,  he  led  our  attention  towards 
different  parts  of  nomination  papers  to  point-out  some  false 
and incorrect information, allegedly provided by the petitioner 
concerning  property,  finance  and  payment  of  income  tax 
besides  supporting 
the  order-judgment  of 
the 
learned 
Appellate Tribunal regarding dual nationality, contending that 
at  the  time  of  filing  of  nomination  papers  the  petitioner  held 
twin  nationality  and  there  was  no  certificate  issued  by  UK 
Visas  and  Immigration  Authority, 
therefore, 
the  order-
judgment  of  the  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  is  in  accordance 
with  the  law  laid  down  by  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  a  case 
reported  in  Syed  Mehmood  Akhtar  Naqvi  v.  Federation  of 
Pakistan  through  Secretary  Law  and  others  (PLD  2012 
Supreme  Court  1089),  hence,  there  is  no  illegality  or 
jurisdictional  defect  in  the  judgment  impugned,  thus  this 
petition is not maintainable and liable to be dismissed. 
 
4. 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the petitioner in 
answer  to  all  the  objections  raised  by  learned  counsel 
Writ Petition No.222355/2018 
 
3 
representing  respondent  No.6  submits  that  entire  information 
provided  by  the  petitioner,  as  required  by  law,  is  correct  and 
there  is  no  ambiguity  qua  his  assets  and  finance.  He  also 
maintained  that  neither  the  respondents  nor  any  other  agency 
of  Pakistan  has  claimed  any  default  committed  by  the 
petitioner in respect of non-payment of any dues attracting the 
causes  of  his  disqualification. Further  submits  that  leaving  of 
inconsequential  columns  blank  also  does  not  invite  penal 
consequences.  As  regards  dual  nationality,  he  presented  the 
original  certificate  issued  by  UK  Visas  and  Immigration 
authority  demonstrating  ‘Renunciation  of  British  Citizenship 
Status’ with the date as 11th April, 2018; hence, contends that 
after  renunciation  of  British  Citizenship  Status,  he  cannot  be 
burdened  with  any  penal  action  for  non-completing  the 
process  by  UK  Visas  and  Immigration  Authority,  which  is 
beyond his control, however, since he has already surrendered 
the  British  Citizenship  and  its  Passport,  hence  no  question 
does arise attracting reasons relating to his disqualification.  
 
5.  We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and 
gone through record of the case.  
 
6. 
The question in the attending circumstances evolves is, 
‘whether  the  declaration-statement  of  a  candidate  in  the 
nomination  papers  was  false  and  incorrect  and  any  material 
particular  can  be  determined  without  holding  a  detailed 
inquiry’.  The  answer  is  in  the  negative  inasmuch  as  it  is  not 
possible  while  sitting  in  constitutional  jurisdiction  to  hold  a 
roving inquiry, which could not have been exercised either by 
the  Returning  Officer  or  Appellate  Tribunal  in  summary 
proceedings, therefore, we are of the view that in presence of 
Articles  4  &  10-A  of  the  Constitution,  which  postulate  to 
Writ Petition No.222355/2018 
 
4 
adopt  the  due  process,  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  is 
excluded  to  determine  with  certainty,  ‘whether  qualification 
and disqualification enumerated under Articles 62 & 63 of the 
Constitution,  are  attracted  against  a  candidate,  so  we  refrain 
ourselves to go to that extent and for this probable reason the 
order  of  the  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  is  silent,  however, 
respondent  No.6  or  any  other  person  eligible  under  the 
elections  laws  can  approach  the  appropriate  forum  at  proper 
stage as permissible under the law. 
Whereas the question concerning dual nationality on the 
basis of which the learned Appellate Tribunal has thrown-out 
the present petitioner out of ring to contest the election, is also 
contrary  to  the  dictum  laid  down  by  the  apex  Court  in  Syed 
Mehmood  Akhtar  Naqvi’s  case,  referred  to  by  the  learned 
counsel for respondent No.6. In the said judgment, the august 
Court  laid  down  the  parameters  regarding  holding  of  dual 
nationality  and  it  is  held  that  any  person  who  had  renounced 
his  citizenship  and  certificate  in  this  respect  has  been  issued 
and  produced,  same  would  be  sufficient  evidence  regarding 
surrendering  of  impugned  nationality  and  in  the  same 
judgment,  honourable  Supreme  Court  even  permitted  Mr.  A. 
Rehman Malik, who was holder of British nationality and de-
seated on this disqualification but subsequently in By-election 
he was permitted to contest the election when he produced the 
certificate of renunciation of his citizenship of U.K., therefore, 
there is no cavil to hold that if a person surrenders his second 
nationality  and  produces  the  certificate  of  renunciation  of 
citizenship  on  a  date  prior  to  filing  of  nomination  papers, 
neither  any  penal  consequences  relating  to  disqualification  is 
attracted nor he can be restrained from contesting the election.  
 
Writ Petition No.222355/2018 
 
5 
7. 
For  what  has been  discussed  above, we  are  of  the  firm 
view  that  the  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  has  not  examined 
rather  applied  the  law  laid  down  by  the  honourable  Supreme 
Court  in  its  true  spirit,  therefore,  the  judgment  impugned  is 
unsustainable  in  the  eye  of  law  being  contrary  to  the  settled 
principle  of  law.  Consequently,  the  same  is  hereby  set-aside 
by  allowing 
the  writ  petition.  The  Returning  Officer 
concerned  is  directed  to include  the name  of  the petitioner in 
the list of eligible/nominated candidates in terms of Section 64 
of the Elections Act, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gull*               
  (MUHAMMAD SAJID MEHMOOD SETHI)    (MUHAMMAD AMEER BHATTI)     
     JUDGE. 
 
                                              JUDGE. 
 
 
Approved for reporting.  
     JUDGE. 
 
                                                JUDGE. 
