Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE   
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
W. P. No.223485 of 2018 
 
Syed Fida Hussain Shah 
Versus 
The Election Appellate Tribunal & others 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of hearing:     17.07.2018. 
Petitioners by:  M/s.  Mubeen  ud  Din  Qazi  and  Syed 
Sikandar Abbas Gillani, Advocates. 
Respondents by:  M/s.  Khalid  Ishaq,  Wajahat  Ali,  Adeel 
Shahid  Karim,  Babar  Afzal,  Ahmed  Saeed 
Advocates,  Ch.  Umer  Hayat,  Director 
(Legal),  Imran  Arif  Ranjha,  Legal  Advisor 
and  Hafiz  Adeel  Ashraf,  Assistant  Law 
Officer. 
MUHAMMAD  SAJID  MEHMOOD  SETHI,  J.-  This 
consolidated 
judgment  shall  dispose  of 
instant  petition 
alongwith following connected petition as common questions of 
law and facts are involved in these cases:-  
W.P.  No.223486  of  2018  titled  Muhammad  Imran  v.  The 
Election Appellate Tribunal & others 
  
Through  instant  petition,  petitioner  has  assailed  order 
dated  25.06.2018,  passed  by 
learned  Appellate  Tribunal, 
whereby  nomination  papers  filed  by  respondent  No.4  for  the 
constituency in question were accepted. 
  
In  connected  petition,  petitioner  /  Muhammad  Imran  has 
assailed  orders  dated  19.06.2018  and  25.06.2018, passed  by  the 
Returning  Officer  PP-126,  Jhang-III  and  learned  Appellate 
Tribunal,  respectively,  whereby  nomination  papers  filed  by 
respondent  No.4  for  the  constituency  in  question  were  accepted 
concurrently.  
2. 
Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  submit  that  respondent 
No.4  is  involved  in  as  many  as  8-criminal  cases  /  FIRs  but  this 
W.P. No.223485 of 2018 & connected case 
2 
 
 
fact was concealed while filing nomination papers. They add that 
respondent  No.4  was  disqualified  in  an  earlier  Bye-Election, 
2016  for  the  constituency  PP-79,  Jhang-III,  vide  order  dated 
11.11.2016,  passed  in  Election  Appeal  No.4A  of  2016,  on 
account  of  false  declaration  of  his  assets  and  pending  criminal 
cases,  but  this  material  aspect  of  the  matter  was  not  taken  into 
consideration  while  passing  the  impugned  order  by  learned 
Appellate  Tribunal.  They  further  submit  that  respondent  No.4 
also did not disclose detail of his bank account and correct value 
of his assets / income in his nomination papers. In the end, they 
submit that impugned order is not sustainable in the eye of law.  
3. 
Conversely,  learned  Legal  Advisor  of  respondent-ECP, 
duly  assisted  by  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.4,  defends 
the  impugned  order  and  submits  that  learned  counsel  for 
petitioner has failed to point out any illegality or legal infirmity 
in the same. He has relied upon Muhammad Afzal Khan Dhandla 
and  3  others  v.  Election  Tribunal  and  others  (PLD  2010 
Supreme  Court  959),  Muhammad  Mujtaba  Abdullah  and 
another v. Appellate Authority / Additional Sessions Judge Tehsil 
Liaquatpur  District  Rahim  Yar  Khan  and  others  (2016  SCMR 
893), Murad Bux v. Kareem Bux and others (2016 SCMR 2042), 
Imran  Ahmad  Khan  Niazi  v.  Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif, 
Prime Minister of Pakistan / Member National Assembly, Prime 
Minister’s House, Islamabad and 9 others (PLD 2017 Supreme 
Court  265),  Sami  Ullah  Baloch  and  others  v.  Abdul  Karim 
Nousherwani and others (PLD 2018 Supreme Court 405), Raja 
Pervaiz  Ashraf    v.  Election  Tribunal  and  others  (PLD  2013 
Lahore 552), Rai Hassan Nawaz v. The Election Commission of 
Pakistan and others (2013 CLC 1101), Gohar Nawaz Sindhu v. 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others (PLD 2014 Lahore 
670)  and  Muzafar  Abbas  v.  Maulana  Muhammad  Ahmad 
Ludhianvi and 31 others (PLD 2017 Lahore 394).  
4. 
Arguments heard. Available record perused. 
W.P. No.223485 of 2018 & connected case 
3 
 
 
5. 
Petitioners  in  this  as  well  as  connected  petition,  raised 
objections  against  the  candidature  of  respondent  No.4,  namely 
Muhammad  Ahmad  Ladhianavi  i.e.  (i)  that  eight  criminal  cases 
lodged  against  respondent  No.4  being  4th  Schedule  offender, 
were  not  disclosed  in  his  nomination  papers;  (ii)  that  the 
respondent  has  not  declared  his  true  assets;  (iii)  that  the 
respondent  has  not  declared  his  true  net  income;  (iv)  that  the 
respondent  has  made  misstatement  qua  the  assets  pertaining  to 
year 2016-2017, while filing the nomination papers; (v) that the 
account  number  has  not  been  disclosed;  and  (vi)  that  the 
respondent was declared disqualified because of mis-declaration 
through  a  judgment  dated  11.11.2016,  therefore,  he  is  not 
qualified to contest the election.  
6. 
First objection is regarding concealment of criminal cases/ 
4th  Schedule  offender.  It  is  evident  from  record  that  respondent 
No.4  has  already  been  exonerated  /  declared  innocent  in  all  the 
criminal cases. In some cases, he was acquitted from the Court of 
competent  jurisdiction,  thus,  non-disclosure  of  said  criminal 
cases  in  nomination  papers  is  not  fatal  for  respondent  No.4.  It 
has been held by Hon’ble Supreme Court that non-disclosure of 
a  fact  which  otherwise,  if  disclosed,  could  not  debar  the 
candidate  from  contesting  the  election,  could  not  be  made  a 
ground  to  preclude  the  candidate  from  contesting  the  election. 
Reference  can  be  made  to  the  case  of  Murad  Bux  supra, 
operative part of which is reproduced hereunder:- 
“7……  The  only  issue  is  the  non-discloser  of  the  pending 
criminal  case  in  the  affidavit  before  the  Returning  Officer 
and  whether  such  non-disclosure  would  be  construed  as 
concealment of „material particulars‟. We, in the backdrop of 
these  facts,  are  of  the  considered  view  that  the  non-
disclosure of a fact which otherwise, if disclosed, could not 
debar the Petitioner from contesting the election, cannot be 
made  a  ground  to  preclude  the  Petitioner  from  contesting 
the  election,  cannot  be  made  a  ground  to  preclude  the 
Petitioner from contesting the election.” 
W.P. No.223485 of 2018 & connected case 
4 
 
 
7. 
So far as the objections regarding true assets / net income, 
misstatement  qua  the  assets  pertaining  to  year  2016-2017  and 
non-disclosure  of  account  number,  are  concerned,  suffice  it  to 
say  that  nothing  has  been  brought  on  record  to  show  that  any 
asset  was  concealed.  Income  is  always  counted  after  deduction 
of  expenditure.  The  account  was  freezed  on  13.06.2018  and  it 
could  not  be  operated  by  respondent  No.4.  The  said  objections 
are  not  substantial  in  nature  as  rightly  observed  by  learned  fora 
below  in  the  impugned  orders.  It  is  well  settled  that  failure  to 
mention  personal  expenditure,  source  of  income  or  bank 
accounts  does  not  constitute deficiency  of  material particular  of 
substantial  nature  attracting  disqualification  clauses  in  the 
matter.  In  the  case  of  Rai  Hassan  Nawaz  supra,  this  Court  has 
observed that the question whether the declaration / statements of 
the candidate in the nomination papers were false or incorrect in 
any  material  particular,  cannot  be  ascertained  without  carrying 
out  a  factual  probe.  This  exercise  cannot  be  undertaken  in 
constitutional jurisdiction and could not have been gone into by 
the  Returning  Officer  or  the  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  in 
summary jurisdiction.  
8. 
The  next  objection  of  petitioners  that  in  the  previous 
round  of  litigation,  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  has  made  a 
declaration to the effect that respondent No.4 is not a sagacious, 
righteous,  non-profligate,  honest  and  Ameen  person  to  contest 
the  election  and  this  declaration  is  permanent  in  nature,  hence, 
respondentNo.4  is  not  entitled  to  contest  the  General  Elections, 
2018. Suffice it to say that learned Full Bench of this Court, vide 
order dated 14.12.2016, passed in W.P. No.36879 of 2016 titled 
Maulana  Muhammad Ahmad Ludhianvi v. Muzaffar Abbas etc., 
observed  that  the  findings  recorded  in  para  17  of  the  said  order 
of  the  Appellate  Tribunal  will  not  prejudice  respondent  No.4’s 
right to contest election in future. The said order is reproduced as 
under:- 
W.P. No.223485 of 2018 & connected case 
5 
 
 
“At  the  outset,  it  is  apprised  that  petitioner  did  not  contest 
election  despite  permission  by  this  Court  through  interim 
order dated 28.11.2016. 
Learned  counsel  for  petitioner  submits  that  he  will 
2. 
not  press  this  and  connected  petition  if  observations  / 
findings  in  Paragraph  No.17  of  the  impugned  order  are 
clarified  to  the  extent  that  these  shall  not  prejudice 
petitioner‟s right to contest election in nature. 
3. 
The  impugned  judgment  is  examined,  which  does 
not  suggest  that  impugned  observations  /  findings  are 
meant for future as well. 
4. 
In view  of  the clarification,  ibid,  the  petitioner  does 
not  press  this  and  connected  petition,  therefore,  both  are 
disposed of .” 
9. 
Even otherwise, as per verdict given in the case of Imran 
Ahmad  Khan  Niazi  (Panama  Papers  Scandal)  supra,  in  a 
summary  jurisdiction,  findings  given  by  learned  Appellate 
Tribunal  do  not  come  within  the  meaning  of  declaration  within 
contemplation  of  provisions  of  Article  62  (1)  (f)  of  the 
Constitution.  The 
relevant  observations  are 
reproduced 
hereunder:- 
“20……  However,  disqualifications  envisaged  by  Article 
62(1)(f)  and  Article  63(2)  of  the  Constitution  in  view  of 
words used therein have to be dealt with differently. In the 
former  case  the  Returning  Officer  or  any  other  fora  in  the 
hierarchy would not reject the nomination of a person from 
being elected as a member of Parliament unless a court of 
law  has  given  a  declaration  that  he  is  not  sagacious, 
righteous,  non-profligate,  honest  and  ameen.  Even  the 
Election  Tribunal,  unless  it  itself  proceeds  to  give  the 
requisite  declaration  on  the  basis  of  the  material  before  it, 
would  not  disqualify  the  returned  candidate  where  no 
declaration, as mentioned above, has been given by a court 
of law. The expression a court of law has not been defined 
in Article 62 or any other provision of the Constitution but it 
essentially means a court of plenary jurisdiction, which has 
the power to record evidence and give a declaration on the 
basis  of  the  evidence  so  recorded.  Such  a  court  would 
include  a  court  exercising  original,  appellate  or  revisional 
jurisdiction  in  civil  and  criminal  cases.  But  in  any  case  a 
court  or  a  forum  lacking  plenary  jurisdiction  cannot  decide 
questions of this nature at least when disputed…..” 
  
In  the  case  of  Raja  Pervaiz  Ashraf  supra,  this  Court  has 
observed  that  requirement  of  declaration  by  a  Court  of  law,  as 
provided in Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution, had to be strictly 
W.P. No.223485 of 2018 & connected case 
6 
 
 
construed  and  in  absence  whereof  neither  the  Returning  Officer 
nor the Election Tribunal had power to issue any declaration by 
itself  in  a  summary  jurisdiction.  Relevant  portion  from  the 
observations is reproduced hereunder:- 
“10…… Therefore, in our view, in order to deprive a citizen 
of his fundamental right to contest election, the requirement 
of  a  declaration  by  a  court  of  law,  as  provided  in  Article 
62(1)(f) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973 has to be strictly construed…… 
Even  otherwise,  it  is  settled  law  that  neither  the  Returning 
Officer nor the Election Tribunal has the power to issue any 
declaration  by  itself  in  a  summary  jurisdiction  under  the 
provisions  of  Representation  of  the  People  Act,  1976, 
unless there is a declaration issued by a court of law placed 
before them, in which event they can invoke the provisions 
of  Article 62(1)(f)  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973.” 
10.  Needless  to  observe  here  that  beside  the  fact  that  above 
objections are not substantial in nature, respondent No.4 has duly 
explained the said omissions / concealment, which appears to be 
reasonable  /  plausible.  The  Hon’ble  Apex  Court,  in  the  case  of 
Sh.  Rasheed  Ahmad,  has  settled  this  issue.  The  relevant  part  is 
reproduced as under:- 
“13.  Where  a  misstatement  or  an 
inaccuracy  or 
concealment  is  established,  the  candidate/member  would 
always  have  the  opportunity  to  offer  an  explanation.  Such 
explanation  may  or  may  not  be  found  acceptable.  Such  is 
the ratio of the judgment of this Court rendered in the case 
reported  as  Sheikh  Muhammad  Akram  v.  Abdul  Ghafoor 
and  19  others  (2016  SCMR  733).  In  the  said  case,  an 
Election  Petition  filed  before  the  Election  Tribunal.  In  the 
proceedings,  it  stood  established  that  a  criminal  case 
registered  against  the  candidate  was  not  mentioned  in  his 
Nomination Papers as required. Such candidate offered an 
explanation which was accepted by this Court by way of the 
aforesaid  judgment  which  is  incidentally  authorized  by  my 
learned brother Qazi Faez Isa, J., and I too was a Member 
in  case  of 
of 
concealment,  discrepancy  and  misstatement 
the 
Nomination Papers an explanation thereof may be given by 
a candidate / member, which may or may not be accepted 
by the court. And only, if such explanation is found tenable 
no penal consequences would follow. The question of “strict 
liability” does not arise with regard to misstatements in the 
Nomination  Papers.  Such  view  was  also  followed  in  the 
judgments  of  this  Court  reported  as  Muhammad  Siddique 
the  said  Bench.  The  said  view 
i.e. 
in 
 
 
 
W.P. No.223485 of 2018 & connected case 
7 
Baloch v. Jehangir Khan Tareen and others (PLD 2016 SC 
97) and Muhammad Hanif Abbasi v. Imran Khan Niazi and 
others  (PLD  2018  SC  189).  No  departure  has  been  made 
by  this Court  in the  cases reported  as  Imran Ahmad  Khan 
Niazi  v.  Mian  Muhammad  Nawaz  Sharif,  Prime  Minister  of 
Pakistan  /  Member  National  Assembly,  Prime  Minister’s 
House,  Islamabad  and  9  others  (PLD  2017  SC  265  and 
PLD 2017 SC 692). In the aforesaid case, the concealment 
of assets in the Nomination Papers filed by the Respondent 
in  the  said  proceedings  was  established 
through  an 
admission. At no point of time any explanation was offered, 
in  this  behalf.  Therefore,  the  question  of  accepting  or 
rejecting such explanation did not arise. Even in the Review 
Petition,  no  explanation  was  offered.  However,  an  oblique 
reference in hypothetical term was only made. This aspect 
of  the  matter  was  dealt  with  and  adjudicated  upon  by  this 
Court  in  the  judgment  passed  on  such  review  reported  as 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others v. Imran Ahmed 
Khan Niazi and others (PLD 2018 SC 1). Reference, in this 
behalf, may be made to para 11 of the said judgment. The 
relevant portion thereof is reproduced hereunder: 
in 
The argument that the omission to disclose 
11. 
assets  could  possibly  be  unintentional 
the 
circumstances of the case would have been tenable 
had the petitioner been a novice or a new entrant in 
business and politics. But where he has been neck 
deep in business and politics ever since early 80s‟ it 
is  unbelievable  that  he  did  not  understand  the 
simple principle of  accounting  that  his  accrued and 
accumulated salary of six and  a  half years was his 
asset  and  liability  of  the  company  he  was  an 
employee of. Even otherwise, this argument cannot 
be given much weight when it has not been pleaded 
by  the  petitioner  that  the  omission  to  mention  the 
asset 
or 
unintentional….” 
inadvertent 
accidental, 
was 
Why no explanation was given or attempted to be given will 
always remain a mystery.” 
 
11. 
In  view  of  the  above,  instant  petition,  along  with 
connected petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.   
  
      (Amin-ud-Din Khan)    (Muhammad Sajid Mehmood Sethi)      
 
 
 
    
     Judge 
Judge  
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
Judge  
 
    
     Judge 
*Sultan* 
