Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
Multan Bench Multan 
Judicial Department 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum   versus   Qadeer Ahmad 
JUDGMENT  
 
 
 
Mr.Waseem Mumtaz, Advocate.  
Date of hearing:   06.12.2016 
Petitioner by:  
Respondent by:   Mirza Dilawar Hussain, Advocate.  
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
MUZAMIL AKHTAR SHABIR, J:               This  civil  revision, 
filed  by  Mst.Jameela  Begum,  is  directed  against  the  dismissal  of  her 
appeal on 13.12.2004 by learned Additional District Judge, Mailsi against 
the judgment and decree dated 13.11.2003 passed by learned Civil Judge, 
Mailsi, whereby the petitioner’s suit for declaration, permanent injunction 
and  consequential  relief  challenging  transfer  of  her  property  vide  gift 
mutations No.1307 and 1308 both dated 29.06.1987 was dismissed. 
2. 
Brief facts of the case are that on 03.06.2002, the petitioner filed a 
suit  for  declaration,  permanent  injunctions  and  consequential  relief 
against 
the  respondent/defendant  Qadeer  Ahmad  (real  brother  of 
petitioner), in which petitioner claimed that Hoshyar Ali, maternal uncle 
of the parties, who died issueless in 1986/87 owned property measuring 
64-Kanals  in  Khata  No.166  situated  in  Tiba  Sultanpur,  Tehsil  Mailsi, 
District Vehari.   Mst.Sharifan, mother of the parties, inherited 32-kanals 
land from her brother Hoshyar Ali. On the death of Mst.Sharifan, share in 
the  afore-mentioned  property  measuring  8-Kanals  was  inherited  by 
plaintiff as daughter, 16-Kanals by defendant Qadeer Ahmad as son and 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:2:-
8-Kanals  by  Barkat  Ali  as  husband.  After  the  death  of  Barkat  Ali, 
respondent Qadeer Ahmad initially provided share in produce of property 
to petitioner but on 26.04.2002 he refused to do so and claimed to be the 
exclusive owner of the property.  On inquiry from the revenue officers, it 
transpired that the petitioner’s property had been transferred firstly to her 
father through mutation No.1307 and then to respondent through mutation 
No.1308,  both  mutations  were  executed  on  the  same  date  i.e.  dated 
29.06.1987, whereas she had never appeared before the Revenue Officer/ 
staff  for  transfer  of  the  property.  The  petitioner  filed  the  afore-referred 
suit  and  challenged  both  the  mutations  on  the  ground  of  fraud, 
misrepresentation and collusion.  
3. 
The  respondent  claimed  that  petitioner  through  gift  mutation 
No.1307 had herself transferred the property to Barkat Ali, father of the 
parties,  on  account  of  natural  love  and  affection.  Barkat  Ali  then 
transferred land measuring 16-kanals, inclusive of petitioner’s property to 
respondent  through  gift  mutation  No.1308  on  the  same  day.  The 
respondent  claimed  that  transfer  of  land  through  gift  mutation  was 
genuine, petitioner does not have cause of action and the suit filed by her 
is not maintainable. 
The learned trial court dismissed the petitioner’s suit on 13.11.2003 
4. 
and petitioner’s appeal was also dismissed by the learned appellate court 
on  13.12.2004.  The  petitioner  has  challenged  both  the  judgments  and 
decrees before this Court in its revisional jurisdiction. 
The learned counsel for petitioner argued that findings of both the 
5. 
courts below suffer from material irregularities and erroneous-exercise of 
jurisdiction. The courts have misread and non-read the evidence available 
on  record  and  have  not  applied  judicious  mind  to  the  matter  in  issue.  
Both  mutations  were  based  on  fraud,  misrepresentation  and  collusion; 
hence not sustainable in the eye of law. The learned counsel argued that 
petitioner  being  an  illiterate  ‘Parda  Nasheen’  lady  has  denied  the 
execution of gift mutations and the onus to prove the genuineness of gift 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:3:-
mutations shifted upon the respondent which the respondent has not been 
able to establish; the ingredients of gift i.e. offer, acceptance and transfer 
of  possession  have  not  been  proved;  the  respondent has  failed  to  prove 
that  petitioner  personally  got  executed  the  gift  mutation;  the  learned 
appellate court has not given issue-wise findings; the entries of Mutations 
No.1307  and  1308  on  the  same  date  are  raising  doubt  about  its 
genuineness; the petitioner has been deprived of her inheritance without 
her  consent.    The  petitioner’s  learned  counsel  argued  that  both  the 
mutations  are  void  and  liable  to  be  cancelled  on  the  basis  of 
aforementioned grounds. 
6. 
Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  argued  that  through 
concurrent findings, the learned courts below have upheld the mutations 
No.1307 and 1308 as genuine and rightly dismissed the suit filed by the 
petitioner.  Further argued that concurrent findings cannot be set aside in 
revisional  jurisdiction  of  this  Court;  gift  mutations  were  proved  by 
producing  its  attesting  witnesses;  the  Lumbardar,  Naib  Tehsildar, 
Qanungo  and  Patwari  have  also  appeared  as  witnesses  to  prove  the 
transfer  of  the  property  in  dispute  and  have  supported  the  claim  of  the 
respondent; there is no misreading and non-reading of the relevant record; 
the petitioner had gifted the disputed property to her father on account of 
natural love and affection and the ingredients of gift were completed; the 
petitioner has challenged the gift mutations after the period of more than 
14 years and as such the suit has been filed only to harass the respondent; 
the petitioner has not denied her thumb impression on the gift mutation; 
the  petitioner  never  raised  allegation  of  fraud  against  her  father  Barkat 
Ali; the respondent is in possession of the property without interruption; 
entries in ‘Roznamcha Waqiyati’ support the claim of the respondent. The 
learned  counsel  for  respondent  argued  that  the  civil  revision  is  without 
merit and the same may be dismissed summarily. 
By consensus of both the learned counsel for the parties, this case is 
7. 
being decided as an admitted case.  
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:4:-
Arguments heard, record perused. 
8. 
9.  
The learned courts below have dismissed the suit on the ground that 
petitioner does not have cause of action and the suit is not maintainable. 
I would deal with these objections before discussing the merit of the case. 
10.  Cause of action means the facts stated in the plaint if presumed to 
be  true,  that  would  give  right  to  the  plaintiff  to  seek  legal  remedy.  By 
stating in the plaint that the petitioner neither transferred her share to her 
father nor she appeared before the revenue authorities for transfer of the 
same  and  the  mutations  were  based  on  fraud,  misrepresentation  and 
collusion,  it  means  that  petitioner  was  asserting  certain  facts  which 
opened  the  door  for  her  to  seek  legal  remedy  for  redressal  of  her 
grievance; hence she would have cause of action to approach the court. 
The learned trial court has wrongly observed that petitioner did not have 
cause of action.  The conclusion of this Court is that petitioner had cause 
of action to approach the court for redressal of her grievance.  Reliance is 
placed on Muhammad Asif and another v. Haji Fazal Ahmad and 2 others 
(2014 CLC 965) wherein it has been held while defining the term ‘cause 
of action’ as under: 
“Cause  of  action’  was  a  set  of  predefined  factual  elements  that  would 
allow a legal remedy. It means the basis of a law suit founded on legal 
grounds and the alleged facts, which  if proceeded would constitute all 
the elements required by a statute. For example to have cause of action 
for breach of contract there must have been an offer and acceptance, for 
a  tort  (civil  wrong)  there  must  have  been  negligence  or  intentional 
wrong doing and failure to perform.” 
11.  Having  cause  of  action  of-course  does  not  mean  that  the  facts 
asserted by petitioner need not be proved.  Any party who asserts some 
facts  to  seek  relief  has  to  prove  the  same  on  the  basis  of  principle  of 
evidence applicable to those particular facts and situation.  
12.  Maintainability,  on  the  other  hands,  deals  with  the  question  that 
whether  the  suit  can  proceed,  carry  on  or  subsist  in  view  of  the  facts 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:5:-
narrated in the contents of the plaint and law on the subject. In other word, 
suit has to be competent to proceed.  An incompetent suit cannot proceed 
any further on the basis of some principle of law. However, question of 
maintainability  is  to  be  determined  by  the  court.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  while  commenting  upon  maintainability  of  a  case  in 
Hasnat  Ahmad  Khan  v.  Institution  Officer  (2010  SCMR  354)  held  as 
under: 
“word ‘maintainability’ derives its source from word ‘maintain’ and its 
means cause to continue, keep up, preserve, support, assert opinion or 
statement  as  true,  preserve  or  provide  for  preservation  (building, 
machine, record etc.) in good repair, give aid to cause of party etc. and 
it  originates  its  source  from  old  French  word  ‘maintenir’,  ultimately 
from Latin word ‘manutenere’ meaning thereby to ‘hold in hand’. 
……….. The objections as to the maintainability are those which either 
raised by the office or the Court itself, are to be decided exclusively by 
the Court.” 
13.  A  suit  may  not  be  maintainable  on  the  basis  of  various  legal 
objections such as absence of cause of action, competency to file, locus 
standi, jurisdiction, etc. or bar of res-judicata, estoppel, etc.  The question 
of maintainability of a suit is to be determined by the court on the basis of 
facts of the case and law on the subject. I would therefore like to decide 
the question of maintainability after giving findings on the genuineness of 
gift mutations.   
14.  The  petitioner  herself  appeared  in  witness-box  as  PW1  and 
Muhammad  Ali,  her  husband,  as  PW2.  Both  stated  in  evidence  that 
petitioner  inherited  8-kanals  of  land  from  her  mother  Mst.Sharifan  who 
originally belonging to her maternal uncle Hoshiyar. Petitioner produced 
her mother’s inheritance mutation No.1305 in favour of parties as ExP1. 
Petitioner claimed that she had been deprived of her share of inheritance 
by  transfer  of  aforementioned  property  to  her  father  through  mutation 
No.1307 (ExP2) and then to her brother vide mutation No.1308 (ExP3), 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:6:-
both  mutations  are  dated  29.06.1987.  The  petitioner  stated  that  she  had 
neither gifted the suit property to her father nor she ever appeared before 
the  revenue  authorities  for  entry  of  mutation  No.1307  and  the  said 
mutation was based on fraud, misrepresentation and collusion and prayed 
that the same be set aside.   
In  her  cross  examination,  petitioner  stated  that  she  is  an  illiterate 
woman.  The  fact  of  petitioner  being  an  illiterate  woman  has  not  been 
rebutted in evidence. Statements of both, petitioner PW1 and her Husband 
PW2, remained consistent in cross examination.  Case of an illiterate lady 
is to be treated as at par to a case of ‘Parda Nasheen’ lady.  It has been 
settled by now that heavy onus to prove lies on a transferee/ beneficiary of 
transaction with a ‘Parda Nasheen’ lady. Reliance is placed on Phul Peer 
Shah v. Hafeez Fatima (2016 SCMR 1225) wherein it has been held that 
where  transaction  has  been  denied  by  an  old,  illiterate  village  ‘Parda 
Nasheen’  lady,  burden  to  prove  its  genuineness  would  shift  to  the 
beneficiary  of  the  transaction.  In  view  of  this  legal  position  and  after 
denial  of  transfer  of  property  by  petitioner,  the  onus  shifted  to  the 
respondent/defendant  to  prove  the  genuineness  of  the  gift  mutations 
No.1307 and 1308. 
15.  The  respondent  in  his  written  statement  as  well  as  his  statement 
recorded  as  DW1  stated  that  petitioner  transferred  her  property  to  her 
father,  Barkat  Ali  through  gift  mutation  No.1307  (ExD2).  He  produced 
two attesting witnesses of mutation No.1307 namely Naseeruddin as DW2 
and  Nazir  Ahmad  as  DW3.    DW2  Naseeruddin  in  cross  examination 
stated that petitioner had sold property to her father but the payment was 
not made in his presence.  DW3 Nazir Ahmad did not utter a single word 
about mutation No.1307 in his examination-in-chief and only stated that 
Barkat Ali had transferred land measuring 8-kanals to respondent. In his 
cross examination, he stated that petitioner had sold  the property to  her 
father  and  consideration  had  been  paid  in  his  presence  but  not  in  the 
presence  of  the  Tehsildar.  He  then  again  said  that  the  property  had  not 
been  sold.  DW4  Shahid  Latif,  Special  Magistrate,  the  then  Tehsildar, 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:7:-
stated that the property was gifted by petitioner to her father and transfer 
of consideration in the form of money had not taken place. DW7 Hazoor 
Ahmad,  Lumbardar,  has  not  stated  any  word  about  the  nature  of 
transaction  but  has  stated  that  petitioner  had  not  received  money  for 
transaction.  Both  the  witnesses  DW2  Naseeruddin  and  DW3  Nazir 
Ahmad have not supported the claim of the respondent that this was a gift 
mutation rather they stated it to be sale.  Hence, the nature of transaction 
to be a gift has not been supported by both the attesting witnesses and as 
such  the  respondent  has  failed  to  prove  the  transaction  to  be  a  gift. 
Moreover,  the  ingredients  of  gift  i.e.  offer,  acceptance  and  delivery  of 
possession have also not been proved.  None of the witnesses produced by 
the respondent has stated that in their presence petitioner had offered to 
gift  her  property  to  her  father  and  he  had  accepted  the  same  and 
possession had been transferred by petitioner.  Hence the essentials of gift 
have  not  been  proved.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Mst.Shafqat  Parveen  v. 
Muhammad Iftikhar Amjad and others (2012 SCMR 1602) wherein the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan has explained the ingredients of valid 
gift and burden of proof is on the beneficiary in the following terms: 
“In Muhammadan Law, offer, acceptance and delivery of possession are 
the  three  essential  ingredients  of  a  valid  gift  and  the  onus  was  on  the 
petitioner to prove these components.” 
16.  The  respondent  has  also  not  proved  the  time,  date,  place  and 
witnesses  before  whom  declaration  of  gift  was  made  by  petitioner  in 
favour  of  her  father.    Hence,  the  gift  has  not  been  proved.  Reliance  is 
placed  on  Peer  Bakhsh  through  L.Rs.  and  others  v.  Mst.Khanzadi  and 
others (2016 SCMR 1417) where in it has been held that mutation was 
not  a  proof  of  title  and  beneficiary  thereunder  must  prove  the  original 
transaction of gift by proving in evidence the time, date, place, intention 
of  declaration  and  witnesses  in  whose  presence  declaration  of  gift  was 
made by the donor. 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:8:-
17.  The  respondent  was  to  prove  that  consideration  for  transfer  of 
property was natural love and affection of a daughter for her father. The 
respondent appearing as DW1 stated that it was natural love and affection 
but his own witnesses DW2 and DW3 stated the transaction to be sale and 
not against love and affection. However, DW3 again said that it was not 
sale.  DW7  Hazoor  Ahmad,  Lumbardar,  has  also  not  stated  that 
consideration of transfer of property was natural love and affection. This 
means  that  the  actual  consideration  for  the  transfer  of  property  has  not 
been established on the record. Therefore, the claim of the respondent that 
gift mutation had been entered on account of natural love and affection as 
consideration fails.  
18.  The respondent has not stated that who identified the petitioner at 
the time of alleged transfer of property by petitioner to her father Barkat 
Ali. The respondent as DW1 has stated that petitioner had gone in alone to 
get her statement recorded. DW2 Naseer uddin and DW4 Ch.Shahid Latif, 
the then Tehsildar, stated that Nazir Ahmad and Hazoor Lumbardar had 
identified  the  petitioner.  DW6  Muhammad  Shafi  Patwari  stated  that 
Hazoor Lumbardar had identified the petitioner at the time of registration 
of mutation.  Nazir Ahmad while appearing as DW3 never uttered a single 
word about Mutation No.1307 and did not say that he had identified the 
petitioner.  Similarly,  DW7  Hazoor  Lumbardar  did  not  say  that  he 
identified  the  petitioner.  Hence,  identity  of  the  person  appearing  for 
recording of mutation is not established.      
19.  To prove the genuineness of a transaction of transfer of property, 
identity  of  parties  to  the  transaction,  subject  matter  of  the  transaction, 
nature  of  transaction  and  consideration  have  to  be  proved.  None  of  the 
aforementioned ingredients have been proved by the respondent. 
20.  The learned counsel for respondent has  argued  that petitioner has 
not  denied  her  thumb  impression  on  the  mutation  and  entries  in 
‘Roznamcha  Waqiyati’  fully  corroborate  the  validity  of  the  gift.  The 
petitioner  has  not  admitted  her  thumb  impression  on  the  gift  mutation 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:9:-
No.1307 as she had denied the execution altogether. The respondent could 
have  easily  applied  for  comparison  of  thumb  impression  to  prove  that 
petitioner  had  appeared  before  the  revenue  authorities  to  get  mutation 
entered but he did not apply to the court for the said purpose. Moreover, 
in view of my finding mentioned above that respondent has not been able 
to prove that the petitioner got the gift mutation sanctioned and the entries 
in  ‘Roznamcha  Waqiyati’  have  lost  significance  and  cannot  be  used  to 
corroborate the gift that has not been proved otherwise. 
21.   The  Superior  Courts  have  laid  down  the  points  for  taking  into 
consideration  with  regard  to  gift  deeds  executed  by  ‘Parda  Nasheen’ 
ladies.    The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has  cited  those  points 
with  approval  in  case  titled  Mst.Rasheeda  Bibi  and  others  v.  Mukhtar 
Ahmad and others (2008 SCMR 1384), which are as under: 
“i.   Whether the plaintiff had any friendly advice before executing the 
deed  and  by  a  person  whom  the  court  considers  as  being  genuinely 
interested in her welfare? 
Whether  the  document  was  explained  to  her  and  whether  she 
ii. 
really had the capacity to understand its consequences? 
iii.  Whether  it  was  a  mental  act,  that  is,  whether  the  mind 
accompanied the hand that executed it? 
iv.  Whether  the  entire  transaction  was  free  from  circumstances 
throwing any shadow of doubt or suspicion on the inception, execution 
and application of the deed?” 
22. 
In the present case, the property of petitioner was firstly transferred 
to  her  father,  who  was  in  a  position  to  influence  her  decision.  The 
respondent has not proved that any independent advice was available to 
petitioner  if  she  had  actually  transferred  the  property  to  her  father  and 
hence  the  component  of  undue  influence  could  not  be  ruled  out. 
Therefore,  the  transaction  is  doubtful  in  every  respect  and  cannot  be 
upheld under any circumstances.   
23.  For what has been discussed above, I feel no hesitation to hold that 
mutation No.1307 is void. The courts below have ignored this aspect of 
the matter and therefore the judgments of both the courts below are based 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:10:-
on  misreading  and  non-reading  of  evidence  and  erroneous  exercise  of 
jurisdiction. 
24.  Mutation No.1308 relates to transfer of 16-marlas of land by Barkat 
Ali (father) in  favour of Qadeer.  Respondent No.1 as DW.1 states that 
father offered 8-kanals of land which he accepted. DW2 Naseer udddin 
has  said  that  father  transferred  property  of  petitioner  8-kanals  to 
respondent.  DW3 Nazir Ahmad said that Barkat Ali offered 8-kanals of 
land  to  respondent  and  handed  over  possession  to  him.  All  the  private 
witnesses of transfer of 16-kanals land from Barkat Ali to Qadeer Ahmad 
have  not  supported  claim  to  the  extent  of  16-kanals.  Even  DW7 
Lumbardar  did  not  state  that  he  identified  Barkat  Ali  at  the  time  of 
transfer  of  the  disputed  property.  The  respondent  has  failed  to  prove 
mutation No.1308 to be a genuine document, besides mutation No.1308 is 
based upon mutation No.1307 which has already been declared as void.  
Superstructure based on void transaction is also void. Reliance is placed 
on Baja through L.Rs. and others v. Mst.Bakhan and others (2015 SCMR 
1704). 
25.  So  far  as the  question  that petitioner has challenged  the  mutation 
after more than 14 years is concerned, it is immaterial because petitioner 
has  specifically  stated  that  she  had  come  to  know  about  the  impugned 
mutations after the refusal of the respondent to pay share in produce on 
26.04.2002.  She made inquiry to the Revenue Officers which transpired 
that the property had been fraudulently transferred, thus the suit filed on 
03.06.2003 is well within time.  Furthermore, possession of one co-sharer 
is the possession of all co-sharers and the petitioner being co-owner shall 
be  deemed  to  be  in  possession  of  the  inherited  property.    Reliance  is 
placed on Agha Syed Mushtaque Ali Shah v. Mst.Bibi Gul Jan and others 
(2016 SCMR 910).  
26.  The learned counsel for respondent tried to rely upon the number of 
witnesses who appeared to support the genuineness of gift mutations. It 
was  argued  that  only  two  witnesses  i.e.  the  petitioner  as  PW1  and  her 
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:11:-
husband as PW2 had appeared in evidence to challenge the gift mutations, 
whereas the respondent produced seven witnesses, including himself, two 
attesting witnesses of mutations besides Tehsildar, Qanungo, Patwari and 
Lumbardar  to  prove  gift  mutations.    He  argued  that  all  the  official 
witnesses have appeared in witness-box to prove mutations No. 1307 and 
1308  and  sanctity  is  attached  to  official  acts.    As  the  private  witnesses 
have not been able to prove the gift transactions, the evidence of official 
witnesses  would  be  of  no  use  because  the  identity  of  the  woman  who 
appeared  before  them  has  not  been  established  and  they  could  not 
themselves  properly  identify  the  petitioner  without  the  identification  of 
private witnesses who have not deposed about identity of the petitioner. It 
is  not  the  quantity  but  the  quality  of  witnesses  that  is  important.  The 
respondent’s witnesses have not been able to prove the gift mutations to 
be genuine. Reliance is placed on Abdul Aziz v. Mst.Malika and another 
(1997 SCMR 1599) wherein it has been held that proof would depend on 
quality and not on quantity of evidence and Sabur Rehman and another v. 
Govt. of Sindh and 3 others (PLD 1996 SC 801) wherein it is held that 
quality and not the quantity determines the fate of the case.  
27.  The respondent has tried to defend the findings on the ground that 
concurrent findings of fact cannot be set aside in revisional jurisdiction of 
this  Court.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  has  held  that 
erroneous  concurrent  findings  based  on  misreading  and  non-reading  of 
evidence are  no longer  sacrosanct.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Nazim  ud  Din 
and others v. Sh. Zia ul Qamar and others (2016 SCMR 24) and Noor 
Muhammad and others v. Mst.Azmat-e-Bibi (2012 SCMR 1373). 
28.  Law protects the right of women to inherit ancestral property and 
more particularly of ‘Pardah Nasheen’ illiterate women who are generally 
unaware of their rights under the law and deprived of their shares in our 
male  dominated  society.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Mst.Hussain  Bibi  and 
others v. Barkat Ali and others (2004 SCMR 1391) and Ghulam Ali and 2 
others v. Mst.Ghulam Sarwar Naqvi (PLD 1990 SC 1).  
C.R.No.999-D/2006 
Mst. Jameela Begum v. Qadeer Ahmad 
-:12:-
29. 
In view of the aforementioned findings, it is held that the learned 
trial  court  had  wrongly  held  the  suit  of  the  petitioner  not  to  be 
maintainable. 
30.  The  upshot  of  the  above  reasoning  is  that  the  Civil  Revision  is 
allowed,  both  the  Judgments  and  decrees  passed  by  the  learned 
Additional District Judge, Mailsi dated 13.12.2004 in appeal and learned 
Civil Judge Mailsi dated 13.11.2003 are set aside and the suit filed by the 
petitioner  is  decreed  with  the  result  that  both  the  mutations  bearing 
numbers  1307  and  1308  dated  29.6.1987  are  declared  to  be  illegal  and 
void  and  the  property  measuring  8-kanals  belonging  to  petitioner  is 
restored to her name and the remaining 8-kanals is restored to the name of 
Barkat Ali, father of the parties, to be inherited by his legal heirs. 
 
*KMSubhani* 
 
(MUZAMIL AKHTAR SHABIR) 
JUDGE 
 
Announced in open Court on 06.01.2017.  
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting.  
 
(MUZAMIL AKHTAR SHABIR) 
JUDGE 
