Stereo. HCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
M/s Eden Developers (Pvt.) Limited 
Versus 
Government of the Punjab etc. 
 
=========================== 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing:-  
Petitioner by:- 
Respondents by:- 
 
 
 
12.01.2017. 
Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Shaukat, Advocate. 
Mr. Muhammad Hammad Khan Rai, A.A.G. 
 
 
CH. MUHAMMAD IQBAL, J:- 
Through 
this 
writ 
petition, the petitioner has challenged the legality of order dated 
10.05.2012  passed  by 
learned  Senior  Member/Member 
(Revenue),  Board  of  Revenue,  Punjab,  Lahore  whereby  the 
application  of  the  petitioner  was  rejected  and  also  sought 
direction against the respondents to proceed with the process of 
acquisition  initiated  vide  notifications  dated  05.04.2004  and 
26.04.2007 respectively. 
2. 
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner submitted an 
application to  the District Collector, Lahore for the acquisition 
of  land  measuring  2187-Kanals  09-Marlas  situated  in  Mauza 
Malikpur,  Sehjpal  and  Jhugian  Alfa  enabling  the  petitioner  to 
establish  a  Housing  Scheme.  On  05.04.2004  a  Notification 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
2 
under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter 
referred as ―the Act‖) was published in the Official Gazette. On 
26.04.2007,  a  corrigendum  Notification  was  issued  on  the 
request  of  the  petitioner  whereby  land  measuring  about  393-
Kanals  09-Marlas  (Mauza  Malikpur  334-Kanals  06-Marlas  & 
Mauza  Sehjpal  59-Kanals  03-Marlas)  was  intended  to  be 
acquired  instead  of  the  area  mentioned  in  the  preliminary 
Notification  under  Section  4  of  the  Act  dated  05.04.2004.  On 
28.09.2007 another Notification under Section 4 of the Act was 
issued for rectification of area as 21-Kanals 12-Marlas in place 
of 29-Kanals 06-Marlas 114-Sq.Ft. for construction of approach 
road  and  thereafter  no  further  proceedings  were  carried  out  in 
matter for a period of more than two years.  
The  District  Officer  (Revenue)  /  Collector,  Lahore 
withdrew  /  de-notified  the  initial  Notification  issued  under 
Section  4  of  the  Act  dated  05.04.2004  and  corrigendum 
Notification  dated  26.04.2007 
through  Official  Gazette 
Notification  dated  28.01.2009  published  on  31.10.2009.  The 
petitioner  challenged  the  impugned  withdrawal  Notification 
before  learned  Senior  Member,  Board  of  Revenue  through  an 
application which was allowed vide order dated 20.04.2011 and 
consequently  the  Notifications  under  Section  4  of  the  Act  in 
favour of the petitioner were restored. The petitioner filed Writ 
Petition No.25126/2010 seeking direction for expeditious/early 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
3 
completion  of 
land  acquisition  proceedings,  which  was 
disposed  of  with  the  direction  to  the  DOR,  Lahore  vide  order 
dated 01.12.2010 to decide the representation of the petitioner. 
The  petitioner  filed  second  Writ  Petition  No.12476/2011  with 
the  same  prayer  which  was  disposed  of  vide  order  dated 
06.06.2011  by  this  Court  with  the  direction  to  the  District 
Collector,  Lahore    to  treat  the  writ  petition  as  a  representation 
and  decide  the  same  in  accordance  with  law  expeditiously. 
Meanwhile, one of the affectee of land acquisition proceedings 
filed application to the Chief Minister, Punjab / Chief Executive 
of  the  Province  regarding  the  alleged  acquisition  notification 
under Section 4 of the Act. The Chief Executive of the Province 
obtained report with regard to matter in issue  from the District 
Collector,  Lahore  alongwith  a  list  of  all  such  land  acquisition 
proceedings  made  for 
the  companies  since  2002.  The 
Commissioner  Lahore  Division  made  his  report  accordingly. 
The  Board  of  Revenue 
through  Memorandums  dated 
26.10.2011  and  11.11.2011  decided 
that  all  acquisition 
proceedings / notifications issued under Section 4 of the Act to 
acquire  the  land  for  private  /  commercial  /  profitable  or 
cooperative  housing  societies  which  had  not  been  completed 
within  more  than  one  year  be  immediately  withdrawn  and  no 
further  compulsory  proceedings  for  acquisition  of  the  land 
under the Act be initiated for the private / commercial housing 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
4 
schemes  or  for 
the  housing  schemes 
launched  by 
the 
cooperative  housing  societies.  The  petitioner  challenged  the 
aforementioned  Memorandums 
dated 
26.10.2011 
and 
11.11.2011  through  Writ  Petition  No.25634/2011  and  vide 
order dated 18.11.2011 this Court directed to the learned Senior 
Member,  Board  of  Revenue  to  treat  the  writ  petition  as  an 
application  of  the  petitioner  and  decide  the  same  after  hearing 
the  petitioner  and  concerned  parties  in  accordance  with  law. 
Learned  Senior  Member  /  Member  (Revenue),  Board  of 
Revenue, Punjab in compliance of order dated 18.11.2011 after 
affording  an  opportunity  of  hearing  the  concerned  parties 
rejected  the  said  application  vide  order  dated  10.05.2012. 
Hence, this writ petition. 
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  submits  that  the 
impugned order is against the law; that learned Senior Member, 
Board of Revenue lacks jurisdiction under Section 48 of the Act 
to  pass  such  order;  that  the  Government  can  withdraw 
acquisition of any land before obtaining its possession whereas 
the  Chief  Minister  of  Punjab  is  not  a  government;  that 
impugned order is clearly violation of acquisition laws, as such, 
same is liable to be set aside. 
4. 
Learned  Law  Officer  appearing  on  behalf  of  the 
respondents submits that the Notification under Section 4 of the 
Act and corrigendum Notification issued by the District Officer 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
5 
(Revenue),  City  Government,  Lahore  were  not  inconsonance 
with the Land Acquisition Act, 1894; that land under Section 4 
of  the  Act  was  not  acquired  for  public  purpose  which  is 
mandatory requirement under the law whereas the petitioner is 
doing a business of real estate under the garb of a company and 
there  is  no  provision  available  in  the  acquisition  laws  which 
provides that land may be acquired for private housing schemes 
or commercial purpose, as such, learned Senior Member, Board 
of  Revenue  rightly  passed  the  order  dated  10.05.2012  and 
turned down the request of the petitioner; that the Notifications 
under  Section  4  of  the  Act  were  issued  in  violation  of  the 
Articles  23  and  24  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan,  1973,  as  such,  subsequent  Notification  dated 
28.01.2009  for  withdrawal  of  earlier  Notifications  was  rightly 
issued;  further  submits  that  this  Court  has  no  jurisdiction  to 
direct  the  respondents  for  the  compulsory  acquisition  of  land 
for  establishment  of  a  private  housing  schemes  which  legally 
vests  in  the  exclusive  domain  of  the  acquiring  agency  / 
authority, as such, learned  Senior  Member, Board of  Revenue, 
Punjab rightly passed the order and has committed no illegality. 
5. 
I have heard the arguments and gone through the record 
with the able assistance of learned counsel for the parties. 
6. 
Admittedly,  the  petitioner  is  a  real  estate  business 
concern  dealing  in  the  sale  and  purchase  of  land  in  the  name 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
6 
and style of M/s Eden Developers (Pvt.) Limited. In para No.2 
of  the  instant  writ  petition,  the  petitioner  admitted  that  they 
purchased an area of land from different owners for establishing 
housing  scheme,  however,  some  owners  have  refused  to  sell 
their 
land 
to 
the  petitioner 
through  private  negotiation 
whereafter  the  petitioner  approached  the  government  for  the 
acquisition of suit land for the purpose of establishing housing 
scheme.  On  the  request  of  the  petitioner  a  Notification  for 
acquisition  of  the  land  of  the  private  individual  was  issued 
which  was  subsequently  withdrawn  by  the  government  vide 
Gazette  Notification  dated  28.01.2009.  The  core  issue  before 
this  Court  is  whether  the  land  of  private  individuals  can  be 
acquired under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act in favour 
of a Real Estate Company and after issuance of the Notification 
for  compulsory  acquisition  of  private  land  for  a  real  estate 
private  company 
the  same  can  be  de-notified  by 
the 
government. It would be appropriate to firstly take up the point 
of acquisition of the land for public purpose of the state. There 
is  no  cavil  or  cudgel  that  the  Provincial  Government  is  fully 
vested  with  the  power  to  issue  a  preliminary  Notification 
expressing  its  intention  for  the  acquisition  of  land  likely  to  be 
needed  for  any  public  purpose.  Section  4  of  the  Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 is as under:- 
―4. 
Publication  of  Preliminary  notification  and 
powers  of  officers  thereupon. (I) Whenever is  appears to 
the  [Provincial  Government]  that  land  in  any  locality  [is 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
7 
needed or] is likely to be needed for any public purpose, a 
notification  to  that  effect  shall  be  published  in  the  official 
Gazette,  and  the  Collector  shall  cause  public  notice  of  the 
substance  of  such  notification  to  be  given  at  convenient 
places in the said locality.  
(2)  Thereupon  it  shall  be  lawful  for  any  officer,  either 
generally  or  specially  authorised  by  such  Government  in 
this behalf, and for his servants and workmen,-- 
to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such 
locality;  
to dig or bore into the sub-soil; 
to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land 
is adapted for such purpose; 
to  set  out  the  boundaries  of  the  land  proposed  to  be  taken 
and  the  intended  line  of  the  work  (if  any)  proposed  to  be 
made thereon; 
to  mark  such  levels,  boundaries  and  the  line  by  placing 
marks and cutting trenches; and 
where  otherwise  the  survey  cannot  be  completed  and  the 
levels  taken  and  the  boundaries  and  line  marked,  to  cut 
down and  clear away any  part of any standing  crop, fence 
or jungle 
Provided that no person shall enter into any building 
or  upon  any  enclosed  Court  or  garden  attached  to  a 
dwelling-house  unless  with  the  consent  of  the  occupier 
thereof  without  previously  giving  such  occupier  at  least 
seven days‘ notice in writing of his intention to do so.‖  
 
Undoubtedly,  the  sanctity  of  the  public  purpose  gathers 
supremacy  over  the  individual  interest.  Public  purpose  varies 
with the time, place and need of the society  which furthers the 
general  interest  of  the  community  as  opposed  to  the  particular 
interest  of  the  individual.  Though  the  exact  meaning  of  public 
purposes  conclusively  is  not  available  in  the  statute  and  it  is 
most pertinent to demonstrate the probable, alike, synonymous 
literal meaning of the same which would be quite beneficial to 
understand  the  issue.  The  term  ‗Public  Purpose‘  has  been 
defined in Black‘s Law Dictionary (5th Edition) as under:- 
―A  public  purpose  or  public  business  has  for  its  objective 
the  promotion  of  the  public  health,  safety,  morals,  general 
welfare,  security,  prosperity  and  contentment  of  all  the 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
8 
inhabitants or residents within a given political division, as, 
for  example,  a  State,  the  sovereign  powers  of  which  are 
exercised  to  promote  such  public  purpose  or  public 
business.‖ 
The  Land  Acquisition  Act,  1894  is  a  special  law  which 
had been enacted for the acquisition of land for public purposes. 
This  Act  is  based  upon  the  doctrine  of  ―Salus  populi 
suprema lex‖  that  the  interests  of  the  public  are  supreme  and 
that  the  private  interests  are  subordinate  to  the  interest  of  the 
state. Further, the public purpose has already received different 
approach  of  meaning  according  to  the  time,  place  and  need  of 
the  society  which  can  only  be  ascertained  and  defined  by  the 
government  and  if  a  government  reaches  conclusion  and 
declares an object as a public purpose than it obtains the status 
of  a  part  of  the  state  services  and  its  benefit  would  be 
extendable, un-discriminately to a community or public at large 
and  such  determination  of  public  purpose  would  be  treated  as 
final.  
The  acquisition  of  land  other  than  for  public  purposes 
will be ultra vires of provision of Article 24 of the Constitution 
of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  as  well  as  the  Land 
Acquisition  Act, 1894  and  under  the  law  there  is  no  scope  for 
acquisition of land other than for public purpose. The object of 
Notification  under  Section  4  of  the  Act  discloses  only  the 
intention and need of the Govt. which is issued to give notice to 
public  at  large  that  land  subject  matter  of  Notification  is 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
9 
required  for  public  purposes,  such  Notification  is  merely  an 
introductory  measure,  tentative  in  nature  and  furnishes  the 
foundation  of  subsequent  proceedings  for  acquisition.  Further, 
it is a caution to the public that any transaction/alienation made 
subsequently  would  be  at  the  risk  and  cost  of  the  respective 
parties. Purpose of such Notification is to carry on preliminary 
investigation  to  find  out  whether  said  land  is  required  for  that 
very public purpose or otherwise. The government through such 
Notification expresses its tentative primary intention to acquire 
land  for  public  purposes  which  could  not  be  considered  as 
conclusive and ultimate decision of the government rather it is a 
precautionary  notice/warning  to  the  public  at  large.  The 
Hon‘ble Supreme Court of Pakistan resolved this issue in a case 
reported  as  Muhammad  Ashiq  &  Another  Vs.  Water  and 
Manpower  Development Authority, Lahore through Chairman, 
WAPDA  House  &  Another  (PLD  2008  SC  335)  and  held  as 
under:-  
―It  may  be  explained  here  that  notification  issued  under 
Section  4  of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act,  in  fact,  empowers 
the  Provincial  Government  and  its  officers  specially  or 
generally to  enter upon the lands, to take its survey and to 
perform other acts as contained in the above noted section. 
In other words, the notification issued and published under 
this  section  4  of  Land  Acquisition  Act,  1894  is  a 
preliminary  step  which  facilitates  the  Government  and  its 
officers not only to perform survey of the land but to decide 
and  determine  as  to  which  piece  of  land  was  finally 
required to be acquired and the land to be left ultimately for 
the  purpose  of  acquisition,  keeping  in  view  the  aim  and 
purpose for which the land was being acquired. Therefore, 
the notification which was got published under section 4 of 
the  Land  Acquisition  Act,  could  not  be  termed  as  an 
ultimate  and  final  decision  of  the  Government  to  acquire 
the land notified in the aforementioned Notification.‖ 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
10 
7. 
The  meaning  of  public  purpose,  its  assessment,  aim, 
object  and  determination  would  be  bit  literal,  stringent,  strick 
and different with regard to compulsory acquisition of land for 
other than the state (other private). Undoubtedly the acquisition 
of land in favour of a company for welfare of public at large is 
permissible  but  the  determining  factor  of  public  purpose  falls 
exclusively  within  the  domain  of  government  which  is  the 
adjudicating and arbitral forum of the same and it has to define 
the public purpose scrutinizing scrupulously the request for the 
acquisition  of  land  by  the  requiring  company  and  government 
has  to  evaluate  public  purpose  objectively  on  basis  of 
reasonable  material  as  sacred  fundamental  right  of  individual 
duly  safeguarded  under  provision  of  Article  24  of  the 
Constitution of Pakistan are likely to  be affected. Furthermore, 
such determination of public purpose would also be justiciable 
and amenable to judicial review by the Courts.  
8. 
So far the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner 
that under Section 5 (West Pakistan Amendment) of the Act, a 
particular chunk of land needed for a company can be acquired 
suffice it to say that there is no denial to it but that is subject to 
the  public  purpose  and  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Provincial 
Government.  The  provision  of  Section  5  (West  Pakistan 
Amendment) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is as under:- 
Notification  that  particular  land  is  needed  for  a 
―5. 
public  purpose  or  for  a  company.  –  Where  land  is  to  be 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
11 
acquired  for  a  public  purpose,  if  the  Commissioner,  and 
where land is to be acquired, for a Company, the Provincial 
Government, is satisfied, after considering the result of the 
survey, if any, made under sub-section (2) of Section 4, or 
if  no  survey  is  necessary  at  any  time,  that  any  particular 
land included in a locality notified under sub-section (1) of 
Section  4  is  needed  for  a  public  purpose  of  Company,  as 
the  case  may  be,  a  notification  to  that  effect  shall  be 
published  in  the  official  Gazette,  stating  the  District  or 
other  territorial  division  in  which  the  land  is  situate,  the 
purpose  for  which  it  is  needed,  its  approximate  area  and 
situation  and  where  plan  has  been  made  of  the  land,  the 
place where such plan may be inspected, and the Collector 
shall cause public notice to be given of the substance of the 
notification  at  convenient  places  on  or  near  the  land  to  be 
acquired.‖ 
Furthermore,  Section  40  of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act, 
1894  is  mandatory  in  nature  which  envisages  the  holding  of 
bonafide investigation regarding the genuineness of the request 
for  acquisition  of  private  land  which  necessarily  be  conducted 
before  issuance  of  the  preliminary  notification  and  any  non-
compliance  of  the  provision  of  Section  40  of  the  Act  is 
incurable  defect  debarring  the  authority  to  accede  the  above 
request. Section 40 of the Act is reproduced as under:- 
―40.  Previous  enquiry.--(1)  Such  consent  shall  not  be 
given  unless  the  [Provincial  Government]  be  satisfied, 
either on the report of the Collector under Section 5-A, sub-
section (2), or] by an enquiry held as hereinafter provided,-
- 
[(a) 
that  the  purpose  of  the  acquisition  is  to 
obtain  land  for  the  erection  of  dwelling  houses  for 
workmen  employed  by  the  Company  or  for  the 
provision of amenities directly connected therewith, 
or 
 ―(aa)  that  such  acquisition  is  needed  for  the  construction  of 
some  building  or  work  for  a  Company  which  is  engaged  or  is  taking 
steps for engaging itself in any industry or  work  which is for a public 
purpose, or‖  
(b) 
that  such  acquisition 
the 
construction of some work, and that such work is likely to 
prove useful to the public]. 
is  needed  for 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
12 
(2) Such enquiry shall be held by such officer and at 
such  time  and  place  as  the  [Provincial  Government]  shall 
appoint. 
(3)  Such  officer  may  summon  and  enforce  the 
attendance  of  witnesses  and  compel  the  production  of 
documents by the same means and, as far as possible, in the 
same manner as is provided by the Code of Civil Procedure 
in the case of a Civil Court. 
The public purpose means proposed aiming a promotion 
of general welfare. The petitioner requested for the acquisition 
of land for establishing a private housing scheme which furthers 
/promotes  the  purpose  of  life  style  and  its  private  business 
which  cannot  be  equated  with  public  purpose  and  such  like 
acquisition is not available in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.  
From the conjunctive reading of Sections 4, 5 and 40 of 
the  Act,  it  is  clear  that  land  can  be  acquired  only  for  public 
purpose  and  not  for  establishing  a  private  housing  scheme  or 
for the business of real estate. There is no provision available in 
the Act for the acquisition of the public land for establishing a 
private  housing  scheme  or  for  the  further  flourishment  of  real 
estate business. It is admitted fact that the petitioner‘s company 
is doing a business on commercial basis aiming to earn a lot of 
profit for enrichment of a few individuals only which cannot be 
termed/treated  as  public  purpose,  as  such,  the  case  of  the 
petitioner does not fall within the ambit of public purpose. 
In  a  similar  case,  land  of  the  private  individuals  was 
being acquired for exclusive welfare of army personnel named 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
13 
as  Army  Welfare  Housing  Scheme  which  was  a  scheme  of 
Army Welfare Trust company but in relevant documents, Army 
Welfare  Trust  (a  company)  did  not  figure  anywhere  nor  any 
document was produced before Court to show if Army Welfare 
Housing Scheme had any authority to acquire land directly. The 
above  acquisition  proceedings  were  challenged  before  this 
Court by the land owners on the ground that the acquisition was 
not for public purpose. The Notifications for acquisition of land 
themselves speak that the land required for a private real estate 
company which is adverse to the spirit of public purpose. This 
Court  while  exercising  the  constitutional  jurisdiction  declared 
the  Notification  as  ultra  vires  in  a  case  titled  as  Muhammad 
Saqib  Abbasi  Vs.  Province  of  Punjab  through  Secretary  Local 
Government, Lahore & 2 Others (2013 CLC 158) and held as 
under:- 
―13.      So  far  as  acquisition  of  land  for  public  purpose  is 
concerned,  the  notifications  themselves  deny  the  ―public 
purpose‖  as  these  clearly  state  that  the  land  is  being 
acquired  for  welfare  of  army  personnel  only  and  not  for 
general  public.  It  has  been  argued  by  learned  counsel  for 
DHA/AWHS  that  AWHS  is  a  scheme  of  Army  Welfare 
Trust  which  is  a  company  but  in  the  relevant  documents, 
Army  Welfare  Trust  does  not  figure  anywhere  nor  any 
document  has  been  produced  before  the  Court  to  show  if 
AWHS has any authority to acquire land from the province 
directly, therefore, the contention of learned counsel seems 
to be an afterthought. Furthermore, housing schemes being 
launched  under  the  banner  of  Defence  Housing  Authority 
are  on  commercial  basis  earning  a  lot  of  profit  therefrom, 
therefore, these cannot be said a ―public purpose‖. 
 
From the perusal of aforementioned provision i.e. Section 
5  of  the  Act,  it  is  very  much  clear  that  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Provincial  Government  is  sine  qua  non  for  the  acquisition  of 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
14 
land.  In  this  case,  it  is  admitted  fact  that  the  petitioner  is 
establishing a private housing scheme for business purpose and 
doing sale and purchase business i.e. real estate business private 
purpose  which  cannot  be  termed  as  public  purpose.  The 
government  after  having  investigated  the  spirit  of  object  / 
claims of the petitioner and reached the conclusion that the case 
of  the  petitioner  does  not  come  within  scope  of  the  public 
purpose  and  in  this  regard  the  Govt.  is  manifestly  vested  with 
the  authority  to  refuse  the  acquisition  process.  Reliance  is 
placed on the case of Federal Government Employees’ Housing 
Foundation  through  Director-General,  Islamabad  &  Another 
Vs.  Muhammad  Akram  Alizai,  Deputy  Controller,  PBC, 
Islamabad (2002 PLC (CS) 1655), relevant portion whereof is 
reproduced as under:- 
―We  may  observe  that  there  can  be  no  cavil  to  the 
proposition  that  the  acquisition  of  the  private  land  for  a 
purpose other than the public purpose is not legal and such 
acquisition  for  the  personal  benefit  of  a  particular  class  of 
employees  would  not  be  in  the  public  interest.  We  are 
therefore, of the view that there can be no exception to the 
view taken in  the judgment of the High Court (2000  YLR 
1711)(supra)‖ 
Furthermore, 
the  Provincial  Government  has 
a 
jurisdiction  under  Section  48  (1)  of  the  Act  to  withdraw  the 
process  of  acquisition  at  any  time  before  taking  possession, 
except in the case covered by Section 36 of the Act. Section 48 
(1) of the Act is as under:- 
―48.  Completion  of  acquisition  not  compulsory,  but 
compensation  to  be  awarded  when  not  completed.--  (1) 
Except  in  the  case  provided  for  in  Section  36,  the 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
15 
Government  shall  be  at  liberty  to  withdraw  from  the 
acquisition  of  any  land  of  which  possession  has  not  been 
taken.‖ 
In this case, admittedly mere a Notification under Section 
4  of  the  Act  was  issued  on  05.04.2004  and  no  further 
acquisition  proceedings  were  ever  initiated  thereafter  which 
reflects  an  intention  of  the  government  to  abandon  the 
proceedings.  Furthermore,  the  land  intended  to  be  acquired  is 
still in the possession of the original owner and government has 
neither  taken  the  physical  possession  nor  announced  any 
compensation  /  award  etc.  to  land  owners.  The  government 
while exercising power under Section 48 (1) of the Act through 
the  District  Officer  (Revenue) 
/  Collector,  Lahore  on 
28.10.2009  (gazette  on  31.10.2009)  de-notified  the  acquisition 
proceedings in respect of land measuring 393-Kanals 09-Marlas 
situated in Mauza Malikpur (334-Kanals 06-Marlas) and Mauza 
Sehjpal  (59-Kanals  03-Marlas),  Tehsil  Cantt.,  District  Lahore. 
Reliance is placed on the case of  Messrs Dewan Salman Fiber 
Limited  &  Others  Vs.  Government  of  NWFP, 
through 
Secretary,  Revenue  Department,  Peshawar  &  Others  (PLD 
2004 SC 441) wherein it is held that   Section  48  of  the  Act 
empowers the Government to withdraw from the acquisition of 
any  land.  This  power  is,  however,  not  absolute,  but  subject  to 
the condition that possession of the land has not been taken. 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
16 
Furthermore,  the  requisition  for  compulsory  acquisition 
of  the  property  for  the  benefit  of  one  or  more  private 
individuals  has  no  backing  of  law.  The  Notifications  under 
Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act issued on 05.04.2004 and 
26.04.2007 and thereafter no further proceedings were initiated 
by  the  government  and  under  Section  5  of  the  Act,  the 
satisfaction  of  the  government  is  necessary  whereas  the 
preliminary inquiries / probe with regard to genuineness of the 
public  purpose  is  imperative  requirement  of  law  and  under 
Section  40  of  the  Act,  the  provincial  government  has  to  be 
satisfied  through  a  bonafide  inquiry.  In  this  case,  no  material 
has  been  placed  on  the  record  showing  that  the  provincial 
government  had  ever  shown  its  satisfaction,  as  such,  the 
intention / Notifications under Section 4 were withdrawn by the 
competent authority.  
9. 
So  far  as  the  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  that  the  Member,  Board  of  Revenue  is  not  a 
government suffice it to say that this Court has already held that 
the  Member  Board  of  Revenue  is  ex-official  Secretary  to  the 
government  of  Punjab  Revenue  Department  in  a  case  titled  as 
National  Police  Foundation  Corporation  Housing  Society 
Limited,  Islamabad  Vs.  Board  of  Revenue,  Government  of 
Punjab  &  2  Others  (PLJ  1984  Lahore  158)  which  is 
reproduced as under:- 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
17 
―It  is  not  denied  that  Mr.  S.  M.  Nasim  learned  Senior 
Member  Board  of  Revenue  is  ex-officio  Secretary  to  the 
Government of the Punjab, Revenue Department, therefore, 
the  mere  fact  that  in  the  impugned  memorandum  the 
Member Board of Revenue was not described as Secretary 
to  the  Government  of  the  Punjab,  Revenue  Department, 
would  not  in  any  way  affect  the  validity  of  the  impugned 
proceedings.  My  view  is  fortified  by  the  dictum  of  the 
Supreme  Court  in  Pio  Gul  v.  The  State  (PLD  1960  SC 
307).‖ 
 
As  such,  the  Member,  Board  of  revenue  was  fully 
competent to pass the impugned order whereas the argument of 
learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  is  misconceived  and  same  is 
repelled. 
10.  From  the  perusal  of  the  contents  of  the  instant  writ 
petition, it transpires that learned counsel for the petitioner has 
not raised any plea of malafide on the part of the government or 
could not establish any personal malafide against the Member, 
Board  of  Revenue  who  passed  the  impugned  orders.  It  is  an 
admitted  position  that  the  petitioner  is  intending  to  set  up  a 
private housing scheme under the garb of the acquisition which 
purpose  cannot  be  equated  in  any  manner  with  the  public 
purpose. Reliance is placed on the case of  Radba Kanta Banik 
Vs. The Province of East Pakistan & 2 Others (PLD 1969 SC 
545), relevant portion whereof is reproduced as under:- 
―The  fact  remains  that  the  impugned  requisition  and 
acquisition were made for the business purpose of a private 
party. By the impugned  orders, the  appellant‘s business of 
running  a  petrol  pump  was  requisitioned  and  thereafter 
acquired  for  Messrs  Ashish  Corporation.  As  an  agent  of 
Caltex Oil (Pak.) Limited, Messrs Ashish Corporation will 
sell  petrol  and  petroleum  products  from  the  requisitioned 
and  acquired  petrol  pump  and  earn  commission  on  such 
sales.  Whoever  may  be  the  agent  in  respect  of  this  petrol 
pump, the consumers will get supply of petrol of petroleum 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
18 
products  as  usual,  and  the  person  holding  the  petrol  pump 
as an agent will earn commission on the sales thereof. Thus 
the  impugned  requisition  and  acquisition  will  directly 
benefit  Messrs  Ashish  Corporation,  but  the  facility  for 
supply to the consumers will continue to remain the same. 
In  this  view  of  the  matter,  it  is  plainly  clear  that  the 
impugned  requisition  and  acquisition  for  the  business 
purpose  of  a  private  party  like  Messrs  Ashish  Corporation 
were not  for  a public purpose, nor were these made in  the 
public interest. 
In  similar  case,  namely,  Jogesh  Chandra  Ledh  v. 
Province of East Pakistan (1), a Division of the High Court 
of that Province held that the requisition of certain premises 
for Molla Baling Agency of which one Moslem  Ali Molla 
was  the  proprietor,  was  bad  in  law  as  the  requisition  was 
not for a public purpose or in the public interest, but for the 
benefit  of  a  private  individual.  On  appeal  from  the  said 
decision, the view taken by the High Court was upheld by 
this Court—See 11 DLR 411 (SC)‖ 
Similarly,  learned  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  in  a  case 
reported as Muhammad Ishaq & Another Vs. Collector, Lahore 
District Lahore & Others (2000 YLR 1074) declared that land 
cannot be acquired under Acquisition Laws for private housing 
scheme. 
―In  view  of  the  said  observation  of  the  Supreme  Court 
which somewhat  confirms  the observation of this  Court in 
the  case  of  Dr.  Muhammad  Nasim  Javed  (supra),  the 
argument that the setting up of a private housing scheme is 
not  a  public  purpose  by  itself  does  not  hold  water. 
However,  we  have  to  see  as  to  whether  the  machinery  of 
law, which but for the Constitutional protection provided to 
it  under  proviso  to  Article  24  of  the  Constitution,  is  a 
process 
for  depriving  a  citizen  of  his  property 
compulsorily, can be allowed to be invoked by a group by 
whatever  name  called,  for  personal  benefit.  The  answer  is 
certainly no and  we seek support from  the observations of 
Mr. Justice  Irshad Hassan Khan (as his  lordship then was) 
in  para.  14  of  the  said  report  at  page  562,  which  is  to  the 
following effect: --- 
In  view  of  the  ratio  laid  down  in  the  aforementioned 
cases,  the  legal  position  which  emerges  is  that  the 
acquisition for Cooperative Housing Building Society may 
serve  a  public  purpose.  It,  however,  depends  upon 
circumstances  of  each  case  whether  or  not  such  an 
acquisition is for a public purpose.‖  
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
19 
 
Under Article 24 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973, the respectable citizens cannot be deprived of 
their  property  through  a  compulsory  process  of  acquisition  of 
land for private housing schemes. Article 24 of the Constitution 
is as under:- 
―24. Protection of property rights. (1) No person shall be 
compulsory  deprived  of  his  property  save  in  accordance 
with law. 
(2)  No  property  shall  be  compulsorily  acquired  or  taken 
possession  of  save  for  a  public  purpose,  and  save  by  the 
authority of law which provides for compensation therefore 
and  either  fixes  the  amount  of  compensation  or  specifies 
the principles on and the manner in which compensation is 
to be determined and given. 
(3) Nothing in this Article shall affect the validity of — 
the 
law  providing  for 
(a) any law permitting the compulsory acquisition or taking 
possession  of  any  property  for  preventing  danger  to  life, 
property or public health; or 
(b)  any  law  permitting  the  taking  over  of  any  property 
which has been acquired by, or come into the possession of, 
any person by any unfair means, or in any manner, contrary 
to law; or 
(c)  any  law  relating  to  the  acquisition,  administration  or 
disposal of any property which is or is deemed to be enemy 
property  or  evacuee  property  under  any  law  (not  being 
property  which  has  ceased  to  be  evacuee  property  under 
any law); or 
the 
(d)  any 
management  of  any  property  by  the  State  for  a  limited 
period, either in the public interest or in order to secure the 
proper management of the property, or for the benefit of its 
owner; or 
(e)  any  law  providing  for  the  acquisition  of  any  class  of 
property for the purpose of – 
(i)  providing  education  and  medical  aid  to  all  or  any 
specified class of citizens; or 
(ii)  providing  housing  and  public  facilities  and  services 
such  as  roads,  water  supply,  sewerage,  gas  and  electric 
power to all or any specified class of citizens; or 
(iii)  providing  maintenance  to  those  who,  on  account  of 
unemployment, sickness, infirmity or old age, are unable to 
maintain themselves, or 
(f)  any  existing  law  or  any  law  made  in  pursuance  of 
Article 253. 
taking  over  of 
(4)  The  adequacy  or  otherwise  of  any  compensation 
provided  for  by  any  such  law  as  is  referred  to  in  this 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
20 
Article,  or  determined  in  pursuance  thereof,  shall  not  be 
called in question in any Court.‖ 
It is the eminent domain of every government to appropriate the 
property  of any  citizen  for  necessities of  the  State, however, it 
entails  to  the  constitutional  requirement  that  the  acquisition  or 
dispossession  must  be  for  public  purpose,  authorized  by  law 
and  obligation  of  the  State  to  pay  compensation  to  the  oustee 
(land  owner).  Right  to  acquire,  hold,  use  and  dispose  of  the 
property  is  one  of  the  fundamental  rights  enshrined  under 
Article 23  of the  Constitution of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
which  provides  protection  to  the  citizens  and  such  protection 
has also been provided under Article 24(1) of the Constitution. 
Acquisition  process  employed  to  deprive  someone  of  his 
property is an exception visualized by the Constitution and the 
process has to be in consonance with the conditions, parameters 
and  manners  laid  down  under  Article      24  (2)  and  (3)  of  the 
Constitution. But in this case neither the land was  acquired for 
public  purpose  nor  the  government  was  satisfied,  which  is 
mandatory  under  the  acquisition  laws,  as  such,  the  impugned 
order  passed  by  learned  Senior  Member,  Board  of  Revenue  is 
quite  in  consonance  with  the  Land  Acquisition  Act,  1894  as 
well as policy decision of the Government.. 
11.  Admittedly, the de-acquisition proceedings were initiated 
on the application of the landowners who are necessary parties 
as their rights / interest are directly involved in this matter and 
Writ Petition No.24493/2012 
 
 
 
21 
despite  having  the knowledge  the petitioner has not impleaded 
them  as  party  in  the  writ  petition  whose  land  is  going  to  be 
acquired  compulsorily.  It 
is  settled 
law 
that 
the  non-
impleadment of necessary parties in the writ petition extremely 
minimize  the  maintainability  of  petition.  Reliance  is placed on 
the  cases  of  Mst.  Maqbool  Begum  etc.  Vs.  Gullan  &  Others 
(PLD 1982 SC 46), Akhtar Ali Khan & Another Vs. Settlement 
Commissioner,  Peshawar  &  4  Others  (1989  SCMR  506)  and  
Muhammad  Suleman  Vs.  Abdul  Rashid  &  13  Others  (PLD 
1987 Lahore 387).  
12.  Learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to point out 
any  illegality  or  material  irregularity  or  any  violation  of 
acquisition  laws  in  the  impugned  order  passed  by  learned 
Senior  Member,  Board  of  Revenue,  Punjab  and  also  has  not 
identified any jurisdictional defect. 
13.  What  has  been  discussed  above,  this  writ  petition  being 
devoid of any merits is hereby dismissed. 
 
(CH. MUHAMMAD IQBAL) 
JUDGE 
 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
ϻƑℍ 
