Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
W.P. No. 169373-2018 
 
Ahad Khan Cheema Vs. NAB etc. 
 
Sr. No. of 
order/ 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Proceeding 
 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where 
necessary. 
27.03.2018,  Mr. Azam Nazir Tarar, advocate for the petitioner. 
Syed Faisal Raza Bukhari, Special Prosecutor for NAB with 
Muhammad Ikram, I.O. NAB Lahore. 
 
Through  this  constitutional  petition,  the  petitioner  has  made 
 
following prayer:- 
“Under the circumstances, it is respectfully prayed that this writ petition 
may  kindly  be  accepted  and  arrest  of  the  petitioner  may  please  be 
declared  illegal,  unlawful  and  void  and  petitioner  may  very  graciously 
be directed to be released.” 
 
2. 
Brief  facts  giving  rise  to  the  filing  of  this  constitutional 
petition  as  contained  in  its  paragraphs  are  that  the  petitioner  joined 
civil  service  in  2001  and  served  at  different  places  including 
Director  General  (D.G.),  Lahore  Development  Authority  (LDA) 
and is presently serving as Chief Executive Officer, Quaid-e-Azam 
Thermal  Power  (Pvt.)  Limited.  The  NAB  initiated  an  inquiry  for 
corruption and corrupt practices in Ashiana Iqbal Housing Project; 
a  project  assigned  by  Punjab  Land  Development  Company 
(PLDC)  to  Lahore  Development  Authority  (LDA)  through 
agreement dated 20.01.2015 when the petitioner remained posted as 
its  D.G.  The  allegation  against  the  petitioner  is  that  he,  with  a 
criminal  intent  and  in  connivance  with  other  co-accused  persons, 
further awarded the contract of the said project to M/s Lahore Casa 
Developers  as  a  joint  venture,  which  was  not  eligible  for  the 
contract  under  Punjab  Public  Private  Partnership  Act,  2014 
(PPPP Act, 2014). It was further alleged that the major shareholder 
of  joint  venture  of  Lahore  Casa  Developers  was  M/s  Bismillah 
Engineering  Services  (Pvt.)  Ltd.;  a  proxy  firm  working  on  behalf 
of M/s Paragon City (Pvt.) Ltd. The petitioner was alleged to have 
W.P.No.169373-2018 
2 
received an illegal gratification in the form of 32 kanal land valuing 
Rs.30.090  million  from  the  owners  of  Paragon  City  (Pvt.)  Ltd., 
causing  loss  to  government  exchequer  due  to  alleged  corruption  in 
Ashiana  Iqbal  Housing  Project.  Consequently,  on  12.02.2018  the 
NAB issued a call-up notice to the petitioner under section 19 of the 
NAO,  1999  to  join  inquiry  at  NAB  Headquarters,  Lahore.  He 
submitted  a  detailed  reply  seeking  particulars/details  of  documents 
which  were  required  by  the  Bureau  through  his  letter  dated 
16.02.2018.  In  retaliation,  it  is  alleged  by  the  petitioner,  the  NAB 
illegally raided the office of the petitioner on 21.02.2018, humiliated 
and  harassed  the  staff  and  also  took  the  petitioner  in  the  custody, 
hence this writ petition. 
 
3. 
In  the  report  and  parawise  comments  submitted  by  the  NAB 
authorities,  it  was  specifically  stated  in  preliminary  objection  that 
after  his  arrest  on  21.02.2018,  the  petitioner  was  produced  before 
Accountability  Court-III,  Lahore  on  22.02.2018  where  his  physical 
remand  was  given  till  05.03.2018  and,  thereafter,  he  is  in  their 
custody  up  till  03.04.2018  under  the  court’s  order,  therefore,  writ 
petition  was  not  competent;  that  the  petitioner  had  come  to  court 
with  unclean  hands;  there  is  an  alternate  remedy  before  the  trial 
court.  
In  its  details,  it  was  stated  that  on  31.10.2017  the  Chairman 
NAB  received  a  complaint  against  the  management  of  many  public 
sector companies who were allegedly established in violation of the 
Constitution  and  without  lawful  authority.  As  allegedly  the  public 
money  was  being  misappropriated  and  embezzled  by 
the 
management  of  these  companies,  the  Chairman  authorized  an 
inquiry  on  07.11.2017  against  such  companies  of  Province  of 
Punjab.  He  delegated  his  powers  to  the  Director  General  NAB 
Lahore  and  accordingly  an  inquiry  No.1(9)HQ/1826/NAB-L  was 
initiated  on  15.11.2017.  Meanwhile,  another  complaint  against  the 
management of M/s Paragon City (Pvt.) Ltd. and the management of 
Punjab  Land  Development  Company  (PLDC)  was  received  on 
17.11.2017  by  NAB  Lahore  alleging  therein  that  the  former,  in 
connivance  with  the  later,  illegally  occupied  state  land  measuring 
W.P.No.169373-2018 
3 
3100  kanal  proposed  for  Ashiana  Iqbal  Project.  Accordingly,  the 
Director  General  NAB  authorized  an  inquiry  on  10.01.2018.  It  was 
also  stated  in  the  report  that  the  responsibility  of  PLDC  was  to 
develop  modern  housing  schemes  for  the  low-income  groups  in 
various  districts  of  the  Punjab.  Initially  Ashiana  Quaid  Lahore, 
Ashiana  Sahiwal  and  Ashiana  Faisalabad  were  initiated  under  the 
said  government  mode.  However,  PLDC  initiated  another  project, 
namely, Ashiana Iqbal, Barki road, Lahore in 2012 which could not 
be  completed  for  which  an  inquiry  is  being  conducted  on  the 
allegation of corruption and corrupt practices in the said project. It is 
also mentioned that the Chief Minister Punjab in a meeting held on 
21.10.2014  at  96-H  Model  Town,  Lahore  directed  the  PLDC  to 
entrust  the  projects  of  Ashiana  Iqbal  and  Ashiana  Quaid  to  LDA 
which  proceeded  with  the  planning,  designing  and  execution  in  the 
province.  
The allegation against the petitioner is that he being Director 
General  LDA  by  misusing  his  authority,  prepared,  processed, 
recommended,  presented  and  got  approved  fraudulent  and  illegal 
proposal  and  bidding  documents  to  grant  undue  and  illegal  benefit 
by awarding contract of Ashiana Iqbal Housing Project of Rs.14.00 
Billion to M/s Lahore Casa Developers with the criminal intent. The 
petitioner  allegedly  started  working  on  preparation  of  bidding 
documents  of  the  project  in  September,  2014  well  before  the 
approval  of  transfer  of  project  to  LDA  by  Board  of  PLDC.  The 
bidding  documents  were  sent  for  legal  vetting  on  08.09.2014 
whereas  PLDC  Board  approved  the  transfer  of  project  of  Ashiana 
Iqbal  on  12.11.2014  showing  that  petitioner  had  engineered  this 
fraudulent act in a preplanned manner.  
It  was  also  mentioned  in  the  comments  that  Lahore  Casa 
Developers  (also  known  as  M/s  SPARKO  Group)  was  a  joint 
venture of three firms/companies namely M/s Bismillah Engineering 
Services  Co.,  M/s  SPARCO  Construction  Company  and  M/s  China 
First  Metallurgical  Group  Co.  Ltd.  However,  M/s  Bismillah 
Engineering  Services  Co.,  a  C-4  Class  company,  had  90% 
shareholding was not  eligible for the contract as its  maximum limit 
of  contract  was  Rs.150.00  million  under  Pakistan  Engineering 
W.P.No.169373-2018 
4 
Council.  Likewise,  M/s  SPARCO  Construction  Company  and  M/s 
China  First  Metallurgical  Group  Co.  have  only  9%  &  1% 
shareholdings,  respectively,  in  the  joint  venture.  On  24.03.2015  the 
contract  was  awarded  to  Lahore  Casa  Developers  under  Public 
Private Partnership  mode and under section 14(d)(h)(j) of the PPPP 
Act, 2014, whereas it was mandatory to obtain exact shareholding of 
all  the  firms  in  the  joint  venture  at  the  prequalification  stage.  The 
petitioner  in  connivance  with  the  other  members  of  the  group 
allegedly  accepted  a  MOU  without  mentioning  the  respective 
shareholders  in  order  to  maliciously  conceal  the  technical  and 
financial  capability  of  Bismillah  Engineering  Company.  M/s 
SPARCO  Construction  Company  was  shown  as  a  lead  member 
whereas 
in 
the 
joint  venture, 
through  an  agreement  dated 
18.05.2015, it was Bismillah Engineering Services Company which 
had the leading role, which was not eligible for the contract.  
As  per  parawise  comments,  this  act  has  caused  loss  to 
national  exchequer  as  the  contractors  willfully  failed  to  initiate 
Ashiana  Iqbal  Project  for  the  last  three  years  during  which  61000 
poor  applicants  have  submitted  Rs.60.00  million  as  processing  fee 
for  the  allotment  of  houses  thereby  government  incurred  Rs.190.00 
million whereas M/s Lahore Casa Developers had caused loss in the 
form of liquidation damages of Rs.455.000 million. 
 
The  inquiry  further  revealed  that  M/s  Bismillah  Engineering 
Services  Co.  was  a  proxy  firm  working  on  behalf  of  Paragon  City 
(Pvt.) Ltd. and that accused received illegal gratification in the form 
of  32  kanal  land  valuing  Rs.30.090  million  transferred  in  his  name 
and in the name of his close relatives, the price of which was paid by 
accused  Nadeem  Zia  through  accounts  of  M/s  Paragon  City  (Pvt.) 
Ltd. 
 
4.  Mr. Azam Nazeer Tarar, advocate, learned counsel for the 
petitioner submits that petitioner was arrested by the NAB to satisfy 
their ego as he dared to seek the details of documents to ascertain the 
nature  of  information  required  from  him  which  act  offended  the 
NAB  authorities  resulting  into  his  malafide  arrest.  It  was  further 
argued  that  the  NAB  had  no  material  of  any  illegal  gratification 
W.P.No.169373-2018 
5 
received by  the  petitioner  pertaining  to the said project; the  land of 
measuring 32 kanal was legally acquired/transferred to the associates 
of  the  petitioner  which  was  duly  declared  in  the  declaratory  form 
submitted  by  the  petitioner;  the  contract  was  transparently  awarded 
to  Lahore  Casa  Developers  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  as  explained  by  its  Chief 
Executive;  that  petitioner  is  not  in  possession  of  any  relevant 
documents  of  LDA  as  he  was  posted  out  from  the  seat  of  Director 
General  LDA  on  28.04.2016;  that  the  right  of  fair  trial  guaranteed 
under the Constitution is violated, therefore, prays that arrest  of the 
petitioner  be  declared  as  illegal,  unlawful  and  void.  Also  submits 
that the petitioner is being victimized by media hype. 
 
5. 
Syed  Faisal  Raza  Bukhari,  learned  Special  Prosecutor  for 
NAB  submits  that  petitioner  was  fully  aware  of  the  nature  of 
allegations against him which was also conveyed to him through 2nd 
and  3rd  notices  dated  19.01.2018  and  12.02.2018  and  that  he  had 
tried  to  withhold  the  information  for  NAB,  therefore,  he  prays  for 
the dismissal of the petition. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
Arguments heard. File perused. 
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing 
the  file,  it  is  straightaway  observed  that  the  petitioner  is  still  in  the 
custody of the NAB authorities in remand until 03.04.2018 when his 
present  remand  period  is  going  to  expire.  Interestingly,  the  remand 
orders  have  not  been  challenged  in  the  present  writ  petition.  The 
legal requirements of the grounds and substance of arrest were duly 
conveyed  to  the  petitioner  as  guaranteed  under  section  24(a)  of 
NAO, 1999 and Article 10-A of the Constitution of Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973. Reliance is placed upon case titled “Abdul Qadir 
Vs.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary,  Ministry  of 
Interior,  Government  of  Paistan,  Islamabad  and  5  others” 
reported as 2002 SCMR 1478. 
 
8. 
 The case of the petitioner is that it was a malafide act on the 
part  of  the  NAB  authorities  who  adopted  an  egoistic  approach 
against  the  petitioner  after  when  he  demanded  the  exact  nature  of 
W.P.No.169373-2018 
6 
allegations  and  the  relevant  documents  from  the  NAB  authorities. 
According to the petitioner, he provided all the requisite information 
and relevant documents in his possession to the NAB authorities. His 
stand is that since he remained a Director General of LDA few years 
ago therefore after when he had abandoned the charge, he could not 
have  any  access  to  the  documents  exclusively  possessed  by  the 
LDA.  However,  the  case  of  the  NAB  authorities  against  the 
petitioner  is  that  he  received  illegal  gratification  in  the  form  of  32 
kanal valuing Rs.30.090 million which was transferred in the names 
of  his  close  relatives,  the  consideration  of  which  was  paid  by 
Nadeem  Zia  through  accounts  of  M/s  Paragon  City  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  It  is 
also  alleged  that  he  aided  and  abetted  and  provided  assistance  in 
awarding the contract to M/s Lahore Casa Developers on the basis of 
technical  and  financial  data,  M/s  SPARCO  Construction  Company 
which  had  only  9%  shareholding  in  the  joint  venture  and  presented 
the later as lead company whereas Bismillah Engineering Company 
which  was  not  eligible  for  the  contract  having  C-4  Class  status 
having maximum limit of 150.00 million as per the rules of Pakistan 
Engineering  Council.  It  is  also  alleged  by  the  NAB  against  the 
petitioner  that  he  prepared  bidding  documents  of  the  project  in  the 
month  of  September,  2014,  i.e.  well  before  approval  of  the  transfer 
to LDA by the board of PLDC and that the bidding documents were 
sent  for  legal  vetting  on  08.09.2014  before  the  approval  of  the 
project  of  Ashiana  Iqbal  on  12.11.2014.  According  to  the  NAB 
authorities, the requirement of section 14(d)(h)(j) of PPPP Act, 2014 
were not complied with. 
 
9. 
It  is  not  denied  by  the  petitioner  that  warrants  of  arrest  were 
issued by not less than Chairman NAB himself. It is also admitted by 
the petitioner that he was facing an inquiry of alleged corruption and 
corrupt  practices  in  respect  of  project  Ashiana  Iqbal  Housing 
Project. The allegation against him related to the period when he was 
Director  General,  LDA.  The  Accountability  Court-III,  Lahore  had 
already  extended  remand  of  the  petitioner  until  03.04.2018.  The 
allegation of acting in retaliation to the letter sent by the petitioner to 
the Chairman NAB at this stage does not appear to be well founded 
W.P.No.169373-2018 
7 
for  the  reasons  that  state  institutions  do  not  function  or  act  at  the 
personal  whims  and  desires  of  individuals  having  any  kind  of  ill 
feeling for or against individuals of another institution. 
 
10. 
Even otherwise the necessary legal requirements for the grant 
of  remand  appears  to  have  been  complied  with.  A  well-reasoned 
order  by  Accountability  Court  No.III,  Lahore  was  passed  in 
satisfaction  of  its  judicial  conscience  as  there  were  reasonable 
grounds  for  believing  that  accusations  or  information  were  well 
forwarded  justifying  custody  of  accused  with  NAB  authorities.  So 
far  the  information  furnished  before  the  Accountability  Court  was 
not false, which raised suspicion that accused committed the offence 
under  NAB  provisions.  Prima-facie  reasonable  grounds  exist  to 
believe the petitioner’s involvement in the alleged offence and, thus, 
his  custody  in  connection  with  the  case  neither  will  be  termed  as 
illegal nor improper for the purposes of maintaining a constitutional 
petition  to  declare  his  arrest  as  unlawful.  Reliance  is  placed  upon 
case 
titled  “Hammad  Khalid  Vs.  Chairman,  National 
Accountability  Bureau,  Islamabad  and  others”  reported  as  PLD 
2003 Lahore 94. 
 
11.  As far as the vilification of the petitioner in  the  electronic  & 
print  media  is  concerned,  suffice  it  to  say  that  this  court  as  a 
custodian of the fundamental rights of the individuals in general and 
of the accused in particular, expects that a responsible reporting will 
be made about the petitioner which would not give any impression to 
the public of carrying a parallel media trial.  
 
12. 
In  this  view  of  the  matter,  we  don’t  find  any  justification  to 
declare  the  arrest  of  the  petitioner  unlawful  or  illegal,  therefore, 
dismiss this petition.  
 
 
(TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH)  
 
JUDGE 
 
(ALI BAQAR NAJAFI) 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
A.Qadoos* 
 
 
 
 
 
Announced in open court on ___________ 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
JUDGE 
