 
Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
(Noor Nawaz vs. The State) 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
(The State vs. Noor Nawaz) 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing: 
 
 
 
17.12.2018       
 
Appellant by: 
M/s.  Muhammad  Ahsan  Bhoon  and 
Imtiaz Noor Malik, Advocates.  
State by: 
Mr. Sultan Mehmood Khan, APG. 
Complainant by: 
Nemo. 
SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI, J:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Noor Nawaz son of Wali Jan Khan, caste Pathan Khattak, resident of 
Janda Khurram, Tehsil Banda Dawood Shah, District Kark, Province 
of Khyber Pakhtoonkhawa, appellant along with Abdul Rahman alias 
Hafeez, Azmat Ali Khan and Shahid Ullah Khan (since acquitted) was 
involved  in  case  FIR  No.653/2015,  dated  17.12.2015,  offence  under 
Sections  302,  114,  34,  PPC,  registered  with  Police  Station  Sialkot 
Cantt.  He  was  tried  by  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Sialkot 
under  the  afore-mentioned  offences.  Learned  trial  court  seized  with 
the  matter  in  terms  of  judgment  dated  21.12.2016  convicted  and 
sentenced the appellant in the following terms:- 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
2 
 
  Under Section 302(b), PPC, sentenced to death as Ta’zir 
with  direction  to  pay  Rs.2,00,000/-  as  compensation  to 
legal  heirs  of  deceased  in  terms  of  Section  544-A, 
Cr.P.C.  and  in  case  of  default  in  payment  thereof,  to 
undergo S.I. for six months. 
2. 
 
Feeling  aggrieved  by  the  judgment  of  the  learned  trial 
court, the appellant has assailed his conviction and sentence through 
filing Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 while learned trial court forwarded 
Murder  Reference  No.23/2017  for  confirmation  or  otherwise  of 
sentence  of  death  inflicted  upon  the  convict  in  terms  of  Section  374, 
Cr.P.C.  As  both  the  matters  are  arising  out  of  one  and  the  same 
judgment of the learned trial court, therefore, both are being disposed 
off through consolidated judgment. 
3. 
 
Prosecution  story  as  portrayed  in  the  FIR  (Exh.PA/1) 
lodged  on  the  application  (Exh.PA)  of  Azmat  Ali  Khan  son  of  Khan 
Zada, caste Pathan Khattak (PW-1) is that the complainant is resident 
of Chanda Khurram, Tehsil Banda Dawood Shah, District Karak and 
involved  in  Zamindara.  Shahid  Ullah  Khan  son  of  the  complainant 
aged 19/20 years used to run tractor with the complainant. One and a 
half  months  prior  to the  occurrence  son of  the  complainant went for 
Lahore  for  labour.  Few  days  prior  to  the  occurrence  son  of  the 
complainant told him on phone that he had got job at the dera of Abid 
Gujjar  against  consideration  of  Rs.10,000/-.  On  16.12.2015  at 
8:00/9:00  p.m.  the  complainant  was  informed  on  phone  that  Shahid 
Ullah  Khan  had  received  firearm  injuries  at  his  head.  On  this 
information the complainant along with (1) Abdul Karim son of Khan 
Zada, (2) Umar Hayat son of Muhammad Hayat, both Pathan Khattak 
by  caste  and  residents  of 
the  same  village  reached  Sialkot 
Cantonment. On reaching there the complainant saw that Shahid had 
succumbed  to  the  firearm  injuries  at  his  head.  The  complainant 
alleged  that  Hafeez who had contracted marriage  with  Azmat son of 
Noor in the village of the complainant, (2) Shahid Ullah son of Spain 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
3 
 
Khan, (3) Azmat son of Noor Sahib, Khattak by caste had committed 
the  murder  of  his  son  on  the  suspicion  of  having  developed  illicit 
relationship with wife of Hafeez. 
4. 
  
The complainant along with written application reached 
Police Station and appeared before  Muhammad Naseer, S.I. (PW-8), 
who  chalked  out  formal  FIR  and  thereafter  investigation  was 
entrusted  to  Fida  Hussain,  S.I.  (PW-15).  Investigating  Officer 
inspected  the  dead  body  and  recovered  two  mobile  phones,  wallet, 
and  original  I.D.  Card,  National  Security  Card  vide  recovery  memo 
Exh.PK. He also prepared inquest statement (Exh.PM), drafted injury 
statement (Exh.PN) and dispatched the dead body to mortuary under 
the escort of Ghulam Sarwar 716/C (PW-4). From the spot he secured 
blood through cotton vide recovery memo Exh.PL and prepared rough 
site  plan  of  the  place  of  occurrence  (Exh.PP).  After  postmortem 
examination last worn clothes of the deceased, qameez (P-1), shalwar 
(P-2), bunyan (P-3), jersey (P-4), bunyan (P-5), jacket (P-6) and pair 
of  shoes  (P-7/1-2)  were  produced  before  the  Investigating  Officer 
which were taken into possession vide recovery Exh.PJ.  On reaching 
Police  Station  Investigating  Officer  handed  over  case  property  to 
Moharrar Malkhana for its safe custody and onward transmission to 
the quarter concerned. On 18.12.2015, Investigating Officer recorded 
supplementary  statement  of  the  complainant  and  also  recorded 
statements  of  the  prosecution  witnesses  under  Section  161,  Cr.P.C. 
Upon the direction of the Investigating Officer and pointing out of the 
PWs  on  18.12.2015  Mirza  Tahir  Tasleem,  Draftsman  (PW-9)  took 
rough notes of the place of occurrence and thereafter prepared scaled 
site  plan  (Exh.PH  and  Exh.PH/1).  On  21.01.2016,  Investigating 
Officer  formally  arrested  the  appellant  and  obtained  his  physical 
remand. During the course of interrogation in pursuance of disclosure 
on 24.01.2016, appellant led to the place where he had thrown away 
his pistol.  
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
4 
 
5. 
 
As  a  result  of  investigation,  the  appellant  was  found 
guilty, hence Investigating Officer prepared report under Section 173, 
Cr.P.C. while placing his name in column No.3, and sent the same to 
the  court  of  Sessions  en-routed  through  the  Illaqa  Magistrate  as 
provided  under  Section  190(2),  Cr.P.C.  The  learned  trial  court 
formally  charge  sheeted  the  accused  vide  order  dated  06.04.2016  to 
which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Prosecution in order to 
substantiate  its  case  produced  as  many  as  fifteen  (15)  prosecution 
witnesses. 
6. 
 
Occular account in this case consists of the statements of 
Hameed  Ullah  (PW-2)  and  Sial  Khan  (PW-3).  Muhammad  Naseer, 
S.I.  (PW-8)  had  chalked  out  formal  FIR  while  Mirza  Tahir  Tasleem, 
Draftsman  (PW-9)  had  prepared  scaled  site  plan  of  the  place  of 
occurrence. Investigation of this case was conducted by Fida Hussain, 
S.I. (PW-15). 
 
Dr.  Umer  Saleem 
(PW-7)  had  conducted  postmortem 
examination  on  the  dead  body  of  Shahid  Ullah  Khan  deceased  and 
observed following injuries on his person:- 
“1-A. A lacerated firearm injury wound of 2 cm x 2 cm in 
diameter  with  blackening  and  contused  margins 
present  on  right  mastoid  region  of  head.  Muzzle 
impression  present  around  this  firearm  injury 
wound.  This 
is  entry  wound.  On  dissection 
underlying mastoid bone is fractured with fracture 
lines  radiating  outward  to  occipital  and  parietal 
bone  of  skull.  On  opening  skull  haemorrhage 
present  on  dura,  subarachnoid  and  pia  matter  of 
brain,  meninges  and  underlying  brain  matter  or 
contused and haemorrhagic.  
Injury  track  explode  and  brain  found  damaged, 
basal skull bones found fractured and later part of 
mandible bone also found fracture. 
1-B  A lacerated wound firearm injury wound of 0.5 cm 
x  0.5  cm  present  on  left  cheek  about  5  cm  below 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
5 
 
left ear, blackening is not present around margins 
and  margins  are  everted.  Injury  No.1-A  is  entry 
wound  and  injury  No.1-B  is  exit  wound.  Spinal 
cord not opened to avoid mutilation of dead body. 
2-A.  Left upper forearm a lacerated firearm injury with 
blackening around margins, margins are contused, 
size of 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm present on posterior upper 
left  forearm  about  8  cm  below  left  elbow  joint 
(entry wound). 
2-B.  A lacerated firearm injury of 2 cm x 2 cm present 
on anteriorly upper left forearm (exit wound).” 
After  postmortem  examination  the  doctor  rendered  the  following 
opinion:- 
“Keeping  in  view  the  postmortem  findings,  I  am  of  the 
opinion  that  injury  No.1-A  &  1-B  and  injuries  on  left 
forearm  are  firearm  injuries  and  are  ante  mortem  in 
nature. Injury No.1-A and injury No.1-B are sufficient to 
cause  death  in  ordinary  course of  nature.  Time between 
injury and death is instantaneously. Time between death 
and postmortem is twenty hours.” 
Statements of rest of the prosecution witnesses are formal in nature. 
7. 
 
The appellant was examined under Section 342, Cr.P.C, 
wherein  he  opted  neither  to  appear  as  his  own  witness  in  terms  of 
Section  340(2),  Cr.P.C.  nor  he  opted  to  adduce  evidence  in  his 
defence. While replying to the question why this case against him and 
why  the  PWs  deposed against  him,  the  appellant  made  the following 
deposition:- 
“It  is  a  false  case.  I  am  innocent.  According  to  FIR,  it 
was a blind murder. Initially case was registered against 
Hafeez and Azmat on the basis of suspicion. Later on, at 
very  later  stage  evidence  was  concocted.  Eye  witnesses 
namely  Hameedullah  PW-2  and  Sial  Khan  PW-3  who 
claimed  to  be  present  at  the  place  of  occurrence  are 
blood relatives of the deceased and it is quite unnatural 
for them to remain quiet and not to disclose the real facts 
of  the  case  to  the  complainant.  Deceased’s  family  has 
certain grudge against my family and they have taken the 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
6 
 
opportunity of a blind murder to involve me and my other 
relatives  for  blackmailing  us.  I am  serving  in  Pak  Army 
and my unit was posted at Siachin and I have no reason 
to  murder  Shahid  Ullah.  Witnesses  are  inter  se  related 
and are inimical against me and my family.” 
 
8. 
 
Learned 
trial  court  after  evaluating 
the  evidence 
available on record, found version of the prosecution proved beyond 
shadow of reasonable doubt against the appellant, which resulted into 
his conviction in the afore-stated terms. 
9. 
 
Learned counsel for the appellant at the outset contended 
that impugned judgment has been passed by the learned trial court in 
a  slipshod  manner  without  adverting  to  real  facts  of  the  case  and 
material  available  on  record.  Learned  counsel  vehemently  argued 
that  the  FIR  was  lodged  with  a  delay  of  11  hours  for  which  no 
plausible explanation has been rendered by the prosecution. Further 
contended  that  the  complainant  is  not  eye  witness  of  the  occurrence 
while  in  the  crime  report  the  appellant  was  not  named,  who  was 
brought in through supplementary statement recorded on 18.12.2015. 
Main  crux  of  arguments  of  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  is  that 
although according to prosecution version Hameed Ullah (PW-2) and 
Sial  Khan  (PW-3)  had  witnessed  the  occurrence,  however,  their 
statements under Section 161, Cr.P.C. were recovered after two days 
of the occurrence. Even they are not truthful witnesses; they failed to 
establish  their  presence  and  made  contradictory  statements.  Further 
argued  that  medical  evidence  does  not  corroborate  the  prosecution 
version  on  minute  details.  Learned  counsel  vigorously  argued  that 
there was no reason with the appellant to have committed the murder 
of son of the complainant without any reason. Further contended that 
on  the  same  set  of  evidence  Abdul  Rahman  alias  Hafeez,  Azmat  Ali 
Khan  and  Shahid  Ullah  Khan,  who  were  named  as  culprits  in  the 
crime report, were acquitted of the charge and no appeal against their 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
7 
 
acquittal  was 
filed.  Learned  counsel 
finally  argued 
that 
the 
prosecution  has  miserably  failed  to  establish  its  case  against  the 
appellant  beyond  shadow  of  reasonable  doubt,  therefore,  conviction 
and sentence recorded by the learned trial court is not sustainable in 
the eyes of law.  
10. 
 
On  the  other  hand  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General 
vehemently opposed the contentions raised by learned counsel for the 
appellant. It was argued that on receipt of information regarding the 
occurrence  as  the  complainant  had  to  come  from  District  Karak 
(Province  of  Khyber  Pakhtoon  Khawah)  by  covering  a  distance  of 
500-KMs,  therefore,  delay  in  lodging  the  FIR  is  not  fatal.  Learned 
Law Officer contended that nevertheless the appellant was not named 
in the crime report, however, he was brought in subsequently through 
supplementary  statement.  Next  argued  that  both  the  prosecution 
witnesses  of  occular  account  viz.  Hameed  Ullah  (PW-2)  and  Sial 
Khan  (PW-3)  fully  supported  the  prosecution  case  on  minute  details 
and  despite  lengthy  cross-examination  nothing  adverse  to  the 
prosecution  version  could  be  brought  on  record.  He  contended  that 
medical  evidence  fully  supports  the  occular  account.  It  was  argued 
that during  the  course of investigation the appellant had pointed out 
the  place  where  he  had  thrown  away his pistol  after the occurrence. 
Further  submitted  that  during  the  course  of  investigation  the 
appellant  was  found  guilty  as  such  his  name  was  placed  in  column 
No.3 of the report prepared under Section 173, Cr.P.C. It was finally 
argued  that  the  appellant  had  taken  the  life  of  a  young  guy  without 
any just cause and keeping in view evidence brought forth on record, 
learned 
trial 
court  was 
rightly 
justified 
in 
recording 
conviction/sentence  against 
the  appellant  under 
the  relevant 
provisions of law. 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
8 
 
11. 
 
Arguments  advanced  from  both  sides  have  been  heard. 
We have also minutely gone through the record available on file with 
the able assistance of learned counsel for the parties. 
12. 
 
It  is  an  established  principle  of  law  that  each  criminal 
case  has  its  own  peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  and  the  same 
seldom  coincide  with  each  other  on  salient  features.  Admittedly  it  is 
an  unfortunate  incident  in  which  son  of  the  complainant  who  was 
quite  young  19/20  years  of  age  lost  his  life  after  sustaining  firearm 
injuries  at  his  head.  Brutality  of  the  occurrence  hardly  leads  any 
justification for bailing out the barbarism shown by the accused but to 
put  the  facts  and  circumstances  in  equilibrium  on  the  touchstone  of 
safe administration of justice, we have scrutinized the whole evidence 
available on record while weighing the same on judicial parlance. It 
has been observed by us that the prosecution has led evidence in the 
shape  of  occular  account,  medical  evidence,  motive,  as  well  as, 
investigation besides other attending circumstances. 
13. 
 
As  far  as  merits  of  the  case  are  concerned  we  have 
observed that there is an inordinate delay of  eleven hours in lodging 
the  crime  report  for  which  no  plausible  explanation  has  been 
rendered  by  the  prosecution.  As  per  prosecution  version  the 
occurrence had taken place on 16.12.2015 at 8:00/9:00 p.m. while the 
matter was reported to the police on 17.12.2015 at 7:00 a.m. whereas 
inter-se distance between the place of occurrence and Police Station 
is only 1-½ KM. Superior Courts have always sensed inordinate delay 
with  suspicion  and  there  are  number  of  judgments  on  this  point  in 
which  the  Superior Courts discarded  the  prosecution  version on this 
score  alone.  In  the  case  of  AZHAR  ALI  and  others  vs.  THE  STATE 
(2008 SCMR 6) the august Supreme Court of Pakistan had held that 
inordinate delay  in lodging the FIR would mean that the occurrence 
was un-witnessed. In a similar case reported as Mehmood Ahmed and 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
9 
 
2  others  vs.  State  (PLJ  1995  SC  1),  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan took  serious notice of delay in lodging the FIR and held as 
under:- 
taking 
to  consultation, 
“Although  in  some  circumstances  a  delay  of  two  hours 
may  not  be  of  much  importance  yet  in  the  facts  and 
circumstances  of  this  particular  case  as  they  have 
happened,  the  delay  has  great  significance.  It  can  be 
attributed 
instructions  and 
calculatedly  preparing  report  keeping  the  names  of 
accused open for roping in such persons whom ultimately 
prosecution  may  wish  to  implicate.  This  does  not  mean 
that  in  any  other  case  where  the  complainant  does  not 
mention  the  names  of  the  accused  an  adverse  inference 
has to be drawn but in cases where the facts show that in 
the  normal  circumstances  the  complainant  could  have 
known  or  obtained  the  names  of  the  accused,  it  will  be 
rather dangerous to rely upon such witnesses unless very 
strong  piece  of  evidence  is  produced  to  substantiate  the 
prosecution  case.  In  the present  case  if the  complainant 
would  have  reached  the  police  station  within  15  to  30 
minutes  of  the  incident,  one  could  say  that  immediately 
after  the  incident  the  complainant  having  no  interest  in 
the  matter  had  rushed  to  the  police  station  to  lodge 
information so that immediate steps may be taken by the 
police. Such is not the case here and as discussed above, 
the delay in particular circumstances of this case has not 
been explained.” 
14. 
 
Besides  delay  in  lodging  the  crime  report  perusal  of 
record  available  on  file  reflects that the  appellant  was not  named in 
the  crime  report  rather the same  was lodged against  Hafeez, Shahid 
Ullah  and  Azmat,  co-accused.  Subsequently  through  supplementary 
statement,  the  complainant  involved  the  appellant  on  the  basis  of 
statements of Hameed Ullah (PW-2) and Sial Khan (PW-3) recorded 
under  Section  161,  Cr.P.C.  However,  fact  remains  that  although  the 
occurrence had taken place on 16.12.2015 while both PW-2 and PW-
3 claim to have seen the occurrence and they are also closely related 
to  the  complainant,  as  well  as,  the  deceased,  however,  their 
statements under Section 161, Cr.P.C. were recorded with a delay of 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
10 
 
two days on 18.12.2015 without any plausible explanation. Therefore, 
the  same  are  hit  by  the  ratio  decidendi  of  august  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan laid down in the case of “Abdul Khaliq vs. The State” (1996 
SCMR 1553) where it was held as under:- 
“---S. 161---Penal Code (XLV of 1860), S. 302/34---Late 
recording of statement under S. 161, Cr.P.C.---Value ---
Late  recording  of  a  statement  of  a  prosecution  witness 
under S. 161, Cr.P.C. reduces its value to nil unless delay 
is plausibly explained.” 
Reliance is also placed on the dictum of law laid down in the cases of 
SAHIB  GUL  vs.  ZIARAT  GUL  and  others  (1976  SCMR  236)  and 
MUHAMMAD IQBAL vs. The SATE (1984 SCMR 930). 
15. 
 
As  far  as  presence  of  the  prosecution  witnesses  at  the 
place  of  occurrence  at  the  relevant  time  is  concerned,  there  is  no 
denial  to  this  fact  that  both  of  them  are  residents  of  District  Karak 
(Province  of  Khyber Pakhtoon  Khawah).  According to  claim  of  both 
the  prosecution  witnesses  of  the  occular  account  they  had  visited 
Sialkot in connection with getting some labour work. However, during 
the  course  of  trial,  Hameed  Ullah  (PW-2)  admitted  that  he  was 
running  a  general  store  in  his  village  including  items  of  bakery. 
Relevant extract out of his statement is reproduced as under:-  
“I am shopkeeper in my village. I run general store. The 
material  available  at  Bakery  is  also  available  at  my 
store.” 
If  this  aspect  is  taken  into  consideration  that  PW-2  was  running  a 
general store at his village, it does not appeal to reason that he would 
visit  a  place  500-KMs  away  from  his  resident  for  getting  labour 
particularly  when  the  deceased had  allegedly  got labour  job  against 
the wages of a meager amount of Rs.10,000/-. Similar is the position 
with  PW-3,  who  during  the  course  of  trial  admitted  that  he  was 
operated  upon  at  his  right  kidney.  However,  it  does  not  appeal  to 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
11 
 
reason  that  he  would  go  for  search  of  labour  work  while  covering 
such a huge distance in presence of his health condition. 
 
As  far  as  authenticity  of  the  statements  of  the  prosecution 
witnesses  is  concerned,  both  of  them  claim  that  the  appellant  had 
made firing upon the deceased in their eye view. However, despite of 
the  fact  that  they  are  cousins  of  the  complainant  but  astonishingly 
there  is  nothing  on  record  that  why  they  didn’t  opt  to  report  the 
matter  to  him  although  they  were  having  his  mobile  number.  They 
even  didn’t  disclose  the  details  of  the  occurrence  in  which  a  young 
boy  was  done  to  death  to  other  family  members.  This  fact  was 
admitted  by  PW-2  while  making  his  statement  during  the  course  of 
trial in the following terms:- 
“I  did  not  inform  the  complainant  or  his  family  or  any 
other relatives telephonically about the occurrence…” 
Similarly PW-3 stated that soon after the occurrence they disappeared 
from  the  place  of  occurrence and rushed towards Lorry Adda where 
they stayed overnight, however, they didn’t bother to inform the local 
police or even made call at Emergency-15. Relevant extract out of his 
statement is reproduced as under:- 
“We remained the whole night at the Lari Adda without 
informing any one about the occurrence. We did not also 
call up at 15 with regard to this occurrence.” 
Their passive conduct subsequent to the occurrence qua not informing 
the  complainant,  other  family  members  or  police  when  they  were 
closely  related  to  the  deceased  speaks  volume  and  leads  to  the 
conclusion  to  believe  that  they  were  not  present  at  the  place  of 
occurrence at the relevant time. 
16. 
 
As  far  as  medical  evidence  is  concerned  in  the  crime 
report no specific role was assigned to the appellant rather he was not 
even named as an accused, therefore, the same is of least importance 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
12 
 
in this case. As far as the prosecution version that during the course 
of investigation the appellant had pointed out the place where he had 
thrown away his pistol is concerned as nothing was recovered at that 
time,  therefore,  mere  memo  of  pointation  cannot  be  given  any  legal 
credence. 
17. 
 
As  far  as  motive  of  this  case  is  concerned  according  to 
FIR  Hafeez  was  married  in  the  village  of  the  complainant,  who  had 
suspicion that the deceased had developed illicit relationship with his 
wife,  hence  the  same  has  not  been  alleged  against  the  appellant. 
Moreover,  on  the  same  set  of  evidence,  Hafeez,  Shahid  Ullah  and 
Azmat  who  were  arrayed  as  accused  in  the  crime  report,  were 
acquitted of the charge and no appeal against their acquittal was filed 
by the prosecution.  
18. 
 
All  the  above  narrated  facts  and  circumstances  when 
evaluated on judicial parlance reflect that the prosecution has failed 
to  establish  culpability  of  the  appellant  in  the  instant  case  through 
reliable, 
trustworthy  and  confidence 
inspiring  evidence.  It 
is 
established principle of law that for extending the benefit of doubt in 
favour of the accused, so many circumstances are not required, rather 
one circumstance which creates reasonable dent in the veracity of the 
prosecution version, can be taken into consideration for the purpose, 
not  as  a  matter  of  grace,  rather  as  a  matter  of  right.  Respectful 
reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  on  the  ratio  decidendi  of  august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  cases  of  “Tariq  Pervez  vs.  The 
State”  (1995  SCMR  1345)  “Riaz  Masih alias  Mithoo  vs.  The State” 
(1995  SCMR  1730)  and  “Muhammad  Akram  vs.  The  State  (2009 
SCMR 230). In the case of “Tariq Pervez vs. The State” (1995 SCMR 
1345), the august Supreme Court of Pakistan has held as under:- 
“---Art.4---Benefit of doubt, grant of---For giving benefit 
of  doubt  to  an  accused  it  is  not  necessary  that  there 
 
 
Murder Reference No.23/2017 
Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 
 
 
13 
 
should  be  many  circumstances  creating  doubts---If  a 
simple  circumstance  creates  reasonable  doubt  in  a 
prudent mind about the guilt of accused, then he will be 
entitled  to  such  benefit  not  as  a  matter  of  grace  and 
concession but as a matter of right”. 
19. 
 
From the facts and circumstances narrated above, we are 
persuaded  to  hold  that  conviction  passed  by  the  learned  trial  court 
against the appellant in the circumstances is against all canons of law 
recognized  for  the  safe  dispensation  of  criminal  justice.  As  per 
dictates of law benefit of every doubt is to be extended in favour of the 
accused.  Moreover,  it  is  golden  principle  of  law  that  the  Court  may 
err in letting off 100 guilty but should not convict one innocent person 
on  the  basis  of  suspicion.  Resultantly  while  setting  aside  the 
conviction and  sentence  recorded by  the learned  trial  court in  terms 
of judgment dated 21.12.2016, Crl. Appeal No.889-J/2016 filed by the 
appellant  is  allowed    as  a  consequence  whereof  he  is  ordered  to  be 
acquitted  of  the  charge  in  FIR  No.653/2015,  dated  17.12.2015, 
offence  under  Sections  302,  114,  34,  PPC,  registered  with  Police 
Station  Sialkot  Cantt.  He  is  directed  to  be  released  forthwith  if  not 
required in any other case. 
20. 
 
Murder  Reference  No.23/2017  is  answered  in  negative. 
Death sentence is not confirmed. 
 
(Muhammad Waheed Khan) 
(Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi) 
Judge 
Judge 
 
                       Approved for Reporting 
Riaz 
 
 
