 
Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
(Rasheed Akbar Khan vs. The State & another) 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing: 
 
 
 
31.05.2018       
 
Appellant by: 
State by: 
M/s. Azam Nazeer Tarar and Mazhar 
Ali Gahloon, Advocates  
Ch.  Muhammad  Jahangir  Wahla, 
Deputy Attorney General. 
Complainant by: 
Mr.  Muhammad  Ahsan  Bhoon, 
Advocate. 
SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI, J:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rasheed  Akbar  Khan  son  of  Ghulam  Akbar  Khan,  caste  Balouch, 
resident  of  village  Niwani,  Tehsil  and  District  Bhakkar,  appellant 
along with Dr. Ayyaz Ahmed Gulzar (since acquitted) was involved in 
case FIR No.190/2002, dated 26.10.2002, offence under Sections 468, 
471,  474,  476,  PPC,  read  with  Section  82  of  the  Representation  of 
People Act, 1976, registered at Police Station City Bhakkar. He was 
tried  by  learned  Sessions  Judge  Bhakkar  under  the  afore-mentioned 
offences.  The  learned  trial  court  seized  with  the  matter  in  terms  of 
judgment dated 21.01.2014  convicted and sentenced the appellant as 
under:- 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
2 
 
  Under  Section  468,  PPC,  sentenced  to  undergo  R.I.  for 
five years with fine of Rs.5,00,000/- and in case of default 
in payment of fine, to further undergo S.I. for six months. 
  Under  Section  471  read  with  Section  465,  PPC, 
sentenced  to  undergo  R.I.  for  two  years  with  fine  of 
Rs.1,00,000/-  and  in  case  of  default  in  payment  thereof, 
to further undergo S.I. for two months. 
  Under  Section  82  read  with  Section  78  of 
the 
Representation  of  People  Act,  1976,  sentenced 
to 
undergo R.I. for three years with fine of Rs.5,000/- and in 
case  of  default  in  payment  thereof  to  undergo  S.I.  for 
fifteen days. 
  All  the  sentences  inflicted  upon  the  appellant  were 
directed  to  run  concurrently and benefit of Section  382-
B, Cr.P.C. was also extended in his favour. 
2. 
 
Feeling  aggrieved  by  the  judgment  of  the  learned  trial 
court, the appellant has assailed his conviction and sentence through 
filing the instant appeal. 
3. 
 
Prosecution  story  as  portrayed  in  the  FIR  (Exh.PB) 
lodged on the complaint  of Ghazanfar Abbas Chheena (PW-7) is that 
the appellant had filed his nomination papers as a Candidate for PP-
49,  Bhakkar  to  contest  the  General  Elections  2002.  Along  with  the 
nomination  papers  filed  before  the  Returning  Officer,  a  fake  B.A. 
degree  issued  under Roll  No.34291  pertaining to  the year 1977  with 
registration  No.77-z-293  was  also  enclosed.  The  complainant, 
however,  averred  that the  total strength of students appearing in  the 
B.A. Examination  in 1977  was 30184  while  registration No.77-z-293 
was allotted to one Muhammad Aftab Farrukh son of Ghulam Nabi. It 
was alleged  in  the  complaint  that  Rasheed  Akbar  Khan  accused  was 
not  having  qualification  of  F.A.  while  he  had  attached  copy  of 
fake/fictitious degree of B.A, which was attested by Dr. Ayyaz Ahmed 
Gulzar,  District  Officer  (Livestock),  Bhakkar  with  his  connivance.  It 
was further alleged that accused Malik Javed Akbar had proposed the 
candidature  of  the  appellant  while  Zahid  Abbas  had  seconded  him. 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
3 
 
On  26.08.2002,  the  complainant  moved  an  application  before  the 
Returning  Officer;  however,  the  accused  withdrew  his  nomination 
papers  on  28.08.2002.  Subsequently  learned  Additional  Sessions 
Judge  passed  direction  for  registration  of  the  case  against  the 
accused.  
4. 
 
The  complainant  along  with  his  complaint  and  original 
letters  No.413  and  414  dated  21.10.2002  of  learned  Additional 
Sessions  Judge,  appeared  before  Makhdoom  Altaf  Hussain, 
Inspector/SHO  (PW-2),  who  was  present  in  the  premises  of  District 
Courts,  who  after  endorsing  police  karvai  on 
the  complaint 
transmitted it to Police Station for registration of formal FIR. On its 
presentation  before  Saif  Ullah,  ASI  (PW-1),  he  chalked  out  formal 
FIR  and  the  investigation  was  entrusted  to  Aftab  Ullah  Khan,  DSP 
(PW-4).  The  Investigating  Officer  on  19.04.2003  wrote  a  letter 
(Exh.PE) to the Controller of Examination, University of the Punjab, 
for  verification  of  B.A.  Degree  of  the  appellant,  however,  vide  letter 
No.685/C, dated 31.05.2003 (Exh.PF),  it was replied that the  degree 
was fake/bogus.  
5. 
 
It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  during  the  course  of 
investigation  the  Investigating  Officer  prepared  cancellation  report, 
which was presented before learned Magistrate Section-30, Bhakkar. 
However,  the  learned  Magistrate  vide  order  dated  14.07.2008 
disagreed  with  the  same.  The  order  of  learned  Magistrate  was 
assailed  through  filing  Writ  Petition  No.9606/2008;  which  was 
allowed  vide  order  dated  09.07.2009  and  the  matter  was  remanded 
back  to  the  learned  Magistrate  with  the  direction  to  pass  a  fresh 
order.  During 
the  proceedings  before 
learned  Magistrate  on 
17.03.2010,  both  the  parties  were  afforded  hearing,  however,  the 
learned  court  below  disagreed  with  the  cancellation  report  and 
directed  the  local  police  to  submit  report  in  terms  of  Section  173, 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
4 
 
Cr.P.C,  which  was  submitted  before 
the  court  of  competent 
jurisdiction.  The  learned  trial  court  formally  charge  sheeted  the 
accused  vide  order  dated  31.05.2013  to  which  he  pleaded  not  guilty 
and  claimed  trial.  Prosecution  in  order  to  substantiate  its  case 
produced as many as eight (8) prosecution witnesses. 
6. 
 
Ghulam Abbas Chheena (PW-7) is the complainant of the 
case. Rana Zahoor Ahmed, Additional Sessions Judge (PW-8) was the 
Returning  Officer  at  the  relevant  time.  Saif  Ullah,  ASI  (PW-1)  had 
chalked out formal FIR while investigation in this case was conducted 
by Makhdoom Altaf Hussain, Inspector (PW-2) and Aftab Ullah Khan, 
DSP  (PW-4).  Rana  Fazal  Ahmed  (PW-5)  was  a  retired  Assistant 
Controller  Examinations,  Punjab  University  while  Zubair  Ahmed, 
Assistant  Controller  Examinations  (PW-6)  had  produced  record 
before the learned trial court. 
7. 
 
The  appellant  was  also  examined  under  Section  342, 
Cr.P.C, wherein he refuted the allegations levelled against him in the 
prosecution evidence. 
8 
 
Learned 
trial  court  after  evaluating 
the  evidence 
available on record, found version of the prosecution proved beyond 
shadow  of  reasonable  doubt  against  the  appellant  resulting  into  his 
conviction in the afore-stated terms. 
9. 
 
At  the  very  outset  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant 
submitted that the impugned judgment has been passed by the learned 
trial court in a slipshod manner without adverting to real facts of the 
case and material brought forth on record. Main crux of arguments of 
learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  is  that  the  alleged  photo  copy  of 
degree  of  B.A.  appended  with  the  nomination  papers  was  not 
scrutinized  by  the  competent  authority  rather  the  nomination  papers 
were  withdrawn  before 
its  scrutiny.  Learned  counsel 
further 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
5 
 
emphasized  that  the  alleged  photocopy  of  degree  appended  with  the 
nomination  papers  was  neither  attested  by  the  concerned  authority 
nor  verified  and  even  no  effort  whatsoever  was  made  during  the 
course of investigation to procure the original degree.  It was argued 
that  it  has  come  on  record  in  the  statement  of  the  Returning  Officer 
that neither the degree was signed by the appellant nor it was annexed 
with the nomination papers as Annexure. Learned counsel vigorously 
argued  that  Rana  Fazal  Ahmed,  who  appeared  during  the  course  of 
trial  as  PW-5  was  not  serving  the  Punjab  University  at  the  time  of 
making  his  statement  before  the  learned  trial  court,  therefore,  he 
being a retired official was not custodian of the record, therefore, his 
statement is devoid of legal sanctity. Next submitted that PW-5 while 
making  his  statement  as  a  PW  also  admitted  that  report  (Exh.PF) 
issued  in  respect  of  B.A.  degree  did  not  contain  the  official  seal  of 
Assistant  Controller  of  Examination,  which  further  shatters  its 
credence.  Learned  counsel  submitted  that  during  the  course  of 
investigation  vires  of  the  crime  report  were  found  false,  hence 
cancellation report was prepared by the Investigating Officer. It was 
further  argued  that  on  the  same  set  of  evidence,  Dr.  Ayyaz  Ahmed 
Gulzar,  co-accused  was  acquitted  of  the  charge  by  the  learned  trial 
court while disbelieving the prosecution evidence to his extent and no 
appeal  against  his  acquittal  was  filed  meaning  thereby  that  the 
prosecution  was  satisfied  qua  the  conclusion  drawn  by  the  learned 
trial court to his extent. It was finally argued that there is not an iota 
of  evidence  to  establish  that  the  appellant  was  instrumental  in 
committing  fraud/forgery;  hence  keeping  in  view  deficit  material 
available  on  record,  the  learned  trial  court  was  not  justified  in 
recording  conviction  against  him  and  prayed  for  his  clean  acquittal 
from the charges. 
10. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General 
assisted  by  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  vehemently  opposed 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
6 
 
the  contentions  raised  by  learned  counsel  for the  appellant.  Learned 
counsel  for  the  complainant  contended  that  at  the  time  of  filing 
nomination  papers  although  the  appellant  was  not  having  the 
qualification of B.A, however, he by way of managing photocopy of a 
fictitious/fake  degree  of  B.A.  attached  it  with  his  nomination  papers 
and  submitted  it  before  the  Returning  Officer.  Next  submitted  that 
during 
the  course  of 
investigation 
the 
Investigating  Officer 
transmitted  photocopy  of  the  degree  to  the  University  of  the  Punjab 
from where it was reported that the same did not exist in their record. 
Learned  counsel  argued  that  there  is  tangible  evidence  available  on 
record  to  establish  that  the  appellant  was  involved  in  fraud  and 
forgery.  It  was  finally  argued  that  the  prosecution  proved  its  case 
through leading cogent and confidence inspiring  evidence; therefore, 
the  learned  trial  court  was  rightly  justified  in  recording  conviction 
against him under the relevant provisions of law. 
11. 
 
We have considered the arguments advanced by learned 
counsel for the parties and gone through the record  available on file 
with their able assistance. 
12. 
 
As  per  prosecution  accusations  contained 
in 
the 
complaint,  which  culminated  into  the  instant  FIR,  the  appellant  in 
order  to  contest  the  General  Elections  2002  filed  his  nomination 
papers  before  the  Returning  Officer  as  a  Candidate  from  PP-49, 
Bhakkar.  It  is  alleged  in  the  crime  report  that  at  the  time  of  filing 
nomination papers, the appellant was not having the qualification of 
B.A.  However,  along  with  his  nomination  papers,  he  submitted 
photocopy  of  a  fake/fictitious  degree  of  B.A.  allegedly  issued  by  the 
University  of  the  Punjab.  Said  Returning  Officer  (Rana  Zahoor 
Ahmed,  Additional  Sessions  Judge)  appeared  during  the  course  of 
trial  as  PW-8,  who  during  the  course  of  cross-examination  frankly 
conceded that the appellant withdrew the nomination papers prior to 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
7 
 
the day of scrutiny. Moreover, PW-8 admitted that neither the alleged 
fake degree was signed by the appellant nor it was annexed with the 
nomination papers as an Annexure. Relevant extract out of statement 
of PW-8 is reproduced as under:- 
“It  is  correct  that  photocopy  of  alleged  fake  degree 
Mark.A  neither  bears  signature  of  accused  Rasheed 
Akbar Khan nor the same has been marked as annexure 
with the nomination papers.” 
Perusal  of  record  available  on  file  also  reflects  that  the  Returning 
Officer had not passed any order for initiation of proceedings against 
the  appellant  on  account  of  producing  copy  of  a  forged/fictitious 
degree of B.A. 
13. 
 
While going through the record available on file we have 
observed that mainstay of the prosecution version in this case is that 
during 
the  course  of 
investigation,  Investigating  Officer  had 
transmitted copy of the B.A. degree to the University of the Punjab for 
its  verification,  however,  the  concerned  officials  of  University  of  the 
Punjab vide its report (Exh.PF) reported that the same was bogus. In 
order  to  establish  this  fact  the  prosecution  produced  Rana  Fazal 
Ahmad, a retired Assistant Controller of Examination, who appeared 
during  the  course  of  trial  as  PW-5.  There  is  no  cavil  to  this 
proposition that at the time of making his statement during the course 
of trial, PW-5 was no more at the strength of University of the Punjab 
as such in no way he was not custodian of record.  Although said PW 
had stated that he had submitted his report (Exh.PF) qua authenticity 
of the B.A. degree, however, during the course of cross-examination, 
he  frankly  conceded  that  Exh.PF  did  not  bear  seal  of  the  Assistant 
Controller  concerned.  Relevant  extract  out  of  his  statement  is 
reproduced as under:- 
“It  is  correct  that  Ex.P.F  does  not  bear  seal  of  the 
Assistant Controller concerned.” 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
8 
 
Needless to mention that without official seal the said report is devoid 
of legal importance and no sanctity whatsoever can be attached to it 
qua its genuineness. Fact also remains that said PW neither produced 
original 
record  qua 
the  B.A.  degree  nor  provided  any 
attested/certified copy of the said degree. 
14. 
 
Next  piece  of  evidence  available  with  the  prosecution  is 
statement  of  Zubair  Ahmed,  Assistant  Controller  (Certificates)  of 
University of the Punjab, who appeared during the course of trial as 
PW-6.  During  the  course  of  trial  he  brought  the  result  gazette  of 
University  of  the  Punjab  pertaining  to  Roll  No.4567,  however,  fact 
remains  that  roll  number  mentioned  in  the  FIR  is  34291.  Hence, 
statement  of  PW-6  to  the  extent  of  the  present  appellant  is  of  least 
importance. 
15. 
 
Admittedly  the  original  degree,  photocopy  of  which  was 
allegedly  annexed  by  the  appellant  with  his  nomination  papers  was 
neither brought on record during the course of investigation nor was 
exhibited during the course of trial proceedings. While going through 
the record available on file we have observed that said document was 
brought on  record as  Mark-A  in the shape of a  photocopy, however, 
the  same  being  secondary  evidence  is  inadmissible  and  that  was  not 
proved  in accordance with law.  It is settled law that a person relying 
on a document is under obligation to prove the same, hence, the same 
could  not  be  read  in  evidence  to  record  conviction  against  the 
appellant keeping in view the pronouncements of the superior courts 
of the  country. The august Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of 
STATE  LIFE  INSURANCE  CORPORATION  OF  PAKISTAN  and 
another  vs.  JAVAID  IQBAL  (2011  SCMR  1013),  laid  down  the 
following principle:- 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
9 
 
“---O.XIII,  Rr.  3  &  4---Document  not  produced  and 
proved  in  evidence  but  only  marked  could  not  be 
considered by courts as a legal evidence of a fact.” 
Similar  view  was  held  in  the  cases  of  Zia  Ul  Hasan  vs.  The  State 
(PLD  1984  SC  192),  Abdul  Qayyum  vs.  Muhammad  Rafique  (2002 
SCJ  300),  Fazal  Muhammad  vs.  Mst.  Chohara  and  others  (1992 
SCMR  2182),  Muhammad  Arshad  Naseem  vs.  the  State  (2004 
PCr.L.J.  371)  and  ASIF  ALI  HASHMI  through  4  Legal  Heirs  vs. 
MUHAMMAD ARIF MIAN and 4 others (PLD 2015 Islamabad 191).  
16. 
 
There  is  no  denial  to  this  fact  that  complainant  of  this 
case,  who  appeared  during  the  course  of  trial  as  PW-7  belongs  to 
rival  party  of  the  appellant.  While  making  his  statement  before  the 
learned 
trial  court  during  cross-examination 
the  complainant 
admitted that he, as well as, his two uncles contested elections held in 
the  years  1988,  1993,  1997  and  2002  against  real  brother  of  the 
appellant,  as  well  as,  his  brother-in-law,  however,  in  all  these 
elections,  none  from  the  complainant  side  was  declared  a  returned 
candidate.  He  further  admitted  that  in  all  General  Elections  from 
2002 to 2008, the objections with regard to educational qualification 
of accused Saeed Akbar Khan were not sustained by any forum and in 
all  those  objections,  educational  qualification  of  accused    Rasheed 
Akbar  Khan  for  General  Election,  2002  was  made  basis.  The 
complainant also conceded that he filed CPLAs No.103,104 LR-2003 
and CPLA No.95-96 of 2006 in the august Supreme Court of Pakistan 
regarding  educational    qualification  of  the  appellant  for  General 
Election,  2002,  however,  both  the  said  petitions  were  dismissed.  So 
much so the complainant acknowledged that facts of present criminal 
case were also discussed in the orders of the  Apex Court. He further 
conceded that despite the failure  in earlier round of aforementioned 
petitions, he filed  Writ Petition No.12230 of 2007 and  Writ Petition  
No.12231  of  2007  in  the  Lahore  High  Court,  Lahore  against  the 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
10 
 
appellant  and  his  brother  Saeed  Akbar  Khan  regarding  their 
qualification  and  both  were  dismissed  by  the  full  Bench  comprising 
upon three Hon’ble Judges of Lahore High Court Lahore. During the 
course of cross-examination, he could not deny the registration of FIR 
No.2  dated  06.01.1995  under  Sections  468,  471,  409,  420,  and  409 
PPC registered against him at Police Station City  Bhakkar; wherein 
it  was  alleged  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  stealing  documents  from 
different    government  departments  and  to  prepare  bogus  documents 
on  the  basis  thereof  in  order  to  get  the  benefit  therefrom.  The 
complainant also could not deny that he had prepared a false RL-II in 
order to get the land transferred in the name of his brothers, namely, 
Rafaqat and Liaqat by converting its area from 1600 Kanals to 4500 
Kanals. 
17. 
 
Another  important  aspect  of  the  case  is  that  in  the 
nomination  papers  filed  by  the  appellant  roll  number  and  year  of 
passing  the  B.A.  degree  were  not  mentioned.  This  fact  was  also 
admitted  by  the  complainant  at  the  time  of  recording  his  statement; 
wherein while replying to a question he conceded that Roll No.34291 
and the year 1977 were not mentioned in the nomination papers filed 
by the appellant. However, there is nothing on record that from where 
the  complainant  obtained this information. This  aspect alone creates 
flaw in the authenticity of the prosecution version. 
18. 
 
Another  important  aspect  of  the  case  is  that  during  the 
course  of  investigation  the  Investigating  Officer  after  thoroughly 
investigating the case opined that there is deficit material to establish 
the  contents  of  the  crime  report  against  the  appellant.  Therefore, 
while  taking  into  consideration  the  whole  material  brought  forth  on 
record he prepared cancellation report. Fact also remains that at the 
time  of  adjudicating  the  case  by  the  learned  trial  court,  prosecution 
evidence  to  the  extent  of  co-accused  Dr.  Ayyaz  Ahmed  Gulzar  was 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
11 
 
disbelieved  and  he  was  acquitted  of  the  charge  on  the  same  set  of 
evidence.  Admittedly  the  prosecution  had  not  assailed  acquittal 
recorded  by  the  learned  trial  court  in  favour  of  said  co-accused 
meaning thereby that it was satisfied to the conclusion drawn by the 
learned trial court to his extent. 
19. 
 
While  going  through  the  record  we  have  observed  that 
the appellant along with his brother Rasheed Akbar Khan was being 
prosecuted  by  the  complainant  in  case  FIR  No.193/2002  for  the 
similar offence and with the same allegation. The instant case as well 
as  case  pertaining  to  FIR  No.193/2002  were  tried  by  the  same  trial 
court and the evidence was also recorded almost on the same dates of 
hearing.  It  is  very  surprising  to  us  that  except  few  variations  in  the 
statements  of  PW.1  and  PW.5,  the  evidence  was  not  recorded 
independently in each case rather the learned trial court has brought 
on record the evidence recorded in other case to the file of this case, 
which definitely is  against the spirit of  law. While going through the 
record we feel no hesitation in observing that a stereotyped judgment 
based on stereotyped evidence has been delivered by the learned trial 
court  in  both  the  cases  which  vitiates  the  proceedings  against  the 
appellant. Such practice is not only against the very spirit of law but 
against  the  principles  of  natural  justice.  So  in  our  humble  view  the 
conviction  and  sentence  passed  by  the  learned  trial  court  is  not 
proper and the same cannot be sustained.  
20. 
 
As far as applicability of the provisions of  Section 82 of 
the  Representation  of  the  People  Act,  1976  is  concerned,  it  was 
incumbent  upon  the  prosecution  to  prove  the  guilt  of  the  appellant 
through 
independent,  consistent,  cogent,  clear  and  convincing 
evidence, which may satisfy the judicial conscious. There should be no 
doubt that the complainant of this case made his statement because of 
political  rivalry/animosity,  hence  independent  corroboration  of  his 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
12 
 
statement  is  necessary,  which  is  lacking  in  the  case  in  hand.  In  this 
case,  the  complainant  himself  appeared  as  PW-7  and  frankly 
conceded that he and his other family members have been contesting 
elections against the appellant side and in the general elections held 
in years 1988, 1993, 1997 and 2002, their side lost the elections. The 
complainant  admitted  the  registration  of  the  FIR  against  him  for 
tampering with the public record and he also could not prove that the 
appellant  was  a  valid  nominated  candidate.  The  basic  allegation  of 
forging  a  bogus  degree  has  also  not  been  proved.  In  such 
circumstances, it is observed that the prosecution failed to discharge 
its onus to prove the charge of corrupt practice against the appellant 
through independent and convincing evidence.  
21. 
 
In  sequel  to  what  has  been  discussed  above,  we  have 
been persuaded to hold that the prosecution has failed in establishing 
its  case  against  the  appellant  beyond  shadow  of  doubt  while  it  is 
cordial principle of law that benefit of every doubt is to be extended in 
favour of  the accused not as a matter of grace rather as a matter of 
right.  Respectful  reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  on  the  ratio 
decidendi  of  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of 
Muhammad Mansha vs. The State (2018 SCMR 772); wherein it was 
held as under: 
“4. 
 Needless  to  mention  that  while  giving  the  benefit 
of  doubt  to  an  accused  it  is  not  necessary  that  there 
should be many circumstances creating doubt. If there is 
a  circumstance  which  creates  reasonable  doubt  in  a 
prudent  mind  about  the  guilty  of  the  accused,  then  the 
accused  would  be  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  such  doubt, 
not as a matter of grace and concession, but as a  matter 
of  right.  It  is  based  on  the  maxim,  “it  is  better  that  ten 
guilty  persons  be  acquitted  rather  than  one  innocent 
person be convicted” Reliance in this behalf can be made 
upon the cases of Tariq Pervez v. The State (1995 SCMR 
1345),  Ghulam  Qadir  and  2  others  v.  The  State    (2008 
SCMR  1221),  Muhammad  Akram  v.  The  State  (2009 
 
 
Crl. Appeal No.105/2014 
 
 
13 
 
SCMR  230)  and  Muhammad  Zaman  v.  The  State  (2014 
SCMR 749)” 
22. 
 
Moreover,  it  is  golden  principle  of  law  that  the  Court 
ought to let off 100 guilty but should not convict one innocent person 
on  the  basis  of  suspicion.  Resultantly  while  setting  aside  the 
conviction and  sentence  recorded by  the learned  trial  court in  terms 
of  judgment  dated  21.01.2014,  Crl.  Appeal  No.105/2014  filed  by  the 
appellant is accepted in toto as a consequence whereof he is ordered 
to  be  acquitted  of  the  charge  in  case  FIR  No.190/2002,  dated 
26.10.2002,  offence  under  Sections  468,  471,  474,  476,  PPC,  read 
with Section 82 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1976, registered 
at  Police  Station  City  Bhakkar.  Sentence  of  the  appellant  stands 
suspended  vide  order  dated  10.02.2014  passed  in  Crl.  Misc. 
No.1/2014  filed  in  Crl.  Appeal  No.105/2014.  His  surety  stands 
discharged from the liability. 
 
(Sardar Ahmed Naeem) 
(Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi) 
Judge 
Judge 
 
Approved for Reporting 
Riaz 
 
 
 
