Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP 
(Shameer Ahmad v. The State) 
and  
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
(The State v. Shameer Ahmad) 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
       Date of hearing:  18.09.2018 
 
 
           
 
Appellant  by: 
Complainant by:  Mr. Muhammad Afzal Chaudhry, Advocate.  
State by: 
Rana Rizwan Ahmed, Advocate. 
Mr. Asghar Ali Gill, Deputy Prosecutor 
General. 
----------------------------------- 
 
Ch.  Abdul  Aziz,  J.  Shameer  Ahmad  (appellant)  along  with 
another co-accused, namely, Wazeer Ahmad, involved in case FIR 
No.425/2009 dated 11.07.2009 registered under sections 302 & 109 
PPC  at  Police  Station  Baghdad-ul-Jadeed,  was  tried  by  learned 
Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Bahawalpur.  The  learned  trial  court  in 
terms  of  judgment  dated  05.09.2013  while  acquitting  the  afore-
mentioned  co-accused  proceeded  to  convict  and  sentence  the 
appellant in the following terms:- 
“Under section  302 (b) PPC to suffer death sentence. He was 
also  directed  to  pay  compensation  of  Rs.200,000/-  to  the  legal 
heirs  of  deceased  under  section  544-A,  Cr.P.C.  and  in  default 
thereof to undergo RI for one year”. 
 
 
Challenging  his  conviction  and  sentence,  Shameer  Ahmad 
(appellant) filed Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP, whereas 
trial  court  sent  reference  under  section  374,  Cr.P.C.  which  was 
numbered  as  Murder  Reference  No.50  of  2013/BWP  for  the 
confirmation  or  otherwise  of  death  sentence  awarded  to  Shameer 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
2 
Ahmad (convict). Both these matters are being disposed of through 
this single judgment. 
2. 
Succinctly  stated  the  case  of  the  prosecution  as  unveiled  by 
Ameer Mai complainant in FIR (Exh.PE/1) is to the effect that she 
was a resident of Bashir Town, Bahawalpur; that at about 7/8 years 
ago, Mst. Shazia daughter of Manzoor Ahmad contracted marriage 
with Shameer Ahmad son of Allah Yar (appellant); that Mst. Shazia 
obtained  divorce  through  court  by  filing  a  suit  for  dissolution  of 
marriage  and  contracted  marriage  with  Muhammad  Nasir, 
whereupon  Shameer  Ahmad  (appellant)  and  his  brother  Wazeer 
Ahmad  (since  acquitted)  had  developed  grudge  and  started  to 
extend threats to Muhammad Nasir; that on 11.07.2009 at Maghrab 
prayer time, she (complainant) along with her daughter in law Mst. 
Shazia,  her  sons  Muhammad  Sajid,  Muhammad  Abid  and 
Muhammad Nasir, was sitting on the cots lying in the courtyard of 
her  house;  that  in  the  meanwhile  Shameer  Ahmad  (appellant) 
entered into her house and while inquiring from Muhammad Nasir 
about  Bashir,  made  four  consecutive  straight  fire  shots  from  his 
pistol  hitting  at  the  chest  and  left  shoulder  of  Muhammad  Nasir; 
that Shameer Ahmad (appellant) made an attempt to run away from 
the spot by brandishing his pistol; that her sons Muhammad Abid, 
Muhammad Sajid and her husband Bashir Ahmad chased Shameer 
Ahmad  (appellant)  and  apprehended  him  along  with  his  pistol 
having  one  round  in  it;  that  she  and  Mst.  Shazia  took  care  of 
Muhammad Nasir injured who succumbed to injuries at the spot.  
3. 
The  law  was  set  into  motion  on  the  statement  (Exh.PE)  of 
Ameer  Mai  (complainant)  made  before  Ghulam  Rasool  SI  (PW.8) 
during  his  visit  to  the  crime  scene  which  was  sent  to  the  Police 
Station  through  Mubashir  Hussain  1715/C  (not  produced  as 
witness)  for  the  registration of  formal  FIR.  Subsequent  thereto, he 
conducted  spot  inspection  and  took  into  possession  blood  stained 
earth  vide  memo  Exh.PG.  He  also  secured  four  crime  empties  of 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
3 
pistol  (P.1/1-4) vide memo  Exh.PF. He  formally  arrested Shameer 
(appellant) and took into possession pistol .30 bore (P.2) along with 
a  live  round  (P.3)  vide  memo  Exh.PH.  He  handed  over  to  dead 
body  of  Muhammad  Nasir  (deceased)  along  with  injury  statement 
(Exh.PB) and inquest report (Exh.PC) to Shabbir Ahmad 74/C.  
4. 
Prosecution  in  order  to  prove  its  case  against  the  appellant 
and  his  co-accused  produced  ten  PWs  including  Ameer  Mai 
(PW.6) and Muhammad Sajid (PW.7), who are eye-witnesses of 
the  occurrence,  Dr.Ghulam  Mustafa  (PW.2)  who  furnished 
medical  evidence  and  Ghulam  Rasool  SI  (PW.8)  who  is 
Investigating Officer of the case. The remaining witnesses, more or 
less, were formal in nature.  
5. 
Dr.  Niaz  Ahmad  (PW.8)  on  12.07.2009  at  about  11:10  a.m. 
conducted  the  post-mortem  examination  of  Muhammad  Nasir  and 
observed the following injuries:- 
“Injury No.1 
A  lacerated  wound  on  the  top  of  left  shoulder  longitudinal  in 
direction,  gutter  shaped  measuring  3  cm  x  1.5  cm.  Ages  of 
wound were blackish. Around the wound there was blackening 
and  tattooing  measuring  10  x  8  cm.  On  dissection  underline 
skin  and  muscles  were  damaged  only  superficially.  Underline 
wounds were intact and there was no bruising of deep muscles. 
Injury No.2 
 A  lacerated  semi-circular  wound  on  the  middle  of  the  left 
clavical  with  inverted  and  blackish  margins.  On  dissection 
underline wound left clavical is broken in pieces and on tracing 
the  track  the  bullet  passes  through  and  damaging  ascending 
aorta, lower lobe of right lung and laudges in antro lateral side 
of  chest  at  the  lower  level  of  lower  border  of  right  lung  just 
below  the  skin.  The  bullet  was  recovered  and  handed  over  to 
police.  Both  lung  cavities  were  filled  with  blood.  There  was 
slight tattooing around injury No.2 measuring 12 x 10 cm and it 
was entry wound of firearm. 
Injury No.3 
 A lacerated semi-circular wound 1.5 cm x 1 cm margins  were 
black  and  inverted,  moon  was  sounded  by  tattooing.  It  was 
entry wound on the left side of abdomen.  
Injury No.4 
A lacerated semi-circular wound 2.5 cm x 3.5 cm with  everted 
margins.  On  dissection  injury  No.3,  only  underlying  muscles 
were damaged. Abdominal cavity was intact and trace of wound 
was  traced  up  to  injury  No.4,  which  was  exit  wound  of  injury 
No.3.” 
 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
4 
The doctor gave following opinion:- 
“After complete internal and external post mortem examination 
I am  of the opinion that cause of death  was injury  No.2 which 
caused  damaged  to  ascending  aorta    and  right  lung  (vital 
organs)  leads  to  excessive  haemorrhage,  shock  and  ultimate 
death.  Such  type  of  injury  was  sufficient  to  cause  death  in 
ordinary course of life. All injuries were ante-mortem in nature 
and caused by firearm weapon.”  
 
6. 
After  the  conclusion  of  prosecution  evidence,  the  learned 
trial court examined Shameer Ahmad (appellant) under section 342, 
Cr.P.C., who in response to question “why this case against you and 
why the PWs have deposed against you” gave the following reply:- 
“I  was  married  with  Mst.  Shazia  Mai  daughter  of  Manzoor 
Ahmad, caste Bhutta (Taili), resident of Kehror Pakka about 10 
years  prior  to  this  occurrence  who  got  divorced  though  court 
from me on 08.10.2005. I produced copies of plaint titled “Mst. 
Shazia  Bibi  Vs.  Muhammad  Shameer”  Exh.DB,  written 
statement  Exh.DC,  statement  of  Mst.  Shazia  Mai  plaintiff 
Exh.DD and short order and judgment dated 08.10.2005 passed 
by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  Kehror  Pakka  Exh.DE  and 
Exh.DE/1. Thereafter, I had no concern with her and I had also 
no concern whether she remarried or to whom. Said Mst. Shazia 
eloped  with  her  paramour  after  the  occurrence  and  due  to  this 
reason,  she  did  not  appear  as  a  witness  in  this  case.  The 
complainant and her sons had been shown as an eye-witness but 
they  were  present  at  Ameerpur  Sadaat,  Kehror  Pakka,  at  the 
time  of  occurrence  and  they  were  brought  from  Ameerpur 
Sadaat  after  the  occurrence  so  they  are  false  witnesses.  No 
independent  witness  has  been  cited  in  this  case  while  the 
occurrence  was  took  place  in  Bahawalpur  city.  I  have  no 
concern  with  this  occurrence.  I  have  been  roped  falsely  in  this 
case. The complainant of this case (PW.6) is the real mother of 
Muhammad Sajid (PW.7). They are close relatives to each other 
as well as of the deceased while the remaining PWs are Police 
Officials  who  deposed  just  to  strengthen  the  prosecution  story. 
In fact, Mst. Shazia Bibi was present at home and on the asking 
of said Shazia Bibi, the complainant party nominated me in this 
case falsely.” 
 
The appellant neither opted to make statement under section 
340 (2) of Cr.P.C. nor produced any witness in his defence. On the 
conclusion  of  trial,  the  appellant  was  convicted  and  sentenced  as 
mentioned above, hence, the instant appeal and murder reference. 
7. 
It  is  contended  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  case  in 
hand  is  arising  out  of  an  occurrence  which  was  not  promptly 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
5 
reported to police; that during trial ocular account was furnished by 
two witnesses who badly failed to prove their presence at the crime 
scene;  that  even  otherwise  the  narration  of  facts  provided  by  the 
eye-witnesses  is  found  to  be  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  medical 
evidence  brought  on  record  through  Dr.  Ghulam  Mustafa;  that  the 
eye-witnesses  have  contradicted  each  other  on  all  material  points 
which rendered their testimony unworthy of any credence; that the 
motive set up by the prosecution is far-fetched and strongly negated 
from  the  evidence  of  none  other  than  the  prosecution;  that  though 
according to the record Shazia Bibi was the main human of dispute, 
however, at  the eventful time  despite being present at  the place  of 
occurrence  she  received  not  a  single  scratch;  that  the  recovery  of 
pistol  .30  bore  effected  from  the  appellant  suffers  from  multiple 
legal  infirmities;  that  the  provisions  of  section  103,  Cr.P.C.  were 
not  adhered  to;  that  the  report  of  PFSA,  according  to  which  the 
crime  empties  recovered  from  the  spot  were  found  to  have  been 
fired  from  the  pistol  alleged  to  have  been  recovered  from  the 
appellant,  is  also  of  no  significance  as  all  these  articles  were 
forwarded  to  the  expert  on  the  same  date;  that  though  from  the 
plain  reading  of  prosecution  evidence  reasonable  doubt  emerges, 
however,  its  benefit  was  withheld  from  the  appellant  which  is 
against  well  settled  principles  of  Criminal  Jurisprudence.  With 
these  submissions,  it  was  urged  by  the  learned  counsel  that  the 
conviction awarded to the appellant is liable to be set-aside.  
8. 
Conversely,  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  assisted  by 
learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  vehemently  opposed  the 
arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant and argued that  the 
instant  case  is  arising  out  of  a  crime  report  which  was  promptly 
reported  to  the  police;  that  though  the  deceased  received  multiple 
firearm  injuries,  however,  only  the  appellant  was  held  responsible 
and such aspect tentatively reflects upon the credibility of the eye-
witnesses; 
that  the  appellant  was  apprehended  at 
the  spot 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
6 
immediately  after  the  occurrence  and  the  weapon  of  offence  was 
also  recovered  from  him  which  later  was  found  matched  with  the 
empties  recovered  from  the  spot  by  PFSA;  that  during  trial  the 
ocular account was furnished by the witnesses who were inmates of 
the  house  where  this  unfortunate  occurrence  took  place,  hence, 
there  is  no  reason  to  disbelieve  their  depositions;  that  the  medical 
evidence placed on record  is in consonance with the statements of 
eye-witnesses;  that  though  the  eye-witnesses  were  cross-examined 
at  length  by  the  defence, however,  nothing  was  brought  on  record 
which  may  provide  some  reasons  for  false  implication  of  the 
appellant; that the prosecution case got due corroboration from the 
motive  which  was  not  even  denied  by  the  defence;  that  the 
appellant  committed  cold  blooded  murder  of  the  deceased  for  no 
good  reasons  and  that  since  the  guilt  of  the  appellant  stands 
established  on  the  basis  of  confidence  inspiring  prosecution 
evidence, hence he deserves no leniency. With these submissions, it 
was  urged  that  the  conviction  awarded  to  the  appellant  needs  no 
interference from this Court.  
9. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
10.  A  wade  through  the  record  reveals  that  the  case  of 
prosecution is comprising upon ocular account furnished by Ameer 
Mai  and  Muhammad  Sajid  (PW.6  &  7),  the  medical  evidence 
brought on record through Dr. Ghulam Mustafa (PW.2), the motive 
which was canvassed as marriage of Shazia Bibi with Muhammad 
Nasir  (deceased)  after  getting  divorce  from  the  appellant  and  the 
recovery of pistol (P.2).  
11.  The  occurrence  which  formed  basis  of  the  instant  case  took 
place  on  11.07.2009  at  about  Maghrab  prayer  time  in  an  area 
known as Bashir Town situated at a distance of about 2-kilometers 
from  Police  Station  Baghdad-ul-Jadeed.  The  occurrence  was 
reported  to  police  through  the  statement  of  Ameer  Mai  (PW.6) 
made  before  Ghulam  Rasool  SI  (PW.8)  on  his  arrival  at  crime 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
7 
scene  at  about  8:45  p.m.    From  above,  it  evinces  that  the  case  in 
hand  is  arising out  of  a promptly  lodged FIR. It  emerges  from  the 
record that the defence has not brought forward any material which 
may  cast  even  an  iota  of doubt regarding the  claim  of  prosecution 
about the case having been registered at the time mentioned in the 
crime report. Such prompt reporting goes long way in excluding all 
the  hypotheses  of  false  implication,  fabrication  of  facts  etc. 
Similarly,  the  promptitude  in  lodging  the  FIR  is  a  step  forward  in 
establishing  the  presence  of  complainant  and  the  witnesses  on  the 
spot at the time of occurrence. Reliance in this regard can be made 
to the case of Muhammad Raza alias Gulai v. The State (NLR 1997 
Criminal 499). 
12.  According  to  the  detail  of  crime  put  forth  by  prosecution, 
Shazia  daughter  of  Manzoor  Ahmad  entered  into  matrimonial 
contract  with  Shameer  Ahmed  (appellant)  7/8  years  before  the 
murder occurrence. On account of certain matrimonial differences, 
Shazia Bibi filed a suit for dissolution of marriage and got divorce 
from  Shameer  Ahmed  (appellant).  Two  years  thereafter,  Shazia 
Bibi got married with Muhammad Nasir (deceased) which became 
source of annoyance for Shameer Ahmed (appellant). He had been 
expressing  his  resentment  on  the  remarriage  of  Shazia  Bibi  with 
deceased  very  often.  On  the  fateful  evening,  Ameer  Mai  (PW.6) 
along  with  Sajid  (PW.7),  Abid,  Shazia  and  Muhammad  Nasir 
(deceased) was sitting in her courtyard. Suddenly, Shameer Ahmed 
(appellant) entered into the house and asked about uncle Bashir and 
immediately  thereafter  fired  four  pistol  shots  upon  Muhammad 
Nasir  hitting  him  on  his  chest,  shoulders  etc.  Though  Shameer 
Ahmed  (appellant)  tried  to  decamp  from  the  spot  but  was 
overpowered by the witnesses and was also disarmed by them.  
13. 
In  the  afore-mentioned  backdrop,  we  have  meticulously 
scrutinized  the  record  and  have  found  that  the  narrators  of  ocular 
account  are  none  other  than  the  inmates  of  the  house,  where  the 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
8 
murder  occurrence  took  place.  After  evaluating  the  prosecution 
evidence  from  all  angles, it  is  found  by  us  that  nothing  is  brought 
on  record  by  defence  which  may  persuade  us  to  hold  that  the 
witnesses  were  not  residents  of  the  same  house.  Thus,  we  are 
swayed to hold that Ameer Mai and Muhammad Sajid (PW.6 & 7) 
are the most natural witnesses of the occurrence. In support of our 
afore-mentioned  finding, we  are  guided by  the  observations of  the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan expressed in the cases of Sajid 
v. The State (2007 SCMR 1014) and Zulfiqar Ahmad and another 
v.  The  State  (2011  SCMR  492)  wherein  the  inmates  of  the  house 
were termed as natural witnesses. 
 As  per  ocular  account,  Shameer  Ahmed  (appellant)  was 
overpowered  and  nabbed  by  the  witnesses  immediately  after  the 
incident and that too at the crime scene. Not only this, the appellant 
was also disarmed by the witnesses and the weapon of offence was 
snatched  from  him.  Such  stance  of  the  eye-witnesses  stands 
corroborated from the investigation and more particularly from the 
police proceedings mentioned at the bottom of complaint (Exh.PE) 
and FIR (Exh.PE/1). This is another factor which provides strength 
to  the  case  of  prosecution  and  more  importantly  proves  the 
presence  of  eye-witnesses  at  the  spot.  While  holding  so,  we  are 
mindful  of  the  prevailing  social  dilemma  whereby  general  public 
opts  to stay  away  from  such  incidents and  makes no endeavour  to 
intervene, what to talk of apprehending a murderer.  
 
An  in-depth  analysis  of  the  testimony  of  two  eye-witnesses 
reveals that they have burdened the appellant with blame of having 
caused all the firearm injuries to Muhammad Nasir (deceased). We 
consider  it  important  to  mention  here  that  since  the  deceased 
suffered  three  firearm  entry  wounds,  however,  even  then  the 
witnesses  contrary  to  the  prevalent  menace  of  false  implication 
through  wider  net  opted  to  implicate  only  a  single  accused. 
Likewise,  during  their  court  deposition,  the  witnesses  remained 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
9 
stuck  to  their  stance  and  successfully  provided  all  the  features  of 
occurrence  including  its  time, the  manner  of  appellant’s  ingress  in 
the house, the mode of occurrence and the way he was apprehended 
at  the  spot.  We  are  also  impressed  from  the  detail  of  post-
occurrence events provided by the eye-witnesses like the arrival of 
police,  the  time  of  recording  of  statements,  the  shifting  of  dead 
body to the hospital etc. It will not be an over exaggeration to say 
that  both  the  eye-witnesses  stood  firm  by  budging  not  an  inch 
during cross-examination and gave no leverage or concession to the 
defence.  
14.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  called  in  question 
the  credibility  of  eye-witnesses  on  the  basis  of  an  injury  found 
during  autopsy  on  the  left  shoulder  of  deceased  which  was 
measuring  3  x  1.5  cm  and  obsessively  argued  it  to  have  not  been 
caused  by  .30  bore  pistol.  We  have  carefully  attended  to  such 
argument  and  have  found  that  it  relates  to  injury  No.1  which  was 
described  by  doctor  as  a  gutter  shaped  wound.  Such  injury  is  an 
aggravated  form  of  grazed  wound  and  is  in  the  nature  of  furrow 
caused through firearm.  Vincent J.M. Di Maio, M.D. in his book 
“Practical  Aspects  of  Firearms  Ballistics  and  Forensic 
Techniques,  Second  Edition”,  while  embarking  upon  “gutter 
wounds” observed as under:- 
“Tangential  wounds  of  the  skull  have  classically  been  called 
“gutter  wounds”.  In  first-degree  gutter  wounds  only  the  outer 
table of the skull is grooved by the bullet with resultant carrying 
away  of  small  bone  fragments.  In  second-degree  wounds 
pressure waves generated by the bullet fracture the inner table.” 
  
 
Likewise,  Jaising  Prabhudas  Modi  in  his  book  “A 
Textbook of Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology” expounded 
upon the “gutter wound” in the following manner:- 
“If  a  bullet  creases  a  bone,  it  may  produce  a  gutter  with  or 
without  fracturing  it  and  may  or  may  not  give  the  direction  or 
deflection of the bullet.”  
 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
10 
  
When  reviewed  in  the  light  of  above-referred  extracts  from 
medical  jurisprudence,  the  arguments  of  learned  defence  counsel 
holds  no  field.  In  the  given  circumstances,  we  have  arrived  at  an 
irresistible  conclusion  that  the  medical  evidence  is  in  consonance 
with the case of prosecution as emanating from the ocular account.  
15.  We have also adverted to the objection raised by the defence, 
according  to  which,  the  distance  between  appellant  and  deceased 
was shown as sixteen feet in the site plan (Exh.PA), which does not 
coincide  with  the  medical  evidence  in  the  presence  of  blackening 
and  tattooing  on  the  entry  wounds.  Suffice  it  to  say  in  this  regard 
that  site  plan  itself  is  never  regarded  as  a  substantive  piece  of 
evidence  and  can  only  be  used  to  discredit  a  witness  if  he  is  duly 
confronted  with  it.  Admittedly,  during  cross-examination,  the  two 
eye-witnesses were never confronted with the contents of site  plan 
(Exh.PA),  hence,  we  are  not  persuaded  to  draw  any  inference 
adverse to the case of prosecution. If any reference in this respect is 
needed,  it  can  be  made  to  the  case  reported  as  Muhammad  Iqbal 
and  others  v.  Muhammad  Akram  and  another  (1996  SCMR  908) 
wherein  while  diluting  upon  similar  proposition,  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan observed as under:- 
“No  doubt,  in  the  site  plan  it  is  mentioned  that  the  distance 
between the deceased and the place wherefrom they were fired 
at was 32 feet but this will not help the defence either because 
site  plan  is  not  a  substantive  piece  of  evidence  and  cannot  be 
used  to  discard  the  evidence  of  a  witness  unless  he  was 
confronted  with  the  same.  In  the  instant  case  the  eyewitnesses 
were not confronted with this portion of the site plan, and it was 
not  asked  from  them  as  to  whether  or  not  they  had  told  this 
distance to the official who has prepared the site plan.”   
 
16.  The  crux  of  the  above  discussion  can  be  summarized  to  the 
effect  that prosecution  has  successfully  proved its  case  against  the 
appellant  on  the  basis  of  confidence  inspiring  medical  evidence 
which  is  found  to  be  in  line  with  medical  record.  The  two  eye-
witnesses  had  no  animus  against  the  appellant  so  as  to  substitute 
him with the actual culprit.  Last but not the least, apprehension of 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
11 
Shameer  Ahmed  (appellant)  from  the  spot  is  another  factor,  from 
which  we  are  inclined  to  maintain  his  conviction.  However,  we 
have  noticed  certain  extenuating  circumstances,  which  warrant 
awarding of alternate sentence of imprisonment for life provided in 
section 302 (b) PPC. Firstly, it is noticed that the motive canvassed 
by the prosecution, from face of it, appears to be far-fetched. Shazia 
Bibi  entered  into  matrimonial  contract  with  Muhammad  Nasir 
(deceased)  two  years  before  the  murder  occurrence.  Admittedly, 
during this period, no untoward incidence ever took place between 
both  sides.  Likewise,  though  Shameer  was  ex-husband  of  Shazia 
Bibi, however, his  arrival in the  house  was  not taken  unpleasantly 
by  any  of  the  family  member  which  appears  to  be  nothing  but 
strange.  If  at  all,  Shameer  was  having  any  grudge  from  the 
remarriage  of  his  ex-wife  Shazia  then  in  such  circumstances  she 
should have been the primary target of his rage. From these aspects, 
it  can  justly  be  concluded  that  the  immediate  cause  behind  the 
occurrence is shrouded in mystery and as a necessary corollary we 
consider it safe to hold that the motive put forth by the prosecution 
remained unproved. This is settled that failure to prove the motive 
itself warrants the Court to have resort to the alternate sentence of 
imprisonment  for  life.  The  guidance  in  this  respect  can  be  sought 
from  the  case  of  Amjad  Shah  v.  The  State  (PLD  2017  Supreme 
Court  152)  wherein  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  gave 
the following observation:-  
“Notwithstanding  that  that  participation  of  the  appellant  in  the 
commission  of offence is  duly established, his  intention,  guilty 
mind  or  motive  to  commit  the  same  remains  shrouded  in 
mystery and is therefore unproven. In such like cases where the 
motive  is  not  proved  or  is  not  alleged  by  the  prosecution,  the 
Court  for  the  sake  of  safe  administration  of  justice,  adopts 
caution  and 
lack  of  motive  as  a  mitigating 
circumstance for reducing the quantum of sentence awarded to a 
convict.” 
 
treats 
the 
If  any  further  reference  in  this  regard  is  needed,  it  can  be 
made to the cases of Hasil Khan v. The State (2012 SCMR 1936) 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP & 
Murder Reference No.50 of 2013/BWP 
 
12 
and  Zeeshan  Afzal  alias  Shani  v.  The  State  and  another  (2013 
SCMR 1602). 
17. 
In  the  light  of  above  discussion,  we  convert  the  death 
sentence  of  Shameer  Ahmad  (appellant)  into  imprisonment  of  life 
with  the  benefit  of  section  382-B,  Cr.P.C.  However,  the  appellant 
shall  pay  compensation  of  Rs.200,000/-  to  the  legal  heirs  of  the 
deceased  under  section  544-A,  Cr.P.C.  and  in  the  event  of  default 
he shall further undergo simple imprisonment for six months. With 
this  modification  in  the  sentence  of  Shameer  Ahmad  (appellant), 
Criminal Appeal No.365 of 2013/BWP stands dismissed.  
18.  Resultantly,  Murder  Reference  No.50  of  2013/BWP  is 
answered  in  the  negative  and  death  sentence  awarded  to  Shameer 
Ahmad (appellant) IS NOT CONFIRMED. 
 
  (Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
                                Judge 
(Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed) 
                   Judge   
 
 
    
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Najum*  
(Ch. Abdul Aziz) 
 
Judge 
