 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
        Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. Writ Petition No.214219 of 2018 
  
 
 
 
Qamar Aziz etc.  
Versus 
Government of the Punjab, etc.  
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Hearing: 
04.09.2018. 
Petitioner(s) by:  Malik Saleem Iqbal Awan, Advocate 
Respondent(s) by:  Ch.  Sultan  Mehmood,  Assistant  Advocate 
General Punjab. 
Bashir  Ahmad  Goraya,  CEO,  DEA, 
Gujranwala. 
Muhammad  Jamil  Nasar,  A.D.  (Lit)  office 
of CEO, DEA, Gujranwala. 
 
Shahid  Jamil  Khan,  J:-  This  judgment  shall  dispose  of 
this and connected petition assailing order dated 10.05.2018 by 
Secretary  School  Education  Department  upon  a  direction  in  an 
earlier petition.  
 
In  pursuance  of  the  direction  impugned  order  dated 
10.05.2018  was  passed,  operative  part  of  which  is  also 
reproduced:- 
 
“4. 
AND  WHEREAS,  it  revealed  from  perusal  of  the  record 
that  the  sanad  of  Shahadat-ul-Almia  is  not  a  prescribed 
qualification for the post of ESE (Arts), SESE (Arts) & SSE (Arts) 
under the policy ibid. The petitioners’ contention to consider their 
sanad  of  Shahadat-ul-Almia  as  equivalent  to  MA  (Islamiat)  for 
the  post  of  ESE  (Arts),  SESE  (Arts)  and  SSE  (Arts)  is  not 
covered  under  the  policy  ibid.  However,  the  petitioners  could 
avail benefit of their sanad by applying against the post of SESE 
(Arabic)  for  which  “BA  with  Shahadat-ul-Almia”  is  a  prescribed 
academic  qualification.  No  such  equivalence  was  issued  by 
Qualification  Equivalence  Determination  Committee  (QEDC)  of 
School  Education  Department  for  the  sanad  of  Shahadat-ul-
Almia  with  MA  (Islamic  Study/Islamiat)  for  appointment  against 
the  post  of  ESE  (Arts),  SESE  Arts)  and  SSE  (Arts).  Therefore, 
the  decision  of  District  Recruitment  Committee,  Lahore  is  in 
accordance with the Recruitment Policy 2017-18.” 
 
[emphasis supplied] 
W. P. No. 214219 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
2. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submits  that  the 
questions  directed  to  be  addressed  are  not  answered.  It  is 
reiterated  that  petitioners  are  possessing  degree  of  Graduation 
with Sanad of Shahadat-ul-Almia, which was declared equal to 
M.A. Arabic and M.A. Islamic Studies by the Higher Education 
Commission (“HEC”). Petitioners applied for the posts of ESE 
(Arts), SESE (Arts) and SSE (Arts) on the basis of equivalence, 
however, applications were not entertained.  
3.  
Learned  AAG  submitted  that  the  direction  in  earlier 
petition was complied with as the petitioners are held entitled to 
apply  for  the  post  SESE  (Arabic)  for  which  prescribed 
qualification  is  BA  with  Shahadat-ul-Almia.  He  apprised  that 
the  issue  had  finally  been  resolved  by  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 
vide  judgment  dated  09.10.2015  in  Civil  Petition  No.1576  of 
2013  (Muhammad  Ilyas  v  Govt.  of  Punjab  through  Secretary 
Schools Education and others). He also relied upon judgment in 
Government  of  N.W.F.P.,  Health  and  Social  Welfare 
Department  through  its  Secretary  v  Dr.  Sheikh  Muzaffar  Iqbal 
and  others  (1990  SCMR  1321),  to  submit  that  no  vested  right 
can  be  claimed  against  the  eligibility  fixed  by  competent 
authority.    
 
In  rebuttal,  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submitted 
that  judgment  of  learned  Single  Bench  of  this  Court  in  W.P. 
No.3774  of  2009  was  not  considered.  He  placed  reliance  on 
judgment  in  Sanaullah  Khan  and  others  v  District  Returning 
Officer,  Mianwali  and  others  (PLD  2005  SC  858).  Finally,  he 
has  read  relevant  paragraph  from  letter  dated  23.01.2018  by 
HEC to submit that petitioners are entitled to be  considered for 
appointment against the posts in question on the basis of Sanad 
of Shahadat-ul-Almia with B.A. 
4. 
Heard. Record perused.  
W. P. No. 214219 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
5. 
It  is  not  denied  that  petitioners  applied  for  the  posts  of 
ESE  (Arts),  SESE  (Arts)  and  SSE  (Arts)  on  the  basis  of 
Shahadat-ul-Almia  with  degree  of  Graduation,  whereas  the 
equivalence  given  by  HEC  vide  letter  dated  23.01.2018  is  for 
Arabic/Islamic  Studies.  Whereas  respondent  has  admitted,  in 
the impugned order, that petitioners are entitled to apply for the 
post of SESE (Arabic).   
6. 
The  proposition  of  petitioners’  right  of  being  considered 
for appointment against a post for teaching Islamic Studies has 
already been settled by the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court 
in  Muhammad  Ilyas’  case  (Supra),  operative  part  of  which  is 
reproduced:- 
to 
According 
the  HECP 
the  equivalence  of 
“4. 
the 
petitioner’s  Sanad  to  M.A.  (Arabic)/Islamic  Studies  renders  him 
fit for teaching the subjects of Arabic/Islamic Studies in Colleges 
and  Universities. It is contended  by the learned counsel for the 
petitioner that the subject of Islamic Studies in the curriculum of 
Colleges  and  Universities  is  the  same  as  ‘Islamiat’  in  the 
Secondary Schools; therefore the petitioner could not have been 
disqualified from appointment.  
The  letter  dated  14.04.2009  specifically  states  that  the 
5. 
candidate holding the Sanad as held by the petitioner is eligible 
to  apply  for  the  post  of  SESE  (Arabic)  in  Secondary  Schools. 
The clear inference is that for the purposes of Secondary School 
education,  the  Provincial  Government  does  not  consider  the 
Sanad  held  by  the  petitioner  to  be  suitable  for  teaching  the 
subject  of 
Islamiat.  The  Provincial  Government’s  decision 
concerns  a  policy  issue  on  which  subject  this  Court  is  not  well 
versed to give  a finding.  In this behalf,  we are fortified  with the 
rule  laid  down  in  the  case  of  Dossani  Travels  Pvt.  Ltd  vs. 
Travels Shop Pvt. Ltd. (PLD 2014 SC 1).  
[emphasis supplied] 
 
 
7. 
It 
is  discernible  from 
the  verdict 
that  prescription               
of  qualification  by  Provincial  Government  is  a  policy  matter.   
The 
issue  before  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  was  of         
appointment  against  a  post  for 
teaching  Islamic  Studies         
which  was  decided  otherwise  despite 
the 
fact 
that         
equivalence was granted by HEC. It can safely be deduced that to 
have  equivalence  by  HEC  is  an  independent  entitlement, 
however,  to  apply  for  post  on  the  basis  of  such  equivalence  is 
W. P. No. 214219 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
another issue and the Hon’ble Supreme Court has laid down that 
it relates to policy matter, therefore, cannot be interfered with. To 
fix  an  educational  qualification  or  eligibility  criteria  for 
appointment against a particular post is a policy  matter, because 
only  employer  knows  the  requirements  and  can  determine 
suitability of qualification for that post.  
In  Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  through  Chief 
Secretary,  Peshawar  and  others  v  Hayat  Hussain  and  others 
(2016  SCMR  1021),  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  held  that  the 
determination  of  eligibility  for  promotion  is  an  administrative 
matter and policy decision falling within the exclusive domain of 
Government  and  that  no  vested  right  is  involved.  Relevant 
excerpt is reproduced:- 
“8. 
It  is  a  settled  proposition  of  law  that  the  Government  is 
entitled  to  make  rules  in  the  interest  of  expediency  of  service 
and  to  remove  anomalies  in  Service  Rules.  It  is  the  Service 
Rules Committee which has to determine the eligibility criteria of 
promotion  and  it  is  essentially  an  administrative  matter  falling 
within  the  exclusive  domain  and  policy  decision  making  of  the 
Government  and  the  interference  with  such  matters  by  the 
Courts 
that  no  vested  right  of  a 
Government employee is involved in the matter of promotion or 
the  rules  determining  their  eligibility  or  fitness,  and  the  High 
Court  has  no  jurisdiction  by  means  of  writ  to  strike  it  down  as 
held by this Court in the case of The Central Board of Revenue, 
Government  of  Pakistan  v.  Asad  Ahmad  Khan  (PLD  1960  SC 
81), the relevant portion therefrom is reproduced herein below:- 
is  not  warranted  and 
  
"In our opinion the High Court made the above order 
without  taking  into  consideration  all  the  factors 
relevant  to  the  case,  namely,  in  the  first  place  the 
taking  out  of  the  post  of  Deputy  Superintendent  of 
the  category  of  class  III,  to  which  the  petitioners 
belong  amounted  to  abolition  of  the  post  and  its 
upgrading  on  a  higher  scale  of  pay  to  a  creation  of 
the  new  post;  appointment  to  which  required  a 
stricter 
test  of  efficiency  by  a  competitive 
examination.  Besides,  all  the  Inspectors  were  given 
the  right  to sit  in the  examination  for  any  number  of 
times  to  qualify  themselves  for  promotion.  At  the 
same  time  the  pay  scale  of  those,  who  could  not 
succeed, was raised to the limit of Rs. 350, namely, 
the  same  pay  as  that  of  a  Deputy  Superintendent 
when  it  was  a  class  III  post.  In  the  circumstances  it 
W. P. No. 214219 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
cannot be said that any rights of the petitioners were 
infringed, which they could enforce by a writ petition. 
The  Government  has  every  right  to  make  rules  to 
raise the  efficiency of  the  services,  and if  no  vested 
right  is  denied  to  a  party,  the  High  Court  had  no 
jurisdiction to interfere by means of a writ. (emphasis 
supplied)” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
 
In  Mumtaz  Ali  Bohio  and  24  others  v  Federal  Public 
Service  Commission  through  Chairman  at  Islamabad  and 
another  (2002  SCMR  772),  it  was  ruled  that  ‘Public  Service 
Commission could make any alteration in the recruitment policy 
before finalization of appointments’. 
 
The judgment in Dr. Sheikh Muzaffar Iqbal’s case (supra) 
relied  upon  by  learned  AAG  is  in  line, wherein  it  was  held  that 
Government has right to enhance the qualification and standards 
for  recruitment  and  that  petitioners  could  not  claim  vested  right 
against retrospective application of such rules.   
8. 
If  the  Government  has  right  to  enhance  the  qualification 
and  fix  standards  for  appointment  against  a  post,  whether  this 
right can be taken away, as is being claimed by the petitioners, on 
the  basis  of  equivalence  granted  by  HEC.  To  answer  this 
proposition  and  binding  force  of  the  equivalence  granted  by  it, 
provision  of  Section  10  of  the  Higher  Education  Commission 
Ordinance,  2002  are  examined,  subsection  (1)  of  which  is 
reproduced; 
 
 
 
“10. 
Powers and Functions of the Commission. 
(1)  For  evaluation,  improvement,  and  promotion  of 
higher  education,  research  and  development,  the 
commission may” 
Power  of  HEC  is  to  the  extent  of  higher  education,  its 
evaluation,  improvement,  promotion,  alongwith  research  and 
development.  HEC 
is  a 
regulator 
for  maintenance  and 
improvement  of  higher  education  under  the  Federation.  The 
clauses  (a)  to  (y)  under  this  subsection  are  describing  the 
W. P. No. 214219 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
functions, which cannot be interpreted in any way to enhance the 
powers given by the legislature in this subsection. In other words 
the  equivalence  certificate  issued  under  clause  (o)  of  this 
subsection  cannot  be  taken  as  binding  advice  to  a  Government 
for  recruitment  against  any  post.  The  clause  (o)  is  also 
reproduced; 
 
 
 
“(o) 
determine  the  equivalence  and  recognition  of  degrees, 
diplomas  and  certificates  awarded  by  institutions  within 
the country and abroad.”  
Purpose  of  this  equivalence,  essentially,  is  evaluation, 
promotion  or 
improvement  of  higher  education  and  not 
recommendation  for  appointment  against  any  post.  Clause  (q)  
assigns  a  function  of  ‘providing  guidelines  for  Individual 
Institutions  (Educational  Institutions  not  the  Government)  for 
minimum  criteria  and  qualifications  etc.  for  appointment  and 
service  of  faculty.  Specific  use  of  the  words  “Individual 
Institutions”  exclude  the  Government  and  Schools,  Colleges 
being run by the Government.  
 
The  equivalence  granted  vide  letter  dated  23.01.2018  by 
HEC  might  be  a  recommendation  for  Individual  Education 
Institution  under  clause  (q),  but  cannot  be  held  as  binding  for 
recruitment  by  the  Government.  Operative  part  of  the  letter  is 
reproduced; 
“With  reference  to  your  application  dated  January  22,  2018  on 
the subject, it is informed that as per decision of the Equivalence 
Committee of erstwhile UGC, the Higher Education Commission 
recognizes the Sanad “Shahdatul Almiya fil Uloomal Arabia wal 
Islamia”  held  by  you  from  Tanzeem  ul  Madaris,  Ahle  Sunnat, 
Lahore as equivalent to M.A Arabic/Islamic Studies involving 16-
year of schooling for the purpose of teaching Arabic and Islamic  
Studies  in  Educational  Institutions  and  for  pursuing  higher 
studies.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
 
The  petitioners  in  this  case  have  applied  for  the  posts  of 
ESE  (Arts),  SESE  (Arts)  and  SSE  (Arts),  which  do  not  come 
within the purview of this equivalence certificate. Even otherwise 
W. P. No. 214219 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
this  equivalence 
is  for  ‘Educational  Institutions’  and  for 
‘pursuing higher studies’.  
 
9. 
Courts are not well versed technically to call in question or 
replace  the  prescribed  educational  qualification  by  competent 
authority  or  Government  under  ordinary  circumstances.  In  a 
recent 
judgment,  National  Engineering  Services  Pakistan 
[NESPAK] (Pvt.) Limited and others v Kamil Khan Mumtaz and 
others  (2018  SCMR,  211),  the  Apex  Court  while  endorsing  the 
view in Doassani Travels’ Case held;  
“49….  it  was  even  otherwise  beyond  the  jurisdictional 
domain  of  the  High  Court  in  exercise  of  its  powers  under 
Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan,  1973  to  delve  into  highly  technical  and  purely 
policy  issues  which  were  better  left  to  be  dealt  with  by 
experts  having  relevant  knowledge,  training  and  expertise 
in  their  respective  fields  and  the  competent  authorities 
authorized and empowered by law to do so.”  
 
 
In  Doassani  Travels’  Case  it  is  enunciated  that  a  policy 
decision  by  competent  authority,  cannot  be  annulled  unless  any 
illegality,  arbitrariness  or  malafide  is  established.  In  Messrs  Al-
Rahman  Travels  and  Tours  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  and  others  v  Ministry  of 
Religious  Affairs,  Hajj,  Zakat  and  Ushr  through  Secretary  and 
others  (2011  SCMR  1621), the  August  Court held  that  a  policy 
can  only  be  called  in  question  if  it  is  violative  of  fundamental 
rights or is in conflict with any provision of law.  
10.  The  judgment  relied  upon  by  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioners in W.P. No.3774 of 2009 by learned Single Bench of 
this  Court  has  admittedly  been  passed  without  discussing  the 
above  quoted  judgment  in  Muhammad  Ilyas’  case  (supra)  by 
Apex Court.  
So far judgment by Apex Court in Sanaullah Khan’s case 
is  concerned,  the  same  was  admittedly  passed  on  Election 
matter. Operative part of which is reproduced hereunder:- 
W. P. No. 214219 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
“28. 
Thus, it is concluded that:- 
If “Sanad” i.e. Shahadat-ul-Almia-Fil Uloom-Ul-Arabia-
(i) 
wal-Islamia obtained by a candidate from a “Deem-Madrasah” 
(Seminary),  which  is  duly  recognized  by  UGC/HEC  and  its 
holder had passed examination of additional subjects as it has 
been  mentioned  in  Notification  dated  17th  November,  1982 
(No.8-418/Acad/82/128) issued by UGC/HEC and equivalence 
certificate  has  also  been 
issued  by  Higher  Education 
Commission  under  section  10(0)  of  the  Higher  Education  M 
Commission  Ordinance,  2002,  then  it  is  acceptable  for  the 
purpose  of  employment  and  for  any  other  purpose  including 
the elections of Local Government.   
 
[emphasis supplied] 
The  underlined  part  of  this  judgment  appears  to  be  an 
obiter dictum, which no doubt is binding, yet this judgment has 
not  addressed  whether  Government  or  any  other  employer  is 
bound to offer employment on this basis, whereas the judgment 
in  Muhammad  Ilyas’  case,  quoted  supra,  clearly  says  that  to 
prescribe  an  educational  qualification  for  particular  post,  is  a 
policy  matter,  which  cannot  ordinarily  be  interfered  by  the 
Courts.  
11.  The  judgment  in  Muhammad  Ilyas’  case  (supra)  by  the 
Apex  Court  is  binding  on  the  respondents  and  on  this  Court 
under  Article  189  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan,  1973  which  has  addressed  the  proposition,  therefore, 
the impugned order is found to have been passed in accordance 
with this judgment. 
This petition alongwith connected petition is dismissed. 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
 
 
        (Shahid Jamil Khan) 
                     Judge 
 
 
Tahir Noor* 
 
Approved for Reporting 
 
Judge 
