 
 
Form No.HCJD/C-121 
                       ORDER SHEET 
           IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
 
 
   JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
LAHORE. 
Criminal Appeal No.1611/2014. 
The State 
Vs 
Karam Dad Bhatti 
 
S. No. of  order/ 
Date of order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where necessary 
proceedings 
proceeding 
02.10.2018.  Mr.  Muhammad  Amjad  Rafiq,  Additional  Prosecutor 
 
General for the state. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Akram  Pasha,  Advocate  for  Bank  of 
Punjab. 
This  appeal  has  been  directed  against  the  judgment  dated 
28.02.2014  passed  by 
learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge, 
Hafizabad, whereby, on acceptance of appeal filed by the accused/ 
respondent,  against  the  judgment  of  his  conviction,  he  has  been 
acquitted  in  case  FIR  No.924/2009  dated  21.09.2009  registered 
under section 489-F PPC at police station City Hafizabad. 
2. 
Briefly the facts of the case are that above FIR was registered 
on  the  complaint  of  Rana  Saleem  Zaeem  ur  Rehman,  Manager  of 
the Bank of Punjab, Hafizabad, to the effect that one Qadir Bakhsh, 
Proprietor  of  M/s.  Mian  Qaiser  Bakhsh  &  Co.,  Hafizabad  Road, 
Jalalpur  Bhattian,  obtained  a  loan  amounting  to  Rs.4,35,00,000/-, 
but did not return the same. On repeated demands of the Bank, he 
issue  a  Cheque  No.88945  dated 15.02.2009 to  be drawn on MCB, 
Jalalpur  Bhattian  for  payment  of  the  land.  The  said  cheque  was 
deposited  for  encashment  but  was  dishonoured  and  returned  with 
the  Memo  slip.  Ultimately  the  FIR  was  got  lodged  under  section 
489-F PPC, after investigation report under section173 Cr.P.C. was 
submitted  before  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate  Section  30, 
Hafizabad  and  after  trial,  the  accused/respondent  was  convicted 
under  section  489-F  PPC  and  sentenced  to  rigorous  imprisonment 
for three years with a fine of Rs.5,00,000/-, in case of non-payment 
of  fine,  to  undergo  simple  imprisonment  for  one  year.  The  said 
 
 
judgment was appealed against and as detailed in para No.1 of this 
order,  the  same  was  allowed,  resulting  in  setting-aside  the 
conviction and sentence of the accused/respondent. 
3.  With reference to findings recorded by the learned appellate 
court  in  para-9  of  the  impugned  judgment,  when  a  question  as 
posed  to  the  learned  Additional  Prosecutor  General  whether  the 
original  cheque  was  produced  before  the  court  or  not,  the  learned 
law  officer  came  out  with  the  plea  that  in  his  statement  under 
section  342  Cr.P.C.  the  accused/respondent  had  not  denied  the 
issuance  of  cheque  and  further  that  the  original  cheque  was  in 
possession  of  the  Manager,  who  appeared  before  the  court  and 
submitted  photo  copy  of  the  same  cheque,  therefore, there  was  no 
need  to  produce  the  original  cheque  and  thus  the  findings  of  the 
learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  are  erroneous.  I  am  afraid  the 
primary  and  foremost  duty  and  obligation  always  lies  with  the 
prosecution  to  put  and  prove  its  case  against  the  accused  beyond 
any shadow of doubt. If any lacuna is left in the prosecution case, 
the same cannot be covered by placing reliance on statement of the 
accused recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C. It is now a well settled 
proposition  of  law  that  when  prosecution  evidence  is  rejected  in 
entirety  (as  the  case  in  the  instant  appeal,  as  held  by  the  learned 
trial court), the statement of the accused under section 342 Cr.P.C. 
has to be accepted in toto and without scrutiny. Reliance is placed 
on the case “The State versus Muhammad Hanif, etc” (1992 SCMR 
2047). 
4. 
As  regards  explanation  about  non-production  of  original 
cheque,  Section  76  of  the  Qanoon-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  is  the 
provision  which  permits  secondary  evidence,  but  while  invoking 
said  provision  certain  conditions,  as  provided  in  the  said  section 
itself  must  exist.  For  ready  reference  Section  76  above,  is 
reproduced hereunder:- 
“76. Cases in which secondary evidence relating to document 
may be given.  
Secondary  evidence  may  be  given  of the  existence,  condition 
or contents of a document in the following cases:— 
 
(a)  when  the  original  is  shown  or  appears  to  be  in  the 
possession  or  power  of  the  person  against  whom  the 
document  is  sought  to  be  proved,  or  of  any  person  out  of 
reach of, or not subject to, the process of the Court; or of any 
person legally bound to produce it; and when, after the notice 
mentioned in Article 77 such person does not produce it; 
(b)  when  the  existence,  condition  or  contents  of  the  original 
have  been  proved  to  be  admitted  in  writing  by  the  person 
against whom it is proved or by his representative-in-interest; 
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the 
party  offering  evidence  of  its  contents  cannot,  for  any  other 
reason not arising from his own default or neglect, produce it 
in reasonable time;  
(d)  when,  due  to  the  volume  or  bulk  of  the  original,  copies 
thereof  have  been  made  by  means  of  microfilming  or  other 
modern devices; 
(e)  when  the  original  is  of  such  a  nature  as  not  to  be  easily 
movable; 
(f) when the original is a public document within the meaning 
of Article 85; 
(g) when the original is a document of which a certified copy 
is  permitted  by  this  Order,  or  by  any  other  law  in  force  in 
Pakistan, to be given in evidence; 
(h) when the originals consists of numerous accounts or other 
documents which cannot conveniently be examined in Court, 
and  the  fact  to  be  proved  is  the  general  result  of  the  whole 
collection; 
(i)  when  an  original  document  forming  part  of  a  judicial 
record  is  not  available  and  only  a  certified  copy  thereof  is 
available,  certified  copy  of  that  certified  copy  shall  also  be 
admissible as a secondary evidence.” 
 
 
On the face of it, firstly the instant case was not covered by any of 
the  above  conditions,  secondly,  if  for  the  sake  of  argument  it  is 
admitted to be a case where secondary evidence could be permitted, 
even  then  permission  of  the  court  must  have  been  specifically 
obtained  to  bring  on  record  secondary  evidence,  but  here  in  this 
case  the  record  does  not  reflect  that  even  an  attempt  was  made  to 
get  permission  of  the  court  to  bring  on  record  secondary  evidence 
of  the  disputed  cheque.  Furthermore  as  shall  be  seen  from  the 
findings recorded by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, what to 
talk  of  getting  formal  permission  of  secondary  evidence,  only  a 
photo copy of the disputed cheque was produced, which practice is 
least  permissible  in  law.  Therefore,  in  the  absence  of  specific 
permission  of  the  court  to  produce  secondary  evidence,  the  photo 
copy  could  not  be  said  to  be  an  evidence  to  be  read  against  the 
 
 
accused.  Furthermore,  as  held  by  the  learned  trial  court  even  the 
photo  copy  of  the  cheque  Ex.PE  showed  that  it  was  a  crossed 
cheque in the name of M/s. Qadir Bakhsh & Co. and about 1 ½ inch 
above the relevant column bearing the name M/s. Qadir Bakhsh & 
Co.  the  word  “Manager  BOP-Hfd  A/C”  were  mentioned  in  the 
blank  space  of  the  said  cheque  from  which  it  is  evidence  that  the 
said  words  were  added  subsequently  which  were  not  even  in  the 
relevant  column.  There  can  be  no  other  opinion  that  a  crossed 
cheque could only be issued in the name of one person and not in 
the name of two or more different persons having differing account 
number. Therefore, the findings recorded by the learned trial court 
even on factual aspects are correct and no exception can be taken to 
such findings. 
 5. 
In  addition  to  the  above,  earlier  the  proposition  with  regard 
issuance  of  cheque  by  a  private  person  in  favour  of  a  bank  for 
return of a loan, dishonor of the cheque and registration of criminal 
case  under  section  489-F  PPC,  came  under  consideration  before 
this  Court  in  “Muhammad  Asif  Nawaz  versus  Additional  Sessions 
Judge  and  others”  (PLJ  2013  Lahore  606)  and  after  detailed 
discussion  with  reference  to  the  relevant  statute  and  the  case  law, 
this  court  made  certain observations, the  relevant  portions thereof, 
are reproduced hereunder:- 
“6. 
Section  20  of  the  Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of 
Finances)  Ordinance,  2001  is  the  provision  relating  to 
certain  offences  and  its  sub-section  (4)  deals  with  dishonest 
issuance  of  a  cheque  towards  repayment  of  a  finance  or 
fulfillment  of  an  obligation  which 
is  dishonoured  on 
presentation.  The  punishment  of  said  offence  has  been 
provided  as  one  year  or with  fine  or with  both. Therefore,  it 
becomes quite obvious that in the matter, like the one in hand, 
the  jurisdiction  only  lies  with  the  Banking  court  established 
under  the  Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances) 
Ordinance,  2001  and  not  before  any  other  court,  until  and 
unless  the  same  is  provided  by  law,  by  which  the  financial 
institution is established.  
7. 
 
 
------------------------------ 
------------------------------ 
------------------------------ 
 
 
8. 
Although  by  amendment  in  PPC,  section  489-F  PPC 
has been inserted after promulgation of Financial Institutions 
(Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance,  2001  but  this  insertion 
would  also  not  give  it  an  overriding  effect  over  special  law, 
for  the  reason  that  the  special  law  is  passed  before  or  after 
the  general  act  does  not  change  the  principle.  Where  the 
special law is later, it will be regarded as an exception to, or 
a  qualification  of,  the  prior  general  act;  and  where  the 
general  act  is  later,  the  special  statute  will  be  construed  as 
remaining an exception to its terms, unless repealed expressly 
or by necessary implication.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------- 
If the legislators had an intention otherwise, they could at the 
very  beginning  formulate  or  afterwards  could  amend  the 
Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance, 
2001 in such  a manner so as to bring this offence within the 
definition  of  “cognizable”  offence.  In  such  circumstances, 
when  the  amendment  was  not  made  in  the  Ordinance,  ibid, 
the  legislators  explicitly  made  their  intention  clear  that  with 
regard to the matters between financial institutions and their 
customers,  this  enactment  shall  hold  the  field  and  section 
489-F PPC (dishonest issuance of cheque) will be applicable 
to  all  other  persons  in  general  except  those  covered  by  the 
Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance, 
2001. The purpose by not amending the Financial Institutions 
(Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance,  2001  appears  to  be  that 
normally  in  any  case  of  loan  from  financial  institution,  the 
loans  are  protected  by  mortgage,  warranties  and  covenants 
made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  customer  to  a  financial 
institution, 
representations,  warranties  and 
covenants  with  regard  to  the  ownership,  mortgage,  pledge, 
hypothecation or assignment of, or other charge on assets or 
properties,  and  the  financial  institution  can  recover  the 
amount  by  adopting  appropriate  process  under  any  of  the 
above mode.” 
including 
6. 
In continuation to the above discussion it may be mentioned 
here that the legal proposition with regard to issuance of cheques by 
the  customers  to  the  financial  institutions  for  return  of  loans, 
dishonour  thereof  and  registration  of  FIRs  under  the  provisions  of 
Section  489-F  of  the  PPC  by  the  banks  against  their  customers, 
came under judicial scrutiny before this Court through various writ 
petitions,  revision  petitions  or  under  section  561-A  Cr.P.C., 
claiming that  action  could  only be taken against them under  the  
Ordinance,  2001    (in  particular  Section  20  thereof)    and  no  other 
 
 
law,    and    exclusive  jurisdiction  vests  with  the  Banking  Courts 
constituted under the said Ordinance. Through common judgments, 
the    learned  High  Court  dismissed  the    matters  holding  that 
concurrent  jurisdiction  vests    in    the    Banking  Courts    constituted 
under  the  Ordinance,  2001,    the  Special  Courts  constituted  under  
the  ORBO,  the  ordinary  criminal courts  and the Agency, and the 
jurisdiction  of  the  latter  two  courts    and  the  Agency  would  not  be 
ousted  on  account  of  Sections    4  and  20  of  the  Ordinance,  2001. 
Thereafter,  the  customers  approached  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 
of  Pakistan  and  vide  judgment  reported  as  “SYED  MUSHAHID 
SHAH  and  others  versus  FEDERAL  INVESTMENT  AGENCY  and 
others”  (2017  SCMR  1218),  after  exhaustive  discussion  the  apex 
Court set-aside the judgment of this court by hold that:- 
“19.        In  conclusion,  we  find  that  the  provisions  of  the 
Ordinance, 2001 are to have an overriding effect on anything 
inconsistent contained  in any other law for the time being in 
force,  including  the  ORBO,  the  Code  (read  with  the  PPC)  
and  the  Act,  1974    (read  with  the  Ordinance,  2016).    In 
essence, whenever an offence is committed by a customer of a 
financial 
the 
Ordinance, 2001, it could only be tried by the Banking Courts 
constituted  thereunder  and  no  other  forum.    The  Special 
Courts under the ORBO, the ordinary criminal Courts under 
the  Code  and  the  Agency  under  the  Act,  1974  read  with  the 
Ordinance, 1962 would have no jurisdiction in the matter.” 
the  contemplation  of 
institution  within 
  
As  such, the legal  proposition now  stands  settled on the point that 
whenever  an  offence  is  committed  by  a  customer  of  a  financial 
institution  within  the  contemplation  of  the  Ordinance,  2001,  it 
could  only  be  tried  by  the  Banking  Courts.  The  Special  Courts 
under 
the  Offences 
in  Respect  of  Banks  (Special  Courts) 
Ordinance, 1984, the ordinary criminal courts under the Cr.P.C. and 
the  Agency  under  the  Federal  Investigation  Agency  Act,  1974, 
would have no jurisdiction in the matter. 
7. 
For  the  above  reasons,  the  prosecution  case  apparently  was 
full of patent illegalities right from its very inception i.e. lodgment 
of  the  FIR,  which  could  not  have  been  done  in  the  light  of  above 
cited  pronouncement  of  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan.  The 
 
 
learned Additional Sessions Judge, therefore, was fully justified in 
setting 
aside 
the 
conviction 
judgment 
against 
the 
accused/respondent  and  I  do  not  see  any  legal  or  factual  flaw 
therein. This appeal, therefore, is dismissed in limine.  
  
 (Muhammad Qasim Khan) 
Judge. 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 Javed* 
