JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Civil Revision No. 1505 of 2009 
Mst. Khurshid Bibi, etc.   Versus  Nazar Abbas, etc. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of hearing:  21.05.2018 & 24.05.2018 
 
Petitioner(s) by:  M/s  Syed  Kalim  Ahmad  Khursheed  and 
Zaka Ur Rahman, Advocates 
 
Respondent(s) by:  M/s  Dr.  Abdul  Basit  and  Inam  Ullah  Khan 
Aziz, Advocates 
 
 
 
 
Mr.  Zafar  Iqbal  Kalanori,  Advocate  for  the 
applicant 
Mr.  Wasim  Mumtaz  Malik,  Additional 
Advocate  General  with  Khuram  Shahzad 
Naqvi  ADLR,  Rai  Ali  Hasnain  ADLR  and 
Ashar Hameed Sial, SG1 
 
 
SHAHID  BILAL  HASSAN-J:  Succinctly,  the  respondents 
No.1  to  4  instituted  a  suit  for  declaration  against  the  present 
petitioners  and  respondents  No.5  to  13  by  maintaining  that  Syed 
Muhammad  Shah  son  of  Syed  Alam  Shah  breathed  his  last  in 
1932 leaving behind Nazar Hussain Shah (son), Mst. Jind Waddi 
(widow),  Mst.  Ghulam  Fatima,  Mst.  Satbharai  and  Mst.  Ghulam 
Sakina (daughters). It was alleged that the parties were governed 
by Sharia. Muhammad Shah procured the mutations of inheritance 
in  respect  of  lands  situated  in  villages  Anara,  Kot  Dharama  and 
Gangra,  whereby  Mst.  Jind  Waddi,  Mst.  Ghulam  Fatima,  Mst. 
Satbharai  and  Mst.  Ghulam  Sakina  were  excluded  from 
inheritance. It was alleged that the plaintiffs/respondents No.1 to 4 
came to know about the above said entries two months ago while 
the cause of action arose for the first time on 19.12.1933, as such, 
C.R.No.1505 of 2009 
2 
the  respondents  No.1  to  4/plaintiffs  being  the  alleged  legal  heirs 
of Ghulam Fatima daughter of Muhammad Shah instituted the suit 
on 26.08.2004. It was asserted that they were owners to the extent 
of 1/5th share and mutation No.101522 attested on 19.12.1933 was 
procured  through  fraud  and  misrepresentation.  The  possession 
was also claimed by the plaintiffs. 
 
The  suit  was  contested  by  the  present  petitioners.  It  was 
admitted  that  Mst. Ghulam  Sakina daughter  of  Muhammad Shah 
was  alive  while  their  version  was  that  they  were  governed  by 
custom  and  mutation  of  inheritance  was  sanctioned  under  the 
customary  law. Out  of  the  divergent  pleadings of  the parties,  the 
learned  trial  court  framed  issues.  Both  the  parties  adduced  their 
respective  oral  as  well  as  documentary  evidence.  On  conclusion, 
the learned trial Court vide impugned judgment and decree dated 
30.05.2008  decreed  the  suit.  The  present  petitioners  feeling 
aggrieved  went  in  appeal.  The  learned  appellate  Court  vide 
impugned  judgment  and  decree  dated  12.06.2009  decided  the 
appeal  in  the  terms  that  the  suit  cannot  be  dismissed  by  setting 
aside the impugned decree; and that impugned decree is varied in 
the  terms  that  the  plaintiffs  and  defendants  No.13  and  14  are 
entitled  to  inheritance  and  that  they are  entitled  to  the  entries  in 
the Revenue Record. Hence, the instant civil revision. 
2. 
 
Syed  Kalim  Ahmad  Khursheed,  Advocate,  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioners  has  argued  that  the  impugned 
judgments  and  decrees  are  against  law  and  facts  of  the  case  on 
record.  The  parties  were  governed  by  customary  law  especially 
when  Mai  Jindwaddi,  predecessor  of  Mst.  Ghulam  Fatima,  Mst. 
Ghulam  Sakina  and  Mst.  Satbharai  appeared  before  the  Revenue 
Officer on 13.06.1933 and it was decided by the Revenue Officer 
that  the  parties  were  governed  by  the  custom,  but  this  aspect  of 
the matter has been omitted from the consideration of the learned 
Courts below. Further argued that the plaintiffs were estopped to 
C.R.No.1505 of 2009 
3 
bring the suit when their predecessor in interest did not challenge 
the validity of the inheritance mutations in their life time, as such 
the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  have  been  rendered  on 
wrong assumption of facts and law and are result of non-reading 
of evidence on record. Section 2(A) of the Muslim personal Law 
Shariat  Application  Act  is  not  applicable  in  this  case,  but  the 
learned Courts below have wrongly construed law on the subject 
and  erred  in  law  while  passing  the  impugned  judgments  and 
decrees.  Maintained  that  the  respondents  No.1  to  4/plaintiffs 
failed to prove on record that the parties were governed by Sharia 
instead of Custom, thus, the impugned judgments and decrees are 
based on surmises and conjectures. Submitted that the findings on 
issues  especially  issue  No.7-a  are  not  sustainable  under  law  as 
both the learned Courts below have omitted to consider the rulings 
of the Apex Court of the country. Same is the situation with issues 
No.1 to 5 and 7, which have wrongly been decided by the learned 
Courts below. Added that the question of limitation has not been 
considered, because the mutation, challenged in suit was attested 
in the year 1933 and the suit was instituted on 26.08.2004, which 
was  badly  barred  by  limitation.  Contended  that  the  learned 
appellate Court while deciding issue No.6 has erred in law and has 
wrongly  relied  upon  case  law  referred  under  the  said  issue. 
Material illegalities and irregularities have been committed by the 
learned Courts below while passing the impugned judgments and 
decrees, which has resulted in miscarriage of justice; therefore, by 
allowing  the  civil  revision  in hand,  the  impugned  judgments  and 
decrees  may  be  set  aside;  consequent  whereof  suit  of  the 
respondents  No.1  to 4  may  be dismissed,  with  costs,  throughout. 
Relies on Ahmad Din v. Muhammad Shafi and others (PLD 1971 
Supreme  Court  762),  Secretary  to  Government  (West  Pakistan) 
Now N.-W.F.P. Department of Agriculture and Forests, Peshawar 
and  4  others  v.  Kazi  Abdul  Kafil  (PLD  1978  Supreme  Court 
C.R.No.1505 of 2009 
4 
242),  Muhammad  Shafi,  etc.  v.  Sultan  (2008  SCJ  181),  Atta 
Muhammad  v.  Maula  Bakhsh,  etc.  (2008  SCJ  147),  Muhammad 
Hussain,  etc.  v.  Muhammad  Shafi,  etc.  (2008  AC  379)  &  (2008 
AC 526) & (2008 SCMR 230), Gul Rehman v. Gul Nawaz Khan 
(2009 SCMR 589), Bashir Ahmed v. Abdul Aziz and others (2009 
SCMR 1014), Ch. Muhammad Ashraf and others v. Mst. Gulshan 
Ara  and  others  (2008  YLR  650-Lahore),  Abdul  Rashid  v. 
Muhammad  Yaseen  and  another  (PLJ  2010  SC  1059),  Ghulam 
Haider  and  others  v.  Murad  through  Legal  Representatives  and 
others (PLD 2012 Supreme Court 501), Muhammad Rustam and 
another v. Mst. Makhan Jan and others (2013 PSC 439-Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan)  &  (2013  CLJ  463),  Mst.  Grana  through 
Legal  Heirs  and  others  v.  Sahib  Kamala  Bibi  and  others  (PLD 
2014  Supreme  Court  167),  Dr.  Muhamad  Javaid  Shafi  v.  Syed 
Rashid  Arshad  and  others  (PLD  2015  Supreme  Court  212), 
Nazim-Ud-Din  and  others  v.  Sheikh  Zia-Ul-Qamar  and  others 
(2016  SCMR  24),  and  Muhamad  Azam  through  LRs.  v.  Abdul 
Qayyum Khan and 2 others (2017 CLC Note 48-Lahore).  
3. 
 
On the contrary, Dr. Abdul Basit, Advocate learned 
counsel  for 
the  respondents  has  supported 
the 
impugned 
judgments and decrees, which have been passed concurrently, and 
has prayed for dismissal of the civil revision in hand. 
4. 
5. 
 
 
Heard. 
It  is  an  admitted  fact  that  at  the  time  of  death  of 
deceased Muhammad Shah his all three daughters namely Ghulam 
Sakina, Satbharai and Ghulam Fatima alongwith her widow Mst. 
Jindwadi  were  alive  besides  Nazar  Hussain  Shah  (son)  and  the 
same  was  the  situation  when  the  mutation  of  inheritance  was 
attested  but  none  of  them  was  incorporated  in  the  inheritance 
mutations  in  dispute  bearing  No.10,  15  and  22  attested  on 
09.12.1933  pertaining  to  Mauza  Anarra,  Mauza  Kot  Dharaman 
and Mauza Kanghrra, respectively. It was stance of the petitioners 
C.R.No.1505 of 2009 
5 
that 
their 
family  was  governed  by  customary 
law  but 
astonishingly  the  D.Ws.  including  one  of  the  defendant  No.5 
namely  Aamir  Shah  (D.W.3)  admitted  that  both  the  parties 
belonged  to  the  most  renowned  and  highly  respectable  spiritual 
family of Hazrat Shah Jewna who was a saint and a strict follower 
of  the  injunctions  of  Holy  Quran  and  Sunnah.  Moreover,  neither 
Hazrat  Shah  Jewna  nor  his  descendants  either  followed  any  un-
Islamic  ritual  and  even  they  did  not  persuade  anybody  else  who 
was spiritually related to him to follow the same and for whole of 
his life Hazrat Shah Jewna and his descendants always persuaded 
their  followers  and  disciples  to  follow  Quran  and  Sunnah  in 
respect  of  all  the  matters  of  life.  When  all  these  facts  had  been 
admitted by the petitioners, how could it be said that their family 
was  governed  by  customary  law,  rather  it  was  established  on 
record that the family of the parties was governed by Islamic Law, 
which provides that on  death of a Muslim, his property devolves 
upon  his  legal  heirs  as  per  their  shares  ordained  by  Holy  Quran 
and  Muhammadan  Law.  Thus,  it  was  established  on  record  that 
disputed  inheritance  mutation  was  got  entered  with  mala  fide 
while  joining  hands  with  the  revenue  officer  as  at  the  time  of 
preparation  of  pedigree  table  the  daughters  and  widow  had  not 
been  shown;  thus,  the  observation  rendered  by  the  learned  Court 
below  especially  the  learned  trial  Court  that  all  the  practice  was 
done  only  to  deprive  the  daughters  and  widow  of  deceased 
Muhammad Shah from their valuable rights collusively and it had 
rightly been held by the learned trial Court that all the daughters 
and widow of deceased Muhammad Shah were entitled to inherit 
his property according to their shares. In Mst. Shahro and others 
v.  Mst.  Fatima and others (PLD  1998  Supreme Court 1512),  it 
was invariably held: 
‘Plaintiffs being female heirs of deceased landowner 
could  not  be  deprived  of  their  right  in  property  left 
C.R.No.1505 of 2009 
6 
by  deceased  by  illegal  mutation  sanctioned  at  the 
behest of male heirs.’ 
In the said judgment, it was further held that:- 
‘It  has  been  held  in  several  decisions  by  this  court 
and  is  now  well-settled  that  possession  of  one  co-
sharer  or  co-owner  is  for  benefit  of  all  other  co-
sharers  and  the  mere  fact  that  mutations  had  been 
attested  in  favour  of  some  of  the  co-sharers  should 
not extinguish the title of the other co-sharers. It has 
also  been  held,  time  and  again,  that  entries  in  the 
revenue record of rights do not create or extinguish 
title  but  are  a  mere  evidence  thereof.  In  Ghulam 
Ali’s  case  (Supra)  it  had  been  held  that  adverse 
entries  in  the  revenue  record  and  non-participation 
in  the  profits  in  the  property  would  not  amount  to 
ouster of the co-sharers as wrong mutation confer no 
right 
in  property, 
the  revenue  record  being 
maintained  only  have  the  purpose  of  ensuring 
realization of land revenue.’ 
Apart from this, in Mst. Fazal Nishan and others v. Ghulam Qadir 
and  others  (1992  SCMR  1773),  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court 
held:- 
‘Last 
full  owner 
(deceased)  having  acquired 
agricultural land under custom from a Muslim prior 
to  15  March  1948,  would  be  deemed  to  have 
inherited  under  Muslim  Personal  Law;  his  heirs 
after  his  death  would  inherit  in  accordance  with 
Muslim  Law  whether  they  were  male  or  female 
heirs.’ 
Same is the situation with case law reported as Mst. Ghulam Janat 
and  others  v.  Ghlam  Janat  through  legal  heirs  and  others  (2003 
C.R.No.1505 of 2009 
7 
SCMR 362), rather in this judgment, the Hon’ble Apex Court of 
the country further held:- 
‘Under section 2-A, it was declared that a male heir 
of deceased Muslim will be deemed to be full owner 
thereof  meaning  thereby  that  he  shall  be  deemed  to 
have  inherited  the  property  not  under  custom  with 
limitations  on  his  powers  to  transfer  but  under  the 
Mohammadan Law, as such, he was deemed to have 
inherited the property under Mohammadan Law as a 
consequence  of  which  he  could  not  be  held  to  have 
acquired  ownership  rights  in  the  entire  estate  but 
shall  have  to  be  deemed  to  be  the  full  owner  to  the 
extent of his share.’ 
When  the  daughters  and  widow  were  co-sharers  in  the  disputed 
land  to  the  extent  of  their  share  since  very  beginning  thus  their 
suit  was  not  barred  by  limitation,  especially  when  after  death  of 
Muhammad  Shah  the  property  was  devolved  upon  them  and  it 
was  of  no  importance  that  their  ownership  was  not  recorded  in 
mutation  of  inheritance;  thus,  the  question  with  regard  to 
limitation  was  also  rightly  adjudicated  and  considered  by  the 
learned Courts below. 
 
So  far  as  the  copies  of  mutations  exhibited  on  record  as 
Ex.D1 to Ex.D7 are concerned, it is suffice to observe that none of 
these  mutations  discloses  that  the  same  were  attested  following 
the customary law, thus, the same have rightly been discarded by 
the learned trial Court. 
6. 
 
Pursuant  to  the  above  discussion,  both  the  learned 
Courts  have  rightly  evaluated  evidence  on  record  and  have 
reached  to  a  just  conclusion,  concurrently,  that  the  plaintiffs/ 
respondents are entitled to inherit the land owned by Muhammad 
Shah  deceased  and  when  there  appears  no  misreading  and  non-
reading  of  evidence,  the  concurrent  findings  on  facts,  howsoever 
C.R.No.1505 of 2009 
8 
erroneous,  cannot  be  interfered  with  as  has  been  held  in 
judgments  reported  as  Muhammad  Farid  Khan  v.  Muhammad 
Ibrahim, etc. (2017 SCMR 679), Mst. Zaitoon Begum v. Nazar 
Hussain and another (2014 SCMR 1469) and CANTONMENT 
BOARD through Executive Officer, Cantt. Board Rawalpindi v. 
IKHLAQ AHMED and others (2014 SCMR 161). 
7. 
 
The  case  law  relied  upon  by  the  learned  counsel 
for  the  petitioners,  with  utmost  respect  to  the  same,  has  no 
relevance to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case in 
hand, thus, it is not helpful to the petitioners’ case. 
8. 
 
In  view  of  the  above,  the  findings  of  the  learned 
appellate Court that only plaintiffs and defendants No.13 & 14 are 
entitled  to  inheritance  and  they  are  entitled  to  the  entries  in 
revenue  record  are  modified  as  such  that  Nazar  Hussain  Shah 
(son),  Mst.  Jind  Waddi  (widow),  Mst.  Ghulam  Fatima,  Mst. 
Satbharai and Mst. Ghulam Sakina (daughters) or their legal heirs, 
as  the  case  may  be,  are  entitled  to  inherit  the  property  left  by 
Muhammad Shah deceased. 
9. 
 
During  pendency  of  the  instant  civil  revision, 
Zulfiqar  Ahmad  an    Asim  Nisar  filed  C.M.No.6-C  of  2016 
seeking  their  impleadment  under  Order  I,  Rule  10  of  the  CPC, 
claiming  themselves  to  be  bona  fide  purchasers  with  value 
without  notice  of  some  portion  of  the  disputed  land.  The  said 
application  has  been  resisted  by  the  revision  petitioners.  It  is 
evident  from  the  record  the  applicants  namely  Zulfiqar  Ahmad 
and Asim Nisar purchased the land in dispute during pendency of 
the proceedings in the suit, thus, the transaction is hit by doctrine 
of lis pendens and the applicants are not necessary party, because 
they  will  step  into  the  shoes  of  their  vendors.  Thus,  by  placing 
reliance  on  2008  SCMR  1024  and  PLD  1993  SC  292,  the 
application bearing No.C.M.6-C of 2016 stands dismissed. 
C.R.No.1505 of 2009 
9 
10. 
 
For the foregoing reasons, the civil revision in hand, 
with above said modification, stands dismissed with no order as to 
the costs. 
 
M.A.Hassan 
SHAHID BILAL HASSAN 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Announced in open Court on ___________. 
Judge 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
Judge 
