 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Stereo. H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No.630 of 2014 
Mujahid Islam @ Zahid  @ Zahidu 
versus  
The State etc. 
 
 
Criminal Revision No.471 of 2014 
 
Atta Muhammad 
 
Date of hearing 
 
 
The Appellant by  
 
 
The Complainant by  
versus           Mujahid Islam, etc. 
 
 
29.03.2019 
Mr. Muhammad Zubair Khalid 
Chaudhary, Advocate. 
M/s Khadim Hussain Sidhu & Tahir 
Mahmood Mughal, Advocates. 
The State by 
======= 
 
Syed Muhammad Anees, District 
Public Prosecutor. 
 
 
Asjad Javaid Ghural, J.     Through Criminal Appeal No.630 of 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
under Section 410 Cr.P.C. appellant Mujahid Islam alias Zahid alias Zahidu 
has challenged the vires of judgment dated 26.03.2014 passed by the learned 
Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Nankana  Sahib  in  case  FIR  No.147  dated 
02.04.2013,  in  respect  of  offences  under  Sections  376  &  364-A  PPC, 
registered at Police Station,  Mangtanwala, District Nankana Sahib whereby 
he was convicted and sentenced as under:- 
 
Under Section 364-A PPC 
Imprisonment  for  life  and  to  pay  fine  of  Rs.50,000/-,  in  default  thereof,  to 
further undergo simple imprisonment for six months. 
Under Section 376 PPC  
 
Imprisonment  for  life  and  to  pay  fine  of  Rs.50,000/-,  in  default  thereof,  to 
further undergo simple imprisonment for six months. 
He was held entitled to the benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. and 
all the sentences were ordered to run concurrently. 
 
2. 
Complainant  Atta  Muhammad  has  preferred  Criminal  Revision 
No.471  of  2014  seeking  enhancement  of  sentence  of  respondent  No.1/ 
appellant, which shall also be decided through this common judgment. 
Crl. Appeal No.630/2014 
Crl. Revision No.471/2014 
 
2 
3. 
The  appellant  has  alleged  to  have  committed  forcible  sexual 
intercourse  with  Mst.  Ifra  Atta,  a  minor  daughter  of  the  complainant  Atta 
Muhammad (PW-8) on 02.04.2013 when she was present in the school after 
closing  hours.  Muhammad  Boota  S.I.  carried  out  the  investigation,  got 
conducted  medico-legal  examination  of  the  victim  on  03.04.2013  and 
recorded  the  statements  of  the  witnesses  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.  He 
arrested  the  appellant  on  the  same  day,  got  conducted  his  potency  test.  He 
recorded the statement of the victim on 12.04.2013 after getting permission 
from  the  Medical  Officer  and  upon  conclusion  of  investigation  found  the 
appellant  involved in this occurrence. 
4. 
At  the  commencement  of  the  trial,  learned  trial  Court  had  framed  a 
charge against the appellant to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed to be 
tried.  
5. 
The  prosecution  produced  11-witnesses.  The  appellant 
in  his 
statement recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C., had denied and controverted 
all  the  allegations  of  fact  leveled  against  him.    He  did  not  opt  to  make 
statement under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C., however he produced two witnesses 
in his defence.   
6. 
Learned  trial  Court,  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial,  had  convicted  and 
sentenced  the  appellant  as  stated  above.  Hence,  this  appeal  and  the 
connected criminal revision.  
7. 
I have heard learned counsel for the appellant, learned District Public 
Prosecutor  appearing  for  the  State  assisted  by  the  learned  counsels  for  the 
complainant and perused the record.  
8. 
Atta Muhammad (PW-8), complainant/father of victim  Ifra Atta runs 
the law  in  motion  while  stating  that  her  daughter  Ifra  Atta  was  studying  in 
second  class  at  Government  Girls  Primary  School,  Mangu-Taru.  On  the 
fateful day, she did not return till 03:15 p.m., he fell worried and reached her 
school  alongwith  one  Waris  but  she  was  not  available  there.  When  they 
reached near the back side of the wall of the school, they heard shrieks and 
weeping and saw over the wall that the appellant was committing rape with 
his  daughter  in  the  field.    He  alongwith  Waris  while  scaling  over  the  wall 
proceeded  towards  the  place  of  occurrence,  the  appellant  made  a  fire  shot 
Crl. Appeal No.630/2014 
Crl. Revision No.471/2014 
 
3 
with his pistol and made his escape good. They attended the victim, who was 
lying smeared with blood, took her on the roadside, made a call for vehicle 
and while boarding in the car they took her to the police station. Thereafter, 
in the company of one constable they took the victim to Rural Health Center 
Natha,  then  District  Headquarter  Hospital,  Nankana  Sahib  where  she  was 
provided  first aid  and  referred  to  Lahore.    After  admission of the  victim  in 
the Children Hospital, Lahore he came back and got recorded his statement 
to the police.  Ifra Atta (PW-9)/victim aged about 08-years had deposed the 
circumstances stating therein that on 02.04.2013 when she came at the main-
gate  of  the  school  uncle  Mujahid  Islam  (appellant)  was  present,  “present 
before me in the Court”, was standing there.  He asked her to give “bair” and 
took  her  to  the  backside  of  the  school,  took  out  his  pistol,  she  started 
weeping, he threatened to kill her in case of weeping, then he removed her 
Shalwar as well as his own Shalwar and after lying her down on the ground, 
committed rape with her. She felt pain, bleeding started and cried due to pain 
but the appellant slapped her.  In the meanwhile, her father and uncle came 
there, the appellant took out his Shalwar and pistol and while threatening his 
father  made  an  ineffective  fire  shot  and  succeeded  to  flee  away  from  the 
place  of  occurrence.  Her  father  took  her  to  the  hospital  where  she  was 
operated  5/6  times  and  then  she  came  back  to  her  house.    She  was  still 
feeling  pain  and  had  to  go  for  urination  time  and  again  due  to  that  very 
reason  and  was  constrained  to  wear  pampers.  Both  the  eye  witnesses  were 
cross-examined  by  the  defence  at  full  length  but  they  remained  consistent 
inter-se  and  supplemented  each  other  in  minute  detail  of  the  incident  qua 
time,  date,  place,  mode  and  manner  of  the  occurrence,  the  identity  of  the 
appellant and his role for committing rape with the victim.  
9. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  sought  acquittal  on  following 
points:- 
i.  The  complainant got registered the case with the delay of 7/8 hours, 
which  was  an  afterthought  story  and  possibility  cannot  be  ruled  out 
that the same was lodged after deliberation and consultation. 
Crl. Appeal No.630/2014 
Crl. Revision No.471/2014 
 
4 
ii.  The case was registered against one Zahid alias Zahidu  whereas the 
appellant’s name was Mujahid Islam.  The appellant being resident of 
the  same  locality,  near  to  the  house  of  the  complainant  and  his 
misidentification as to the name creates some doubt. 
iii.  Report  of  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency  had  been  received  with 
negative result. 
iv.  The  appellant  took  a  specific  plea  of  alibi,  which  remained               
un-attendant by the trial Court.  
v.  At  the  time  of  medical  examination  of  the  victim  she  had  given  the 
history of rape that when she left the school, a boy caught hold of her 
and while putting his hand on his mouth took her aside and committed 
Zina with her and due to excessive bleeding she cried and one women 
rescued her. 
10.  The point-to-point findings are that:- 
(i) 
The  complainant  and  one  Waris  had  seen  the  appellant  committing 
Zina  with  the  complainant’s  minor  daughter,  she  was  smeared  with 
blood,  they  took  her  on  the  road,  called  a  taxi  and  straightway 
proceeded to the police station without any further delay. Thereafter, 
in  the  company  of  one  constable  they  took  the  victim  to  the  Rural 
Health  Center  Natha  then  to  District  Headquarter  Hospital  Nankana 
Sahib  and  then  due  to  her  critical  condition,  she  was  referred  to 
Children  Hospital,  Lahore.  The  delay,  in  such  state  of  affairs,  was 
neither  fatal  for  the  prosecution  nor  any  beneficial  for  the  defence. 
The complainant got lodged a Rapt No.12 (Ex.DD) on 02.04.2013 at 
05:20 p.m. prior to his proceedings to the hospital, which shows that 
he  brought  the  victim  to  the  police  station  on  the  same  day  with  the 
allegation  that  at  about  04:00  p.m.  she  was  about  to  leave  for  home 
after  closing  of  the  school,  one  Zahid  son  of  Basharat  resident  of 
“Deh” had committed Zina-bil-jabar with the victim.  The wording of 
this Rapt recorded by the Moharrir was exactly identical as alleged by 
the  complainant  in  the  crime  report.  From  bare  reading  of  the  said 
rapt,  which  was  recorded  at  05:20  p.m.  on  the  same  day,  shows  that 
Crl. Appeal No.630/2014 
Crl. Revision No.471/2014 
 
5 
the question of delay in reporting the matter to report for getting some 
legal assistance exists nowhere. 
(ii)  The  appellant  urged  a  question  that  the  original  rapt  and  the  crime 
report  was  registered  against  one  Zahid  alias  Zahidu,  whereas  the 
appellant’s  original  name  was  Mujahid  Islam.  It  has  been  observed 
that  the  appellant  was  resident  of  the  same  village,  same  area  and 
Mohallah and both the parties were known to each other since birth. It 
is  quite  common  that  some  people  in  our  society  are  known  with 
different  names  other  than  the  names  mentioned  in  the  documents, 
which is Childrenly not known to the public. The appellant was well-
identified by the victim while making statement before the trial court 
that  he  was  the  only  person,  who  had  committed  forcible  sexual 
intercourse  with  her.    The  complainant  made  statement  before  the 
learned  trial  court  that  he  raised  objection  before  the  police  that  the 
name  of  the  appellant  was  written  as  Zahid  alias  Zahidu  instead  of 
Mujahid  Islam  and  the  police  assured  him  to  correct  the  same,  he 
moved  application  in  that  regard  however,  he  clarified  that  the 
appellant  and  his  father  had  3/4  nick  names.  The  name  of  the 
appellant was mentioned as Mujahid Islam alias Zahid alias Zahidu in 
the  documents  prepared  during  investigation,  at  the  time  of  framing 
the  charge  by  the  trial  court  and  thereafter  the  appellant  himself 
mentioned his same name in his statement recorded under Section 342 
Cr.P.C.    In  such  a  scenario  when  every  document  reflects  the 
appellant’s  name  as  Mujahid  Islam  alias  Zahid  alias  Zahidu  then  the 
question does not  arise to make any objection that why the appellant 
was  named  in  the  crime  report  only  with  nick  name.    There  is  no 
doubt  in  my  mind  rather  there  is  a  clarity  after  perusing  the  entire 
record  that  Mujahid  Islam  was  the  person  who  was  called  with  the 
name of Zahid alias Zahidu.  
(iii)  Dr.  Uzma  Rana,  WMO,  (PW-4)  conducted  the  medical  examination 
of  the  victim  on  02.04.2013  at  07:55  p.m.  and  observed  that  the 
victim’s  shirt  and  Shalwar  both  were  heavily  blood-stained,  she  was 
confused  and  very  depressed  at  the  time  of  her  examination.  She 
Crl. Appeal No.630/2014 
Crl. Revision No.471/2014 
 
6 
observed (i) A lacerated wound measuring 3 x 1.5 cm at the junction 
of labia majora on lower side extending towards the anus, (ii) Tears, 
laceration, abrasions, swelling were present at the private parts, (iii) 
Hymen was badly rupture and there was heavily vaginal bleeding with 
clots.  Four  vaginal  swabs  were  taken  from  the  vagina,  three  for 
chemical examiner and one for DNA test. The internal injuries could 
not  be  assessed  due  to  excessive  bleeding  from  vagina.  The  patient 
was  referred  to  Children  Hospital,  Lahore  due  to  her  precarious 
condition. After receiving operation notes of the victim, she observed 
that  as  per  operation  notes,  from  Pad’s  Wards  surgery  from  children 
Hospital,  Lahore  there  was  lot  of  damage  extending  from  anal  verge 
to  cervix  including  laceration  lot  of  mucosa  and  presence  of  lot  of 
blood,  which  declared  as  extreme  of  crime.  In  such  condition  of  a 
baby  girl,  how  it  could  be  believed  that  no  rape  was  conducted  with 
the  victim  while  relying  on  the  negative  report  of  the  Chemical 
Examiner.   
(iv)  Learned counsel for the appellant submits that undoubtedly, the victim 
was  raped  in  a  brutal  manner  but  the  appellant  was  not  the  person, 
who  had  committed  the  offence,  there  may  be  someone  else  and 
during cross-examination to the victim and her father the defence put 
the  suggestion  that  one  Naveed,  a  cousin  of  the  victim  was  actual 
offender  but  the  complainant  involved  the  appellant  in  this  case 
falsely  just  to  save  the  skin  of  said  Naveed.  This  argument  has  no 
substance.  The  appellant  was  the  sole  perpetrator  against  whom  the 
victim  herself  and  her  father  raised  finger  and  none  else.  Even  there 
was no occasion for the complainant to falsely implicate the appellant 
in a case of family honour and where the future of a young baby was 
at stake. 
(v)  Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  diverted  the  attention  of  this 
Court  towards  the  appellant’s  plea  of  alibi  while  relying  upon  the 
document Mark-A i.e. the roll number slip showing that the appellant 
was appearing in annual examination of the Board of Intermediate and 
Secondary  Education,  Lahore  at  Center  “Government  Higher 
Crl. Appeal No.630/2014 
Crl. Revision No.471/2014 
 
7 
Secondary  School  Mod  Kunda  (Nankana  Sahib)”  and  on  the  fateful 
day he had to appear in the examination of Subject (Pakistan Studies) 
and  the  time  mentioned  therein  was  01:30  to  03:30  p.m.  but 
surprisingly  the  said  document  had  never  been  produced  by  the 
appellant  before  the  Investigating  Officer  to  verify  the  factum  as  to 
whether  he  had  appeared  in  the  examination  or  not.    If  it  was  so,  it 
would have been easier for the Investigating Officer to verify from the 
center  and  record  the  statement  of  examiner/invigilators  qua  the 
appellant’s arrival in the center and time of leaving the school.  There 
were  many  factor  which  could  have  brought  on  record  to  paint  the 
clear  picture  with  regard  to  the  appellant’s  participation  in  the  crime 
or  his  innocence.    Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  though  had 
produced  a  photo  copy  of  provisional  result  intimation  showing  that 
the  appellant  had  obtained  11  marks  in  the  said  paper.  I  have  gone 
through  the  result  card,  which  shows  that  the  accused/appellant  had 
obtained  03-marks  in  Urdu,  04-Marks  in  English,  04-marks  in 
Islamyat,  11-marks  in  Pakistan  Studies,  12-marks  in  Children 
Mathematics,  04-marks  in  Children  Science,  07-marks  in  Advanced 
Islamyat  Studies  and  04-marks  in  Punjabi.    Meaning  thereby,  if  for 
the  sake  of  arguments  the  appearance  of  the  appellant  is  admitted, 
even  then  the  student  is  always  allowed  to  leave  the  examination 
center after half an hour from the initial time and the distance between 
the  place  of  occurrence  and  the  examination  center  was  hardly  4/5 
kilometers,  which  was  not  far  away  to  make  the  alleged  offence 
impossible.  I  am  aware  of  the  fact  that  this  photocopy  of  result 
intimation  has  no  evidentiary  value  at  all  but  if  it  is  taken  into 
consideration, even then the documents of roll number slip (Mark-A) 
and photo copy of result intimation get no favour for the appellant and 
the same are not sufficient to discard the eye witnesses especially the 
victim with whom this brutal act had been committed by the appellant. 
(vi)  Learned counsel has argued that the victim herself given the history of 
rape  before  the  Medical  Officer  that  one  boy  took  her  aside  and 
committed  Zina-bil-Jabr  with  her,  due  to  pain  she  cried  and  when 
Crl. Appeal No.630/2014 
Crl. Revision No.471/2014 
 
8 
there  was  excessive  bleeding,  a  woman  came  there  and  rescued  her 
but the accused fled away.  In that regard specific questions were put 
by the defence itself and the victim clarified the actual position while 
stating  that  “lady  doctor  medically  examined  her  at  District 
Headquarter  Hospital,  Nankana  Sahib.  I  could  not  record  statement 
before  the  doctor.  Volunteer  stated  doctor  obtained  my  thumb 
impression  and  due  to  pain  I  could  not  record  anything  before  the 
Medical Officer in which I have not named accused Mujahid Islam as 
culprit”.    In  reply  to  another  question  she  deposed  that  it  was  not 
remember to her as to how many days her father remained with her at 
the Children Hospital, Lahore because she was not in her senses. She 
had also shown ignorance that after how many days she regained her 
senses.  In such critical condition when the Medical Officer had stated 
that there was profusely bleeding and due to her medical condition she 
was  referred  to  Children  Hospital,  Lahore  then  how  it  could  be  said 
that she  had narrated  said history,  which is  being  taken  as shelter by 
the defence. 
11.  Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  further  pointed  out  that  the 
victim  got  recorded  her  statement  belatedly  after  about  10-days  of  the 
occurrence, which speaks volume with regard to its sanctity.  This fact was 
clarified  by  Muhammad  Boota  S.I.  (PW-11)  while  deposing  that  he  visited 
Children  Hospital,  Lahore  for  recording  the  statement  of  the  victim  on 
05.04.02013 but he was not permitted by the doctor because she was not in a 
position  to  make  statement  and  then  once  again,  he  visited  Children 
Hospital, Lahore on 12.04.2013 for seeking permission, which was allowed 
and he recorded her statement through application Ex.PM. This shows that it 
was beyond control of the victim to make statement on the day of occurrence.  
12.  This should not be lost sight of the fact that learned Judge, who tried 
the case has mentioned in Paragraph No.25, at page No.13 of the judgment 
impugned  that  “It  is  pertinent  to  mention  here  that  whenever  accused  and 
the  victim  appeared  jointly  in  the  Court,  victim  started  weeping  and  she 
became so frightened that she took refuge on the back side of her mother”. 
This observation of the learned Presiding Officer conducting the trial, clearly 
Crl. Appeal No.630/2014 
Crl. Revision No.471/2014 
 
9 
depicts  the  mental  condition  of  the  victim  due  to  the  act  of  the  appellant 
faced by her in this occurrence. 
13.  Having  looked  into  the  evidence  from  four  corners,  I  am  of  the 
considered  view  that  the  prosecution  has  been  able  to  prove  the  charge 
against  the  appellant  through  cogent,  reliable  and  confidence  inspiring 
evidence.    Both  the  eye  witnesses  including  the  victim  herself  are  quite 
natural  and  straightforward  raising  their  finger  towards  none  else  but  the 
appellant  being  a  sole  perpetrator.  In  such  like  cases  of  a  single  accused 
substitution is always considered to be a rare phenomenon. It is tradition of 
our  society  to  conceal  such  like  offences,  as  it  is  difficult  to  approach  the 
police station while taking the minor girl in the lap smeared with blood with 
the allegation of rape committed by some body to take the stigma forever not 
only for the family but also damaging the future of a minor girl.  The ocular 
account  is  supported  with  the  medical  evidence.  The  appellant  crossed  the 
limits ascribed by Allah Almighty, in a brutal manner and does not deserve 
any  sympathy  of  this  Court.  While  going  through  the  evidence  from  the 
four-corners,  I  have  no  legitimate  exception  to  differ  with  the  opinion 
arrived at by the trial Court qua the conviction and sentence of the appellant.  
14.  For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the  appeal  in  hand  is  devoid  of 
any force, the same stand dismissed. 
Crl. Revision No.471 of 2014 
15.  For the reasons recorded hereinabove, the criminal revision in hand is 
without any merit, the same stand dismissed in limine.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
           Sadheer Ahmed* 
                                                                   (Asjad Javaid Ghural) 
 
                    Judge 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
        Judge 
