ORDER SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Writ Petition No.174343/2018. 
Major (R) Muhammad Zulfiqar Ali      Vs.    NAB etc. 
 
S.No. of 
Order/ 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order  with  signature  of  Judge  and  that  of  parties  or  counsel 
where necessary 
Proceeding 
 
   6.3.2018. 
 
Mr.  S.M.  Zeeshan  Mirza,  Advocate  assisted  by    
Mr. Zahir Abbas, Advocate for the Petitioner. 
Mr.  Arif  Mehmood  Rana,  Special  Prosecutor  for 
NAB (on Court’s call). 
 
This constitutional  petition assails the  vires of order 
dated  10.2.2018  passed  by  the  learned  Accountability  Court 
No.3,  Lahore,  whereby  he  declined  the  request  of  the 
Petitioner to postpone the decision of ACR No.65/2008 till the 
maturity of ACR No.06/2010 and to decide both the references 
through a consolidated judgment. 
2.  
Brief  facts  giving  rise  to  this  constitutional 
petition  are  that  the  NAB  authorities  received  numerous 
complaints  against the management of Punjab Small Industries 
Corporation  Employees  Cooperative  Housing  Society, 
Lahore  (the  "Society"). The competent authority authorized 
an inquiry into these complaints  which was subsequently 
upgraded  to  investigation.  The  allegations  against  the 
management  were  not  only  of  massive  corruption  but 
also  of  diverse  nature.  Nevertheless,  they  could  be 
categorized  under  two  heads,  i.e.  (a)  illegal  sale  of  the 
Society's  land  and  misappropriation  of  sale  proceeds,  and 
(b)  misuse  of  authority  and  commission  of  fraud  in 
allotment  of  plots  of  the  Society  for  which  two 
independent investigations were ordered. Eventually, two 
separate  references  bearing  ACR  No.65/2008  and  ACR 
W.P.No.174343/2018. 
- 2 - 
No.06/2010  were  filed  in  the  Accountability  Court  which 
are presently pending before  Accountability  Court  No.3, 
Lahore. The Petitioner is the ex-General Secretary of the 
Society and an accused in both these references. He made an 
application  before the  learned  Accountability  Court  with 
following prayers: 
"Under  the  expounded  facts  and  submissions,  it  is  most 
humbly prayed that in the greater interest of justice, both the 
references bearing No.06/10 and reference No.65/08 may be 
decided through a consolidated/single judgment or at least 
the judgments be pronounced simultaneously. 
It is further prayed that in compliance of the order passed by 
August Supreme Court and for the decision desired for qua 
the  distinguished  characters  or  similarities  the  instant 
reference  which  is  at  final  stage  may  be  adjourned  till  the 
similar stage of the connected Reference No.06/10 and both 
may be decided on the day." 
The  learned  Accountability  Court  dismissed  the  aforesaid 
application vide impugned order dated 10.2.2018. Aggrieved, 
the Petitioner has filed the instant petition before this Court. 
3.  
The learned counsel for the Petitioner contended that 
ACR No.65/2008 and ACR No.06/2010 were inter-connected and 
intertwined. NAB  had  no  legal  justification  for  filing  separate 
references and they need to be consolidated. In the alternative 
he argued that even if a consolidated charge was not framed in 
the  two  references,  they  could  go  side  by  side  and  be  decided 
through a single judgment. He  added  that  ACR  No.65/2008 
was still at the stage of  evidence and decision of that case 
be kept pending till the maturity of ACR No.6/2010. 
4.  
The learned Special Prosecutor for NAB vehemently  
opposed this petition. He contended that the Petitioner's plea 
had no substance and was frivolous. The two references had no 
commonality  and  could  not  be  clubbed.  They  proceeded  on 
distinct facts and even the set of accused persons was different. 
He  further  contended  that  the  Petitioner  had  made  a  similar 
request in an earlier round which was declined by this Court 
 
W.P.No.174343/2018. 
- 3 - 
and also by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan. He prayed 
that this petition be dismissed.  
5.  
6. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
Broadly  speaking,  the  question  involved  in  the 
instant  case  is  whether  there  can  be  a  joint  trial  of  ACR 
No.65/2008  and  ACR  No.06/2010  by  framing  a  joint  charge 
and,  if  not,  whether  proceedings  in  the  two  references  can  be 
allowed to proceed side by side and then they should be decided 
through a consolidated judgment. The answer to the first part of 
the  question  is  contained  in  Section  233  which  is  to  be  read  in 
conjunction with Sections 234, 235, 236 and 239 of the Code of 
Criminal  Procedure,  1898  (the  “Code”).  The  said  Sections  are 
very much relevant for our present proposes on the authority of 
Section 17 of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 (the 
“NAO”), which ordains that subject to the exceptions mentioned 
therein  the  provisions  of  the  Code  apply  to  the  proceedings 
under the NAO unless they are inconsistent with it.  
7. 
The general rule set out in Section 233 of the Code 
is  that  there  should  be  separate  charge  and  a  separate  trial  for 
every  distinct  offence. Section 233  is  reproduced hereunder  for 
ready reference:  
 
233.  Separate  Charges  for  distinct  offences.  For  every 
distinct offence of which any person is accused there shall be 
a  separate  charge  and  every  such  charge  shall  be  tried 
separately,  except  in  the  cases  mentioned  in  Sections  234, 
235, 236 and 239.  
8. 
In  Sri  Ram  Varma  v.  The  State  (AIR  1956  All. 
466),  a  Full  Bench  of  the  Allahabad  High  Court  explained  the 
rationale behind Section 233 as under: 
“The  rules  forbidding  the  joinder  of  charges  have  been 
framed for the benefit of the accused. The underlying idea is 
that  if  too  many  charges  are  grouped  together  against  an 
accused  person,  he  might  be  handicapped  or  embarrassed  in 
conducting his defence. Moreover, there is a likelihood of the 
jury or the Judge being unconsciously prejudiced against the 
 
 
W.P.No.174343/2018. 
- 4 - 
accused  when  a  large  number  of  accusations  are  brought 
against him.”  
9. 
The  expression  “distinct  offences”  is  not  defined  in 
the Code. However, the Illustration to Section 233 indicates that 
it means the offences which have no connection with each other. 
In  Ramesh  M.  Udeshi  v.  The  State  (2002  PCr.LJ  1712)  while 
dilating  on  this  issue  a  Division  Bench  of  the  Karachi  High 
Court observed that they  may be classified under the following 
heads (though the list is not exhaustive): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  Offences  falling  under  different  sections  of  the  same 
penal enactment.  
(b)  Offences falling under different penal enactments.  
(c)  Offences  committed  on  different  occasions  even  though 
they may fall under the same section.  
(d) Offences committed against different persons.  
(e)  Offences  committed  by  different  persons  individually 
though  they  may  be  of  the  same  kind,  as  where  three 
persons were charged with being drunk. 
(f)  Allegations  of  misappropriation  against  accused  not  in 
respect  of  any  single  amount  but  relating  to  different 
specific amounts received by him on different dates from 
different persons.   
10.  
In the instant case, perusal of the record reveals that 
ACR No.65/2008 is against the Petitioner and two others and 
the  allegation  is  that  they  sold  the  Society's  land  in  Mauza 
Lidher  and  Chung  Khurd  without  the  approval  of  the  Registrar 
Cooperatives and the General Body and thereby misappropriated 
sale  proceeds  amounting  to  Rs.13,837,750/-  in  aggregate.  They 
are accused of having committed criminal breach of trust of the 
property  of  the  members  of  the  Society  and  are  charged  for 
offences  under  Clauses  (iii),  (iv),  (x)  and  (xii)  of  Section 
9(a)  of  the  NAO.  On  the  other  hand,  ACR  No.6/2010  is 
against  six  accused,  including  the  Petitioner,  and  the 
allegation  against  them  is  of  misuse  of  authority,  fraud  in 
allotment,  cancellation,  replacement  of  plots,  making 
double/triple  allotment  of same  plots, reducing  size  of  plots  and 
cheating the public-at-large to get illegal gains. Besides, there is 
 
W.P.No.174343/2018. 
- 5 - 
an  allegation  of  maintaining  a  parallel  bank  account  for  the 
Society's  funds  and  misappropriation  of  public  money 
amounting  to  Rs.35,83,475/-.  In  this  reference  the  Petitioner  is 
charged with offences under Clauses (iii), (iv), (vi), (ix), (x) and 
(xii)  of  Section  9(a)  of  the  NAO.  It  is  thus  evident  that  the 
charges  in  the  two  references  are  distinct  and  fall  within 
the  mischief of different provisions of the NAO. The number 
of  accused  persons  is  also  different  and  the  set  of  witnesses 
cited  by  the  prosecution  in  the  two  references  also  varies. 
Therefore, they must proceed independently.  
11.  
Section  234  of  the  Code  stipulates  that  a  person 
accused  of  more  offences  than  one  of  the  same  kind  may  be 
charged  with  and  tried  at  one  trial  subject  to  two  conditions, 
namely,  they  were  committed  within  the  space  of  twelve 
months from the first to the last of such offences, and secondly, 
the number of said offences does not exceed three:   
234. Three offences of same kind within one year may be 
charged  together.  (1)  When  a  person  is  accused  of  more 
offences  than  one  of  the  same  kind  committed  within  the 
space  of  twelve  months  from  the  first  to  the  last  of  such 
offences,  whether  in  respect  of  the  same  person  or  not,  he 
may be charged with, and tried at one trial for,  and number 
of them not exceeding three.  
(2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable 
with the same amount of punishment under the same section 
of the Pakistan Penal Code or of any special or local law: 
However, clause (d) of Section 17 of the NAO dispenses with 
both the aforementioned conditions in respect of offences tried 
by the Accountability Court and provides that it may be hold a 
joint  trial  for  offences  of  the  same  kind  committed  during  the 
space  of  any  number  of  years.  The  said  clause  is  reproduced 
hereunder: 
d.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  Section  234  of  the  Code,  a 
person accused of more offences than one of the same kind 
committed  during  the  space  of  any  number  of  years,  from 
the  first  to  the  last  of  such  offences,  may  be  charged  with 
and tried at one trial for any number of such offences.   
 
W.P.No.174343/2018. 
- 6 - 
The  expression  “offences  of  same  kind”  is  defined  in  Section 
234(2) as offences which are punishable with the same amount 
of punishment under the Pakistan Penal Code or of any special 
or  local  law.  One  may  argue  that  corruption  and  corrupt 
practices  have  myriad  facets  and  different  acts  may  constitute 
distinct offences under various clauses of Section 9 of the NAO 
but  they  would  be  reckoned  as  “offences  of  the  same  kind” 
within the meaning of Section 234(2) of the Code as they carry 
the  same  punishment  under  Section  10(a)  of  the  NAO.  This 
may  be  true  but  the  provisions  of  Section  234  are  not 
mandatory. The Court has discretion to try offences of the kind 
mentioned  therein  jointly  but  is  not  bound  to  do  so.  In  The 
State  v.  Mirza  Azam  Beg,  P.C.  and  another  (PLD  1964  SC 
120), the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan ruled:  
 
“The  provisions  of  sections  235  and  239  of  the  Criminal 
Procedure Code vest, in our view, a discretion in the Court to 
try  offences  of  the  kinds  indicated  therein  jointly  in  the 
circumstances therein mentioned, but there is nothing in them 
to  indicate  that  the  Court  is  bound  to  try  such  offences  or 
persons  together  in  every  case.  The  discretion  vested  in  the 
Court by these sections is  expected like any other discretion 
vested in a Court of law to be exercised upon sound judicial 
principles  and  in  the  light  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  of 
each case.” 
Similarly,  in  Ahmad  Khan  v.  Commissioner,  Rawalpindi 
Division  and  another  (PLD  1965  (W.P)  Peshawar  65),  the 
Court  ruled  that  Section  234,  235,  236  and  239  are  merely 
enabling  provisions:  they  are  permissive  and  not  mandatory.  It 
said:  
 
 
“It will be manifest from reading the language of the section 
that it has two parts  and each part lays down  a  general  rule. 
The  first  part  lays  down  that  for  every  distinct  offence  of 
which  any  person  is  accused  there  should  be  a  separate 
charge, and the second part lays down that every such charge 
shall  be  tried  separately,  except  the  cases  mentioned  in 
sections  234,  235,  236  and  239.  It  will,  therefore,  be  plain 
that  criminal  cases  cannot,  like  civil  suits,  be  consolidated, 
and  tried  together  on  the  same  evidence,  except  within  the 
limits as to the joinder of charges laid down in the Criminal 
Procedure  Code  (see  Emperor  v.  Chamask  Lal  (1941  Bom. 
156).  Again,  sections  234  to  239  are  merely  permissive  and 
not mandatory, i.e., it is for the prosecution to try the accused 
W.P.No.174343/2018. 
- 7 - 
for  different  offences  in  one  trial  as  provided  by  those 
sections,  but  in  case  the  prosecution  decides  to  split  the 
charges and try him separately on those charges the accused 
    [emphasis added] 
cannot insist on joinder of charges.”  
 
12.  
In the instant case, the NAB decided to bifurcate the 
charges for valid reasons which we have already discussed. The 
Petitioner  challenged  its  decision  previously  in  Writ  Petition 
No.6242/2010  and  then  in  Writ  Petition  No.10271/2011 
before  this  Court  but  both  were  dismissed.  He  filed  CPLA 
No.1486-L  of  2011  before  the  august  Supreme  Court  against 
order dated  22.6.2011  passed  in  W.P.No.10271/2011  which 
was dismissed as withdrawn on 11.6.2014 with the permission to 
re-agitate  the  matter  before  the  Accountability  Court  at 
an  appropriate stage. The Apex Court's order dated 11.6.2014 
was as under: 
 
 
"After making  brief submissions, learned counsel for the 
Petitioner seeks permission to withdraw this petition with the 
observation that it may be left open for the Petitioner to 
agitate the same grounds before the Accountability Court at 
some appropriate stage. Such request is acceded to. This 
petition is accordingly dismissed as withdrawn with the 
above observation." 
13.  
The Petitioner has not stated anything in the petition 
which may show that there is any change in the circumstances 
which  may  entitle  him  to  re-agitate  the  matter  before  the 
learned  Accountability  Court.  Even  during  the  course  of 
hearing  his  learned  counsel  could  not  refer  to  any  such 
circumstance. 
14. 
The  second  limb  of  the  question  that  we  need  to 
determine is whether a consolidated judgment can be  passed in 
two different trials.  Section  366  of  the  Cr.P.C.  deals  with  the 
mode of delivering judgment. It reads: 
366.  Mode  of  delivering  judgment.—(1)  The  judgment  in 
every trial in any Criminal Court of original jurisdiction shall 
be  pronounced  or  the  substance  of  such  judgment  shall  be 
explained: 
 
 
W.P.No.174343/2018. 
- 8 - 
 
 
 
(a)  in  open  Court  either  immediately  after  the 
termination  of  the  trial  or  at  some  subsequent  time 
of which notice shall be given to the parties or their 
pleaders; and  
15.  
The  word  “judgment”  has  also  not  been  defined  in 
the Code but it is construed to be the decision of a Court which 
terminates judicial proceedings pending before it. Section 367 of 
the Code deals with the language and content of a judgment. It 
reads as under: 
 
 
 
 
367. Language of judgment: Contents of judgment.-- (1) Every 
such  judgment  shall,  except  as  otherwise  expressly  provided 
by this Code, be written by the Presiding Officer of the Court 
or from, the dictation of such presiding officer in the language 
of  the  Court,  or  in  English;  and  shall  contain  the  point  or 
points for determination, the decision thereon; and the reasons 
for  the  decision;  and  shall  be  dated  and  signed  by  the 
Presiding Officer in open court at the time of pronouncing it 
and where  it is  not  written  by  the  Presiding Officer with  his 
own  hand,  every  page  of  such  judgment  shall  be  signed  by 
him. 
(2)  It  shall  specify  the  offence  (if  any)  of  which,  and  the 
section of the Pakistan Penal Code or other law under which, 
the  accused  is  convicted,  and  the  punishment  to  which  he  is 
sentenced.  
(3)  Judgment  in  alternative.  When  the  conviction  is  under 
the Pakistan Penal Code and it is doubtful under which of two 
sections, or under which of two parts of the same section, of 
that Code the offence falls, the Court shall distinctly express 
the same and pass judgment in the alternative. 
16.  
Section  367  of  the  Code  ordains  that  a  judgment 
must contain three things: (i) the points of determination, (ii) the 
decision thereon, and (iii) the reasons for the decision. The Code 
does not  contain  any provision for  a  consolidated  judgment for 
different  trials.  Resultantly,  there  must  be  a  separate  judgment 
for  every  trial.  More  importantly,  since  ACR  No.65/2008  and 
ACR  No.6/2010  proceed  on  different  allegations  and  the 
evidence recorded (or to be recorded) therein is also distinct they 
cannot be decided by a consolidated judgment.  
17. 
In  view  of  above,  we  are  of  the  considered 
opinion 
that 
the  distinguishing  features  of 
the 
two 
 
W.P.No.174343/2018. 
- 9 - 
references  do  not  allow  them  to  be  clubbed  or  decided  by  a 
consolidated  judgment.  Any  attempt  to  do  so  would  cause 
serious  miscarriage  of  justice  which  cannot  be  countenanced. 
The  impugned  order  is  based  on  cogent  reasons  and  does  not 
warrant  interference  by  this  Court.  This  petition  is  devoid  of 
merit and is hereby dismissed. 
 
 
   (ALI BAQAR NAJAFI) 
 
   JUDGE 
 
(TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH) 
 
      JUDGE 
*M.Khalid* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
