Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN.  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
F.A.O. NO.134 OF 2012.  
S.E. MEPCO and others  
 
Vs.  
 
Judge District Consumer 
Court and another  
Sr. No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties 
proceeding 
 
 
 
 
proceeding 
 
 
 
or counsel, where necessary. 
18.10.2018  Rao  Muhammad 
Iqbal,  Advocate 
for 
the 
appellants.  
Respondent  No.2  already  proceeded  against 
exparte.  
 
This  is  first  appeal  against  order  dated 
31.08.2012  passed  by  learned  Presiding  Officer, 
District  Consumer  Court,  D.G.  Khan  Camp  at 
Layyah,  whereby 
the 
complaint 
filed  by 
respondent No.2 stood accepted.  
2. 
The background of this F.A.O. is that Muneer 
Ahmed Khan-respondent No.2 (respondent) filed a 
complaint against the appellants before the learned 
District  Consumer  Court,  D.G.  Khan  Camp  at 
Layyah  (the  District  Consumer  Court),  alleging 
therein that he got allocated five transformers, but 
the  said  transformers  were  installed  at  other 
locations  instead  of  approved  sites  and  as  such 
respondent  prayed 
for 
installation  of 
said 
transformers  on  the  allocated  sites.  The  said 
complaint  was  contested  by 
the  appellants, 
maintaining  that  though  the  allocation  mentioned 
by  the  respondent  had  been  approved,  but  all  the 
cases  for  installation  of  transformers  had  to  be 
F.A.O. No.134 of 2012 
 
2 
completed  subject 
to  release  of 
funds.  The 
complaint  filed  by  the  respondent  was  accepted 
vide  order  dated  31.08.2012  passed  by  the  learned 
Presiding  Officer,  District  Consumer  Court,  in 
following terms:- 
transformers  and 
“…the complaint is conditionally accepted and all 
un-authorized  transformers  are  required  to  be 
shifted  to  the  allocated  sites  immediately  while  a 
report  is  directed  to  be  filed  within  one  month 
about  allocated 
installed 
transformers  and  allocations  of  the  installed 
transformers  so  as  to  determine  that  if  the 
transformers  were  used 
for  the  sites  other 
allocated  sites  through  the  Ex.En  while  the 
concerned Ex.En would be liable to the sentence of 
simple imprisonment of two years each at Central 
Jail  D.G.  Khan  on  account  of  each  and  every 
transformers  which  is  found  to  be  used  for  un-
allocated  site.  All  the  sentences  would  run 
concurrently  and  all  un-authorized  transformers 
are  required  to  be  shifted  to  the  allocated  sites 
immediately.” 
3. 
The appellants, by filing instant F.A.O., have 
assailed the above order, mainly on the grounds of 
against  facts,  law  and  as  such  the  same  is  not 
sustainable.  It  has  been  maintained  by  learned 
counsel for the appellants  that  the learned District 
Consumer  Court  has  no 
jurisdiction  to  take 
cognizable  of  the matter being not a case of  faulty 
services.  
4. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
5. 
The  Consumer  Court  established  under  the 
Punjab Consumer Protection Act, 2005 (The Act) is 
not a court of general jurisdiction, so it is its duty to 
examine  the  allegations  raised  in  the  complaint  in 
order  to  determine  its  jurisdiction.  The  complaint 
F.A.O. No.134 of 2012 
 
3 
made  by  the  respondent  is  vague  and  general 
allegations  have  been  leveled  therein.  The  only 
prayer  of  the  respondent  in  the  said  complaint  is 
regarding  installation  of  the  transformers  on  the 
allocated  sites  and  there  is  no  dispute  regarding 
any  defective  products  or  faulty  services.  As  such 
the  complaint  made  by  the  respondent  does  not 
confer 
jurisdiction  to  the  Consumer  Court  to 
adjudicate  upon  the  same.  In  case  “Sub-Divisional 
Officer  (Operation),  FESCO  vs.  Muhammad  Illyas” 
2016  CLC  1417  [Lahore  (Bahawalpur  Bench)],  it 
has been held as under:- 
“…in  order  to  invoke  the  jurisdiction  by  the 
Consumer  Court,  it  must  have  satisfied  that  the 
products complained against suffered from any of 
the defects specified in the claim or that any or all 
of the allegations contained in the claim about the 
services  provided  are  true,  then  it  could  issue 
direction  in  the  above  said  manner.  However, 
from the bare reading of the complaint filed by the 
respondent  before  the  learned  Consumer  Court, 
one can find that it is not regarding any defective 
product  or  faulty  services,  rather  the  dispute 
raised  by  the  respondent  related  to  correction  of 
detection  bill,  which  falls  within  the  exclusive 
jurisdiction  of  the  Civil  Court  in  view  of  the 
dictum laid down by the august Supreme Court of 
Pakistan  in  PLD  2006  SC  328,  rightly  relied 
upon by learned counsel for the appellant.” 
 
Similar view has been taken in the judgment 
dated  24.11.2017  passed  by  this  Court  (Multan 
Bench) in F.A.O. No.125 of 2012 titled as “Executive 
Engineer  MEPCO,  etc.  vs.  District  Consumer  Court 
etc.” 
6. 
Admittedly,  the  appellants  distribute  and 
supply  electricity  to  the  consumers  within  the 
F.A.O. No.134 of 2012 
 
4 
territory  under  a  Distribution  License  granted  by 
National  Electric  Power  Regulatory  Authority 
(NEPRA) 
in  pursuance  of  the  Regulation  of 
Generation,  Transmission  and  Distribution  of 
Electric  Power  Act,  1997  (NEPRA  Act),  which  is  a 
Federal  Statute  and  as  such  the  Consumer  Court 
has  no  jurisdiction  to  deal  with  the  matter.  So  the 
Consumer  Court  has  transgressed  its  powers  and 
erred  in  law while  assuming  its  jurisdiction  in  the 
matter.  Reliance  is  place  on  case  “Askari  Bank  Ltd. 
and  others  vs.  Irfan  Ahmed  Niazi  and  others”  (PLD 
2016  Lahore  168)  &  “Standard  Chartered  Bank 
(Pakistan)  Limited  through  Manager  vs.  Shafqat  Ullah 
Tahir” (2016 CLD 1546 Lahore).  
7. 
Coming  to  merits  of  the  case  it  has  been 
observed  that  the  respondent  has  not  given  any 
date when he got allocated transformers for which 
residential  scheme  and  the  date  on  which  in 
violation  of  such  allocation  the  transformers  were 
installed  at  other 
residential 
area(s).  The 
respondent  has  also  failed  to  mention  the  date 
when  the  cause  of  action  has  arisen  in  his  favour 
and  before  approaching  the  learned  Consumer 
Court  he  had  issued  any  legal  notice  to  the 
appellant or not. Whereas under Section 28(1) & (3) 
of  the  Act  issuance  of  notice  is  mandatory  and 
without  such  legal  notice  complaint  cannot  be 
filed.  For  ready  reference  relevant  provisions  are 
reproduced as under:- 
“28.  Settlement  of  Claims.-  (1)  A  consumer 
who  has  suffered  damage,  or  Authority  in  other 
F.A.O. No.134 of 2012 
 
5 
cases,  shall,  by  written  notice,  call  upon  a 
manufacturer  or  provider  of  services  that  a 
product  or  service  is  defective  or  faulty,  or  the 
conduct of the manufacturer or service provider is 
in contravention of the provisions of this Act and 
he  should  remedy  the  defects  or  give  damages 
where the consumer has suffered damage, or cease 
to contravene the provisions of this Court. 
(2). ---- 
(3)  No claim shall be entertained by  a Consumer 
Court  unless  the  consumer  or  the  Authority  has 
given  notice  under  sub-section  (1)  and  provides 
proof  that  the  notice  was  duly  delivered  but  the 
manufacturer  or  service  provider  has  not 
responded thereto.”(emphasis supplied) 
The  complaint  of  the  respondent  is  suffering  from 
inherent defects and even the controversy involved 
in the complaint was factual one and could not be 
resolved without recording evidence of the parties 
and on this score alone the impugned order is not 
sustainable. 
8. 
For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  the 
instant  F.A.O.  is  allowed  exparte,  the  impugned 
order  dated  31.08.2012  passed  by  the  District 
Consumer  Court  is  set  aside  and  the  complaint 
filed by the respondent stands dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
(Mujahid Mustaqeem Ahmed) 
Judge 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
Judge 
 
Khalid 
