Form No. HCJD/C-121 
 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, BAHAWALPUR BENCH, 
ORDER SHEET 
BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Civil Revision No.652 of 2011/BWP 
Mst. Suhagan  Versus  Ashiq Muhammad and others 
Sr. No. of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
05.04.2018  Mr.  A.R.  Aurangzeb  &  Makhdoom  Kalim  Ullah 
Hashmi, Advocates for the petitioner 
Mr.  Qamar  Hameed  Hashmi,  Advocate  for  the 
respondents 
 
 
 
Briefly,  the  present  petitioner  instituted  a  suit  for 
declaration to the effect that she was owner in possession of the 
land  fully  described  in  the  head  note  of  the  plaint  and  she 
neither  sold  her  land  to  the  respondents/defendants  or  their 
father  nor  received  any  consideration;  that  the  mutations 
No.442  dated  02.07.1961,  452  dated  10.07.1962,  482  dated 
22.02.1966, 507 dated 21.01.1959 and 602 dated 19.08.1966 by 
the  petitioner/plaintiff  in  favour  of  the  respondents/defendants 
and their father were against law and facts, ineffective qua her 
rights,  result  of  fraud  and  as  such  liable  to  be  cancelled. 
Allegedly,  the  respondents/defendants  were  asked  time  and 
again but they refused. 
The  suit  was  contested  by  the  respondents/defendants, 
who  controverted  the  averments  of  plaint  and  raised  certain 
legal  as  well  as  factual  objections  while  submitting  written 
statement. 
Out of the divergent pleadings of the parties, the learned 
trial  Court  framed  as  many  as  eight  issues  including  “Relief” 
and  invited  evidence  of  the  parties.  The  parties  adduced  their 
oral  as  well  as  documentary  evidence.  On  conclusion  the 
learned  trial  Court,  after  hearing  arguments,  vide  impugned 
C.R.No.652 of 2011/BWP   
 
 
 
 
 
                            2 
judgment and decree dated 28.03.2011 dismissed the suit of the 
petitioner/plaintiff.  Being  aggrieved  by  the  said  judgment  and 
decree,  the  petitioner/plaintiff  agitated  the  same  through  an 
appeal,  but  the  appeal  was  also  dismissed  vide  impugned 
judgment  and  decree  dated  29.09.2011,  which  has  culminated 
in filing of the civil revision in hand. 
2. 
 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  has  argued  that 
the  impugned  judgments and decrees  are against  law  and  facts 
of  the  case;  the  same  have  been  passed  without  lawful 
authority. Both the learned Court below have not considered the 
fact that it has been proved through oral as well as documentary 
evidence  that  the  petitioner  is  owner  in  possession  of  the  suit 
land  and  the  mutations  challenged  in  the  suit  are  forged  and 
fictitious, but even then they non-suited the petitioner illegally. 
He  submits  that  after  specific  denial  of  execution  of  the 
mutations  in  question  on  behalf  of  the  petitioner,  being  real 
owner, the onus shifts upon the respondents/defendants to prove 
valid  execution  of  the  same,  in  which  they  have  miserably 
failed  because  no  direct  evidence  consisting  of  witnesses  who 
allegedly associated with the striking of the alleged bargain and 
in whose presence the alleged consideration has been paid, have 
been  produced;  thus,  when  the  position  is  as  such  the 
presumption  would  be  drawn  that  had  they  appeared,  they 
would  not  have  supported  the  execution  of  mutations  under 
challenge,  as  envisaged  under  Article  129(g)  of  the  Qanun-e-
Shahadat  Order,  1984.  He  further  submits  that  provisions  of 
Article 80 of the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 1984  have also  not 
been  complied  with  as  no  evidence  showing  that  the  attesting 
witnesses are either dead or cannot be found and the document 
was  executed  by  the  person  purported  to  have  done,  but  even 
then the impugned judgments and decrees have been passed by 
the  learned  Courts  below.  He  adds  that  the  question  of 
limitation  has  also  wrongly  and  illegally  been  considered  and 
C.R.No.652 of 2011/BWP   
 
 
 
 
 
                            3 
decided, because a specific plea of fraud has been taken by the 
petitioner and in such a scenario limitation would start from the 
date  of  knowledge  and  not  from  the  date  of  fraud.  Impugned 
judgments and decrees are result of sheer  misreading and non-
reading  of  evidence  on  record  and  suffer  from  non-application 
of  independent  judicious  mind.  Provisions  of  Order  XLI,  Rule 
31  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  have  been  defiled  by 
the  learned  appellate  Court  by  not  giving  issue-wise  findings 
while  passing  the  impugned  judgment  and  decree.  Both  the 
learned  Courts  below  have  committed  material  illegalities  and 
irregularities,  which  has  resulted  in  miscarriage  of  justice; 
therefore, by allowing the civil revision in hand, the impugned 
judgments  and  decrees  may  be  set  aside  and  suit  instituted  by 
the petitioner/plaintiff may be decreed as prayed for. Relies on 
Khan  Muhammad  through  L.Rs.  and  others  v.  Mst.  Khatoon 
Bibi and others (2017 SCMR 1476), Nazim-Ud-Din and others 
v. Sheikh Zia-Ul-Qamar and others (2016 SCMR 24), Ghulam 
Farid and another v. Sher Rehman thorugh LRs. (2016 SCMR 
862), Peer Baksh through LRs and other  v. Mst. Khanzadi and 
others  (2016  SCMR  1417),  Muhammad Bashir  v.  Muhammad 
Hussain  and  16  others  (2009  SCMR  1256),  Board  of 
Intermediate  and  Secondary  Education,  Sargodha  through 
Chairman  and  another  v.  Mst.  Surriya  Andleeb  and  another 
(2009  MLD  1252-Lahore),  Abdul  Hameed  through  L.Rs.  and 
others v. Shamasuddin and others (PLD 2008 Supreme Court 
140), Mst. Suban v. Allah Ditta and others (2007 SCMR 635), 
Rehmatullah  and  others  v.  Saleh  Khan  and  others  (2007 
SCMR 729), Syed Shabbir Hussain Shah and others v. Asghar 
Hussain Shah and others (2007 SCMR 1884), Khalil Ahmad v. 
Abdul  Jabbar  Khan  and  others  (2005  SCMR  911),  Sher  Baz 
Khan and others v. Mst. Malkani Sahibzadi Tiwana and others 
(NLR  2004  Revenue  1),  Muhammad  Akram  and  another  v. 
Altaf  Ahmad  (PLD  2003  Supreme  Court  688)  and  Syed 
C.R.No.652 of 2011/BWP   
 
 
 
 
 
                            4 
Iftikhar-Ud-Din  Haidar  Gardezi  and  9  others  v.  Central  Bank 
of India Ltd., Lahore and 2 others (1996 SCMR 669). 
3. 
 
Naysaying  the  submissions  above,  the  learned 
counsel  representing 
the  respondents  has  supported 
the 
impugned  judgments  and  decrees,  which  have  been  rendered 
concurrently, and has further argued that at this stage the same 
cannot be interfered with under section 115 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 merely because different view is possible to be 
taken. He has prayed for dismissal of the civil revision in hand. 
Relies on Abdul Qayum through Legal Heirs v. Mushk-e-Alam 
and another (2001 SCMR 798), Muhammad Sardar and others 
v.  Province  of  Punjab  and  others  (2011  YLR  119-Lahore), 
Muhammad  Ijaz  and  2  others  v.  Additional  District  Judge, 
Multan  District  Multan  and  4  others  (PLJ  2011  Lahore  42) 
and  Muhammad  and  others  v.  Mst.  Khatoon  and  others  (2013 
YLR 2036-Lahore). 
4. 
5. 
 
 
Heard. 
Limitation  does  not  run  against  a  void  transaction 
nor does efflux of time extinguish the right of inherence. In the 
present  case  the  petitioner  has  taken  a  specific  stance  that 
neither  she  entered  appearance  before  any  revenue  official/ 
officer  for  execution  or  attestation  of  mutations  in  dispute  nor 
did  she  receive  any  sale  consideration  nor  delivered  the 
possession  of  the  disputed  property  to  the  respondents/ 
defendants  and 
the  mutations 
in  dispute  are  result  of 
impersonation, fraud, forgery and against law. Thus, the suit of 
the  petitioner/plaintiff  is  well  within  limitation  after  specific 
denial  about  two  months  prior  to  institution  of  the  suit  as  has 
been averred in the plaint by her and even the mutation is not a 
proof of title and a beneficiary thereunder has to prove the same 
by leading strong, cogent and trustworthy evidence. This Court 
is  fortified  on  this  view  by  judgments  reported  as  Peer  Baksh 
through  LRs  and  other    v.  Mst.  Khanzadi  and  others  (2016 
C.R.No.652 of 2011/BWP   
 
 
 
 
 
                            5 
SCMR  1417),  Mst.  Suban  v.  Allah  Ditta  and  others  (2007 
SCMR  635)  and  Khalil  Ahmad  v.  Abdul  Jabbar  Khan  and 
others (2005 SCMR 911). 
6. 
 
Now the argument that at this stage the concurrent 
findings  recorded  by  the  learned  Courts  below  cannot  be 
interfered  with  under  section  115  of  the  Code  of  Civil 
Procedure, 1908 merely because different view is possible to be 
taken  is  considered  and  dilated  upon  and  in  this  regard 
sufficient is to observe that  while dealing with this proposition 
the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  various  judgments 
including  Nazim-Ud-Din  and  others  v.  Sheikh  Zia-Ul-Qamar 
and  others  (2016  SCMR  24),  Sultan  Muhammad  and  another 
v. Muhammad Qasim and others (2010 SCMR 1630), Ghulam 
Muhammad  and  3  others  v.  Ghulam  Ali  (2004  SCMR  1001) 
and  Habib  Khan  and  others  v.  Mst.  Bakhtmina  and  others 
(2004 SCMR 1668) has invariably held: 
 
„5. 
It  is  well-entrenched  legal  proposition  that 
concurrent  findings  of  facts  of  the  Courts  below 
could  not  be  reversed  in  exercise  of  revisional 
Jurisdiction  as  conferred  upon  the  High  Court 
under  section  115,  C.P.C.  and  learned  ASC  has 
rightly 
referred  and 
relied  upon 
various 
authorities  as  mentioned 
in 
the  preceding 
paragraph  but  it  should  not  be  ignored  that  such 
concurrent 
findings,  cannot  be 
termed  as 
“sacrosanct”  and  could  be  reversed  if  the  same 
are  based  on  insufficient  evidence,  misreading  of 
evidence,  non-consideration  of  material  piece  of 
evidence, erroneous assumption of facts and patent 
error  of law.  We  are  not persuaded to agree  with 
Raja  Muhammad  Ibrahim  Satti,  learned  ASC  that 
concurrent 
findings  must  be 
kept 
intact 
C.R.No.652 of 2011/BWP   
 
 
 
 
 
                            6 
irrespective  of  the  fact  whether  the  same  are 
erroneous or otherwise.‟ 
In the present case, it is evident  that the learned Courts below 
have not considered the fact that the respondents have failed to 
consider  that  after  specific  denial  of  the  petitioner  regarding 
execution  and  attestation  of  the  mutations  in  question  on  the 
basis of oral sale as well as receipt of sale amount, it was duty 
of  the  respondents  to  prove the  same  to have been  validly  and 
legally executed after receipt of consideration by the petitioner/ 
plaintiff,  but  they  have  miserably  failed  to  prove  the  same  as 
per requirement of law, because they have relied upon solitary 
statement  of  D.W.1  namely  Mushtaq  Ahmad,  grandson  of 
Banna  and  have  not  produced  Patwari  Halqa  who  entered  the 
mutation,  the  revenue  officer  who  attested  the  said  mutations 
and  the  witnesses  who  identified  and  verified  the  presence  of 
the  petitioner.  Moreover,  no  evidence  has  been  led  by  the 
respondents  to  show  when,  where  and  in  whose  presence  the 
bargain  reached  at  between  the  parties,  because  no  day,  time, 
month,  year  and  venue  has  been  pleaded  by  them.  In  Abdul 
Hameed  through  L.Rs.  and  others  v.  Shamasuddin  and  others 
(PLD  2008  Supreme  Court  140)  and  Ghulam  Farid  and 
another v. Sher Rehman through L.Rs. (2016 SCMR 862), the 
Apex Court of the country held: 
„Under  the  law  and  principle  of  justice,  when 
mutation  is  never  held  to  be  a  document  of  title 
and  when  a  negligible  presumption  is  attached  to 
it,  provided  it  is  proved  fairly  and  its  entry  and 
attestation  is  conducted  in  the  laid  down  manner, 
the mere incorporation of it into the “Jama Bandi” 
and  its  repetition  periodically,  would  not  confer 
title on the purchaser unless the transaction of sale 
is  independently  established,  through  cogent  and 
convincing  evidence.  In  the  case  of  transaction 
C.R.No.652 of 2011/BWP   
 
 
 
 
 
                            7 
with  illiterate  village  lady  this  principle  assumes 
the status of rule of law as in that case the onus of 
the  beneficiary  of 
it  becomes  manifold.  To 
discharge the burden of proof he has to satisfy the 
Court  of  law  that  the  entire  transaction  was 
completed  in  a  transparent  manner  and  all  the 
required  precautions  were  faithfully  and  honestly 
observed  before 
the  attestation  of  mutation, 
dispelling  every  suspicion  that  it  was  tainted  with 
fraud and misrepresentation.‟ 
7. 
 
In  view  of  the  above,  when  the  respondents  have 
not  produced  the  witnesses  in  whose  presence  the  bargain  has 
struck  in,  consideration  has  been  paid,  if  for  the  sake  of 
arguments  it  is  accepted  that  the  petitioner  thumb  marked  the 
disputed mutations, even then after denial, the same would not 
be said to have been proved, because not only mere signing or 
putting  thumb-mark  on  a  document,  but  something  more  must 
be proved for its due execution, which is lacking in this case. In 
this  regard  reliance  is  placed  on  Syed  Shabbir  Hussain  Shah 
and  others  v.  Asghar  Hsusain  Shah  and  others  (2007  SCMR 
1884), wherein it has been held: 
„According to Article 78 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat, 
1984,  execution  of  a  document  is  to  be  proved  to 
be in the handwriting or signature or thumb-mark 
of  the  alleged  executant,  which  would  mean 
signing or putting thumb-mark over a document as 
consenting  party  thereto.  Execution  of  document 
would  not  only  mean  mere  signing  or  putting 
thumb-impression  but  something  more  than  mere 
signing or putting thumb-impression by executant. 
It  must  be  proved  that  thumb-mark  was  made  in 
the  presence  of  witness  in  whose  presence  the 
document  was  written  and  read  over  and  it  was 
C.R.No.652 of 2011/BWP   
 
 
 
 
 
                            8 
understood  by  the  vendor  and  would  not  only  be 
limited  to  merely  signing  a  name  or  placing 
thumb-impression  upon  a  blank  sheet  of  paper  so 
as  to  prove  the  document  to  have  been  executed 
whose  identification  should  also  be  proved  by 
reliable and authentic evidence that a person who 
has affixed thumb-mark or signature was the same 
person  who  owned  the  land  and  sold  the  same  to 
be  vendee.  Execution  would  mean  series  of  acts, 
which would complete the execution. Mere singing 
or  putting  thumb-mark  would  not  amount  to 
execution  in  terms  of  Article  78  of  Qanun-e-
Shahadat  Order,  1984.  A  document  which  is  not 
proved  is  inadmissible  in  evidence,  unless  strict 
proof of it is waived.‟ 
8. 
 
Pursuant  to  the  above  discussion,  it  is  proved  on 
record  that  the  respondents  have  failed  to  comply  with  the 
requirements  of  Article  17  &  79  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order,  1984  and  there  is  also  no  evidence  to  prove  that  the 
witnesses  who  entered  and  attested  the  mutations  were  either 
dead  or  could  not  be  found;  thus,  the  findings  of  the  learned 
Courts  below  are  based  on  wrong  appreciation  and 
interpretation of law on the subject as well as suffer from glare 
misreading  and  non-reading  of  evidence.  Both  the  learned 
Courts  below  have  failed  to  exercise  vested  jurisdiction  in 
accordance  with  law.  Therefore,  the  impugned  judgments  and 
decrees  being  not  sustainable  in  the  eye  of  law  cannot  be 
allowed to hold field further. 
9. 
 
The  case  law  relied  upon  by  the  learned  counsel 
for  the  respondents,  with  utmost  respect  to  the  same,  has  no 
relevance to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case in 
hand;  thus,  it  does  not  render  any  assistance  or  help  to  the 
respondents’ case. 
C.R.No.652 of 2011/BWP   
 
 
 
 
 
                            9 
10. 
 
The  crux  of  the  discussion  above  is  that  while 
placing  reliance  on  the  judgments  supra  as  well  as  judgment 
reported  as  Muhammad  Akram  and  another  v.  Altaf  Ahmad 
(PLD 2003 Supreme Court 688), the civil revision in hand is 
accepted,  impugned  judgments  and  decrees  passed  by  the 
learned Courts below are set aside and the suit instituted by the 
petitioner/plaintiff  is  decreed  declaring  the  mutations  No.442 
dated 02.07.1961, 452 dated 10.07.1962, 482 dated 22.02.1966, 
507  dated  21.01.1959  and  602  dated  19.08.1966  against  law 
and  facts,  ineffective  qua  the  rights  of  the  petitioner/plaintiff, 
result of fraud and are cancelled, accordingly. 
 
 
 
M .A. Hassan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shahid Bilal Hassan) 
Judge 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
Judge 
