       JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,                  
MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN  
        (JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
 
      Writ Petition No. 3626 of 2017 
    
                      (Muhammad Ismail    Versus  Special Judge, etc.) 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing: 
12.03.2018 
   Petitioner by: 
   State by: 
Mr. 
Advocate.  
Muhammad 
Ashraf 
Qureshi, 
Mehr  Nazar  Abbas  Chawan,  Assistant 
Attorney General with Abid S.I. 
Respondent No.2 by:  Mr.  Abdul  Rehman 
Tariq  Khand, 
 
Advocate. 
Muhammad  Tariq  Abbasi,  J:–  This  writ  petition,  calls 
in  question,  the  order  dated  15.02.2017,  passed  by  the 
learned  Judge  Anti-Terrorism  Court,  Dera  Ghazi  Khan, 
whereby  application  under  Section  23  of  Anti-Terrorism  Act, 
1997  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  Act),  moved  by  the 
petitioner, has been dismissed. 
2.  
The  FIR  No.  580,  dated  24.12.2012,  under  Section  302 
PPC,  at  Police  Station  Kot  Mithan,  District  Rajanpur,  was  got 
lodged  by  Umer  Khan  S.I.  with  the  precise  contentions  that 
dead  body  of  a  woman  having  strangulation  in  her  neck  was 
recovered  and  that  forehead,  left  cheek  and  feet  of  the  body 
were also cut by some animal.  
3.  
The  case  was  investigated,  when  the  present  petitioner 
and    six    others,    namely,    Muhammad  Saleem,  Rana 
Writ Petition No. 3626-2017 
 
2 
Mehmood Ahmad, Muhammad Ahmad Faiz Rasool, Muhammad 
Bilal, Ghulam Mustafa and Qari Ghulam Abbas, were found to 
be  involved,  hence  arrayed  as  accused.  It  was  found  that  in 
the  occurrence  acid  was  also  used,  therefore  offence  under 
Section  336-B  PPC,  was  added  and  consequently  matter  was 
referred to the learned Judge Anti-Terrorism Court, Dera Ghazi 
Khan.  
4.   During proceedings before the Anti-Terrorism Court, the 
petitioner, through  an application under Section 23 of the Act 
had  requested  that  as 
from  the  attending 
facts  and 
circumstances,  applicability  of  Section  336-B  PPC,  was  not 
found, hence the case was triable by an ordinary court and as 
such,  it  may  be  transmitted  to  the  said  Court.  The  learned 
Judge  Anti-Terrorism  Court,  through  the  impugned  order  had 
turned  down  the  above  said  request  of  the  petitioner. 
Resultantly, the writ petition in hand. 
5. 
The learned counsel for the petitioner has re-iterated the 
grounds  taken  in  the  writ  petition.  Whereas  the  learned  Law 
Officer  as  well  as  the  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent 
No.2/complainant  has  opposed  the  petition,  while  holding  the 
impugned order to be justified and call of the day.             
6.   Arguments  advanced  by  all  the  sides  have  been  heard 
and the record has been perused. 
7.  
The  main  question  before  us  is,  whether  from  the 
attending facts and circumstances as well as material available 
on      the      record,      the      offence,      defined    under    Section  
336-A  PPC,  which  has  been  made  punishable  under  Section 
Writ Petition No. 3626-2017 
 
3 
336-B PPC, is made out or otherwise. The said provisions read 
as under:- 
“336-A.  Hurt  caused  by  corrosive  substance.  Whoever 
with  the  intention  or  knowingly  causes  or  attempts  to  cause 
hurt  by  means  of  a  corrosive  substance  or  any  substance 
which  is  deleterious  to  human  body  when  it  is  swallowed, 
inhaled,  comes  into  contact  or  received  into  human  body  or 
otherwise shall be said to cause hurt by corrosive substance.” 
 
“336-B.  Punishment  for  hurt  by  corrosive  substance. 
Whoever caused hurt by corrosive substance shall be punished 
with 
imprisonment  of  either 
description  which  shall  not  be  less  than  fourteen  years  and  a 
minimum fine of one million rupees.” 
 
In  the  above  mentioned  provisions,  hurt  to  a  human 
imprisonment 
life  or 
for 
8. 
being  is  stated.  Therefore,  it  is  clear  that  if  by  using  of  a 
corrosive  substance,  including  acid,  any  hurt  is  caused  to  a 
human  being,  only  then  the  above  mentioned  provisions  will 
come in field.    
9.  
Evidence  of  Mst.  Hameeda  Mai  complainant  (PW-5)  and 
Muhammad Saeed (PW-6), is available on the record, whereby 
both  have  deposed  that  after  strangulation,  dead  body  of 
Mst.Kalsoom  was  thrown  in  a  sugarcane  crop  and  to  conceal 
its  identity,  acid  was  poured  on  face  of  the  body.  Meaning 
thereby  that  corrosive  substance  i.e.  acid  was  poured  on  the 
dead body of the above named lady.  
10.   Another  point  before  the  Court  is  that  when  a  harm  is 
caused  to  a  dead  body,  through  a  corrosive  substance,  even 
then  the  accused  shall  be  dealt  with,  under  the  above 
mentioned provisions or otherwise. 
Hurt  has  been  defined,  in  Section  332  PPC,  in  the  following 
words:-   
“332. Hurt. (1) Whoever causes pain, harm, disease, infirmity 
or  injury  to  any  person  or  impairs,  disables,  disfigures,  
Writ Petition No. 3626-2017 
 
4 
defaces  or  dismembers  any  organ  of  the  body  or  part  thereof 
of any person without causing his death, is said to cause hurt.” 
 
11.   Plain reading of the said provision suggests that if hurt is 
caused  to  a  living  human  being,  only  then  it  shall  be 
considered as an injury and punishable accordingly. Therefore, 
it can safely be said that if a corrosive substance is thrown on 
a dead body, it does amount to hurt, as defined under Section 
332 or 336-A PPC and punishable under Section 336-B PPC.  
12.   In  the  situation  in  hand,  as  stated  above,  the  acid  has 
been  poured  on  the  dead  body,  so  that  its  identity  may  be 
concealed.  Therefore  at  the  most  offence  under  Section  201 
PPC may be applicable and Section 336 PPC would not attract, 
and as such the case does not come, within jurisdiction of the 
Anti-Terrorism Court. 
13.   As result of what has been discussed above, the instant 
writ  petition 
is  accepted,  the 
impugned  order  dated 
15.02.2017  is  set-aside  and  reversed.  Meaning  thereby  that 
application  under  Section  23  of  the  Act,  moved  on  behalf  of 
the petitioner, is allowed, with a direction to the learned Judge 
Anti-Terrorism  Court,  Dera  Ghazi  Khan,  to  transfer  the  file  of 
the case to the Court of ordinary jurisdiction.  
 
                                       (Asjad Javaid Ghural)            (Muhammad Tariq Abbasi) 
                                               
 
 
 
  Judge 
 
 
               Judge 
Approved for reporting.  
 
      Iqbal*                
 
