Stereo. H C J D A. 38 
 
 
JUDGMENT   SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Civil Revision No. 1188 of 2017 
 
MUHAMMAD RAFIQ CHAUDHRY 
VERSUS 
FAHMEEDA BEGUM 
 
Date of hearing: 
 
07.09.2018 
Petitioner by: 
 
Respondent: 
 
 
Mr. Azhar Maqbool Shah, Advocate. 
Mr. Salman Hanif Rajput, Advocate. 
AMIN-UD-DIN  KHAN,  J.    Through  this  Civil  Revision,  petitioner 
who is defendant in the suit for specific performance has challenged the 
judgment and decree dated 20.12.2016 passed by a learned Additional 
District  Judge,  Sialkot  whereby  the  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner  was 
dismissed as well as the judgment and decree dated 14.09.2013 passed 
by  a  learned  Civil  Judge  1st  Class,  Sialkot  whereby  suit  for  specific 
performance filed by the plaintiff-respondent was decreed. 
 
2. 
 
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  plaintiff-respondent  on 
16.12.2002  filed  a  suit  for  specific  performance  on  the  basis  of 
agreement  to  sell  dated  06.07.2001.  Written statement  was  filed. The 
suit  was  contested.    Petitioner-defendant  denied  the  execution  of 
agreement  to  sell  in  favour  of  plaintiff-respondent  pleading  that 
actually  there  was  some  dispute  with  regard  to  payment  of  money 
between  son  of  the  petitioner-defendant  with  Muhammad  Asghar, 
 
 
Civil Revision No. 1188 of 2017 
 
 
 
2 
husband  of  the  plaintiff,  therefore,  on  06.07.2001,  for  preparation  of 
guarantee  deed  (ہمان  تنامض),  stamp  paper  valuing  Rs.  100/-  was 
purchased  by  the  defendant  and  on  the  blank  stamp  paper,  he  put  his 
signatures and denied the receipt of earnest money. 
 
 
Learned  trial  Court  vide  its  order  dated  21.10.2004 
appointed a local commission for site inspection and to report about the 
present  position  of  the  suit  property.    Through  a  report  dated 
01.09.2005, it was apprised by the local commission that plaintiff was 
in possession of the suit property. 
 
 
Learned  trial  Court  framed  the  issues  on  16.06.2008  and 
invited  the  parties  to  produce  their  respective  evidence.    Both  the 
parties produced their oral as well as documentary evidence.   
 
 
Case  of  the  plaintiff-respondent  was  that  the  original 
agreement to sell was procured by the petitioner-defendant on the plea 
that  he  wanted  to  get  the  sale  deed  prepared  and  handed  over  the 
previous  original  sale  deed  to  the  defendant-petitioner.    Therefore, 
permission  was  granted 
to 
the  plaintiff-respondent 
to  produce 
secondary  evidence  with  regard  to  the  agreement  to  sell  which  was 
produced as Ex.P-1. 
 
3. 
 
In the first round of litigation,  learned trial Court decreed 
the suit vide judgment and decree dated 23.10.2010.  An appeal (RFA 
No. 1036 of 2010) was filed which was allowed by this Court and case 
was remanded to the learned trial Court. After remand, both the parties 
Civil Revision No. 1188 of 2017 
 
 
 
3 
produced  further  oral  as  well  as  documentary  evidence  to  strengthen 
their claim. 
 
 
The  remaining  consideration  amount  was  also  paid  under 
the orders of the Court and learned trial Court decided the application 
for temporary injunction. 
 
4. 
 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  argues  that  when  the 
petitioner-defendant  denied  the  execution  of  agreement  to  sell,  it  was 
the  responsibility  of  the  plaintiff-respondent  to  prove  the  same  in 
accordance  with  law  and  in  the  light  of  the  standard  for  proving  the 
document  enunciated  by  the  superior  courts.    States  that  plaintiff-
respondent miserably failed to prove the execution of agreement to sell 
as  both  the  learned  Courts  below  as  much  weight  was  given  to  the 
statement of PW-1, the Notary Public.  Further submits that the original 
agreement to sell was not produced with the explanation that same was 
handed over to the petitioner-defendant cannot be accepted.  States that 
grant  of  relief  of  specific  performance  is  a  discretionary  relief, 
therefore,  prays  for  acceptance  of  this  Civil  Revision  by  setting  aside 
the concurrent findings of learned two Courts below. 
 
 
Learned  counsel  has 
relied  upon  “MUHAMMAD 
RASHEED KHAN versus Mst. MEHR-UN-NISA” (2009 SCMR 740), 
“MUHAMMAD  SHARIF  and  others  versus  NABI  BAKHSH  and 
others”  (2012  SCMR  900),  “LIAQAT  ALI  KHAN  and  others  versus 
FALAK  SHER  and  others”  (PLD  2014  Supreme  Court  506)  and 
Civil Revision No. 1188 of 2017 
 
 
 
4 
“FARID  BAKHSH  versus  JIND  WADDA  and  others”  (2015  SCMR 
1044). 
 
5. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent 
argues  that  plaintiff-respondent  successfully  proved  the  agreement  to 
sell  as  well  as  payment  under  the  agreement  and  possession  over  the 
suit property.  States that there are concurrent findings of fact recorded 
by  both  the  learned  Courts  below  and  petitioner-defendant  failed  to 
show any mis-reading and non-reading of evidence by both the learned 
Courts below while handing down the judgments, therefore, argues that 
no  case  for  interference  by  this  Court  is  made  out.    Further,  learned 
counsel  has  produced  photostat  copies  of  Ex.P-2  and  report  of  local 
commission  stating  that  petitioner-defendant  has  intentionally  not 
appended these documents with this Civil Revision.  Argues that it is a 
fatal  defect  and  Civil  Revision  can  be  dismissed  on  this  score  alone.  
Prays  for  dismissal  of  the  Civil  Revision  stating  it  meritless  and 
defective one.  To strengthen his arguments, learned counsel has placed 
reliance  upon  “GHULAM  NABI  AND  OTHERS  versus  Seth 
MUHAMMAD  YAQUB  AND  OTHERS”  (PLD  1983  Supreme  Court 
344), “RAB NAWAZ and 13 others versus MUSTAQEEM KHAN and 
14 others” (1999 SCMR 1362), “BASHIR AHMED through L.Rs. and 
another  versus  MUHAMMAD  ALI  through  L.Rs.  and  another”  (2007 
SCMR 1047) and “MUHAMMAD SATTAR and others versus TARIQ 
JAVAID and others” (2017 SCMR 98). 
 
Civil Revision No. 1188 of 2017 
 
 
 
5 
6. 
 
I  have  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  at  length  and 
gone through the record as well as the case-law referred to by learned 
counsel for the parties. 
 
7. 
 
It  is  not  disputed  that  stamp  paper  of  Ex.P-1  was 
purchased  by  the  petitioner-defendant.  His  signatures  on  the  stamp 
paper have not been denied by him. On the other hand, the case pleaded 
by  the  plaintiff-respondent  is  that  after  completion  of  the  agreement 
(Ex.P-1), petitioner-defendant approached for execution of sale deed in 
favour  of  plaintiff-respondent,  therefore,  he  demanded  the  original 
agreement  to  sell  which  was  handed  over  to  him  so  that  he  may 
purchase  the  stamp  papers  and  get  the  sale  deed  prepared.    As  a 
security,  petitioner  handed  over  the  previous  original  sale  deed  of  the 
suit property which was in his favour.  This argument has weight. 
 
8. 
 
Further,  permission  was  granted  to  produce  secondary 
evidence  but  there  is  nothing  on  the  file  of  this  Civil  Revision  that 
petitioner-defendant  raised  any  objection  or  when  permission  to 
produce  secondary  evidence  was  granted,  he  challenged  the  order 
before  any  further  forum.    When  it  is  so,  I  have  no  reason  to  think 
otherwise than the fact that permission was granted in accordance with 
law.    Both  the  learned  Courts  below  concurrently  discussed  the 
evidence available on the file while discussing Issues No. 1 to 3 onus of 
which was upon the plaintiff-respondent and against that, onus to prove 
Issue No. 5 was upon the defendant. 
 
Civil Revision No. 1188 of 2017 
 
 
 
6 
9. 
 
Needless to observe that when purchase of stamp paper of 
Ex.P-1  and  signatures  thereupon  were  admitted  by  the  petitioner-
defendant and he denied the purpose of purchase of stamp paper as well 
as  contents  of  the  document  Ex.P-1,  it  was  his  duty  to  produce  very 
strong and convincing evidence. 
 
 
It  is  a  settled  principle  of  law  that  when  a  person 
challenges some part of the contents of a document, the onus to prove 
the allegation is upon that person to prove the case pleaded by him.  It 
is  also  a  settled  proposition  that  against  the  documentary  evidence, 
simple oral evidence is not sufficient.  In this case, it is the plea of the 
petitioner  that  he  purchased  the  stamp  paper  but  he  has  not  appended 
Ex.P-2,  copy  of  register  of  the  stamp  vender  which  was  produced  by 
the  plaintiff  when  record  was  produced  before  the  Court.  It  clearly 
shows that stamp paper was issued for an agreement by the petitioner in 
favour  of  respondent  and  brief  detail  of  the  document  Ex.P-1  is  also 
available in the column of brief summary in the register. 
 
10. 
 
With  regard  to  the  possession,  there  is  a  report  of  local 
commission  dated  01.09.2005  which  has  not  been  appended  by  the 
petitioner with this Civil Revision and photostat copy thereof has been 
provided  by  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  during  the  course  of 
arguments  before  this  Court.    In  the  judgment  of  learned  Civil  Judge 
handed down on 23.10.2010 at Page-2 (para-2), it was noted that report 
of  the  local  commission  was  available  on  the  file  and  despite  giving 
various  opportunities  to  the  defendant  for  submission  of  written 
Civil Revision No. 1188 of 2017 
 
 
 
7 
objections thereupon, he did not file any objections, therefore, his right 
to  file  the  objections  was  closed  on  25.04.2006.    Hence,  the  report  of 
local  commission  is  undisputed  and  can  be  read  over  in  favour  of  the 
plaintiff-respondent  to  hold  that  she  was  in  possession  of  the  suit 
property.   
 
11. 
 
The remaining consideration amount was paid in the Court 
at the time of grant of temporary injunction by the learned trial Court as 
recorded in its judgment.   
 
12. 
 
So  far  as  the  statement of  PW-1  is  concerned, there  is no 
cavil to the rule that scribe cannot be considered as an attesting witness 
but the facts and circumstances of this case are different. Statement of 
PW-1  is  that  Ex.P-1  was  roughly  drafted  on  his  dictation  and 
subsequently typed in Urdu on computer.  Further, all the payment and 
signatures  of  the  parties  as  well  as  witnesses  took  place  before  him, 
therefore,  by  no  stretch  of  imagination,  he  was  a  witness  to  the 
transaction  and  as  such  his  statement  can  be  relied  upon.    By 
scrutinizing  of  evidence,  it  is  clear  that  even  major  portion  of  the 
statement  of  witnesses  of  plaintiff-respondent  has  not  been  cross-
examined.  Needless to observe that if a major portion of the statement 
of  witnesses  is  not  cross-examined,  it  is  presumed  to  have  been 
admitted by the other side.  Same is the position in this case. 
 
13. 
 
It  is  noteworthy  that  petitioner  also  filed  a  suit  for 
declaration  to  challenge  the  legality  and  validity  of  the  agreement  to 
Civil Revision No. 1188 of 2017 
 
 
 
8 
sell but subsequently opted to withdraw the suit.  This fact will also be 
beneficial for the respondent. 
 
14. 
 
I am clear in my mind that for invoking the jurisdiction of 
this  Court  under  Section  115  of  the  CPC,  petitioner  was  required  to 
show that the findings recorded by both the learned Courts below are a 
result of mis-reading and non-reading of evidence available on the file. 
Neither the said factors  have  been  proved by  the petitioner nor  I have 
seen  in  the  impugned  judgments  and  decrees.    Furthermore, this  Civil 
Revision is defective one as Ex.P-2, the report of local commission, the 
statement  of  witnesses  and  the  annexures  thereof  were  not  appended 
with the petition as required under Section 115 of the CPC. 
 
15. 
 
Pursuant  to  above,  I  have  no  reason  to  disagree  with  the 
unanimous  conclusion  drawn  by  both  the  learned  Courts  below.  No 
case  for  interference  under  Section  115  of  the  CPC  by  this  Court  is 
made out and as such this Civil Revision being devoid of force stands 
dismissed with costs throughout. 
 
 
(AMIN-UD-DIN KHAN) 
JUDGE 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
       JUDGE 
Abis Ali 
