JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE,  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
FAO. No.117 of 2016 
National Transmission and Dispatch Company  vs. Trust Investment Bank Ltd 
Date of hearing: 
01.02.2017 
JUDGEMENT  
Appellant by: 
Mr. Ashar Elahi, Advocate  
Respondent by: 
Mr. Javaid Mehmood Sandhu, Advocate 
 
SHAHID WAHEED,J.  This  appeal  is of  the  plaintiff  and arises 
from  a  summary  suit  which  was  instituted  by  it  under  Order  XXXVII 
CPC  for  recovery  of  Rs.118,796,252/-  on  the  basis  of  certificates  of 
investment  and  certificates  of  deposit.  The  defendant-respondent  after 
having  received  summons  filed  an  application  before  the  learned  Trial 
Court seeking leave to appear and defend the said suit. It was maintained 
in  the  application  that  certificates  of  investment/certificates  of  deposit 
did  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of  negotiable  instrument;  that  the  subject 
matter of the suit was exclusively triable by a Banking Court under the 
provisions  of 
the  Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances) 
Ordinance,  2001;  and,  that  the  suit  under  Order  XXXVII  CPC  was  not 
competent.  The  averments  made  in  the  above  said  application  were 
controverted  by  the  plaintiff-appellant.  The  learned  Trial  Court  while 
hearing arguments on the application for leave to appear and defend the 
suit passed the impugned order dated 27.11.2015 whereby the plaint was 
returned  under  Order  VII  Rule  10  CPC  for  its  presentation  before  an 
appropriate forum on the ground of bar of jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
 
2 
FAO.No.117-16 
2. 
The above facts of this case give rise to a question of law whether 
the  learned  Trial  Court  without  deciding  the  application  for  leave  to 
appear  and  defend  a  summary  suit  could  return  the  plaint  under  Order 
VII Rule 10 CPC for its presentation before an appropriate forum.  
3. 
In order to provide the peg on which the above referred question is 
to be hung, it is necessary to examine the relevant provisions of law. The 
plaintiff instituted suit under Order XXXVII CPC which is procedural in 
nature and provides for a speedy, efficacious and summary remedy, for 
recovery of money on the basis of bill of exchange, etc. This provision is 
a  departure  from  the  procedure  provided  for  ordinary  suits.  Order 
XXXVII  CPC  is,  however,  only  an  enabling  provision  and  a  plaintiff 
wishing  to  enforce  a  bill  of  exchange  etc.  may  at  his  option  bring  a 
summary  suit  under  this  Order  or  may  institute  a  suit  under  ordinary 
procedure. The advantage to the plaintiff for adopting such a procedure 
is provided under  Order  XXXVII  Rule  2 CPC which  contemplates  that 
without leave of the Court a defendant cannot appear and defend the suit, 
as a matter of right. He has to apply for leave to appear and defend the 
suit. Without obtaining leave to appear and defend, a defendant will not 
be heard  by  the  Court in  defence of  the  action. A defendant  may  apply 
for leave within 10 days of the service of summons upon him. If he does 
not  apply  for  such  a  leave  or  if  leave  is  refused  the  plaintiff  will  be 
entitled to a decree and all the allegations made in the plaint are deemed 
to be admitted.  
4. 
Now,  on  the  basis  of  above  analysis  of  the  provisions  of  Order 
XXXVII CPC, I advert to the case on hands. The defendant-respondent 
 
 
 
 
3 
FAO.No.117-16 
in  his  application  for  leave  to  appear  and  defend  the  suit  raised,  inter 
alia, the issues: (i) whether on the basis of certificates of investment and 
certificates of deposit a summary suit under Order XXXVII CPC  could 
be  instituted?;  (ii)  whether  the  certificates  of  investment/  certificates  of 
deposit  fell  within  the  ambit  of  definition  of  “finance”  as  provided  in 
Section  2  (d)  of  the  Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances) 
Ordinance,  2001?;  (iii)  whether  the  plaintiff-appellant  could  be  held  as 
customer  as  defined  in  Section  2  (c)  of  the  Financial  Institutions 
(Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance,  2001?;  and,  (iv)  whether  the 
controversy  between  the  parties  was  exclusively  triable  by  a  Banking 
Court?  These  issues  constituted  a  root  question  relating  to  the 
jurisdiction of the Trial Court and might be relevant for granting leave to 
the  defendant-respondent  to  defend  the  suit.    Though  this  question 
should have been decided at the earliest but after granting application for 
leave  to  appear  and  defend  the  suit  as  prior  to  that  stage  neither  the 
defendant-respondent  had  locus  standi  to  attack  maintainability  of  suit 
nor question of jurisdiction could be considered  in depth. In this regard 
guidance may be had from the cases of  Cotton Export Corporation of 
Pakistan  (Pvt)  Ltd  v  Messrs  Nagina  Cotton  Industries  Ginning 
Pressing  and  Oil  Mills  and  6  others  (1993  CLC  2217),  Sh. 
Muhammad Irfan and others v Sitrar Commission Shop and others 
(2005 MLD 851) and Naeem Iqbal v Mst. Zarina  (1996 SCMR 1530).  
5. 
In view of above, answer to the question, under reference, is given 
in  the  negative  and  it  is  held  that  learned  Trial  Court  without  deciding 
the  application  for  leave  to  appear  and  defend  the  suit  could  not  return 
 
 
 
 
4 
FAO.No.117-16 
the  plaint  under  Order  VII  Rule  10  CPC  for  its  presentation  before  an 
appropriate  forum.  Thus,  order  dated  27.11.2015  of  the  learned  Trial 
Court is not valid.  
6. 
In the sequel, this appeal succeeds. Order dated 27.11.2015 of the 
learned  Trial  Court  is  hereby  set  aside.  Consequently,  the  case  is 
remanded  to  the  learned  Additional  District  Judge,  Lahore,  who  shall 
first decide the application of the respondent-defendant seeking leave to 
appear  and  defend  the  suit  and  thereafter  proceed  with  the  suit  in 
accordance  with  law.  Parties  are  directed  to  appear  before  the  learned 
Additional District Judge, Lahore, on 20.02.2017. No order as to costs.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Arshad*  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID WAHEED) 
 
JUDGE 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
Judge 
