JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE.  
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.15971 of 2010.  
 
Naza and others  
 Vs.          
Abdul Hayee (deceased) through L.Rs & others  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
DATES OF HEARING:  
 
PETITIONERS BY:   
 
24.01.2018, 25.01.2018, 
30.01.2018 & 31.01.2018. 
M/s  Malik  Noor  Muhammad 
Awan  &  Sh.  Naveed  Shehryar 
with  Miss  Saima  Hanif  and 
Fatima Malik, Advocates.  
 
RESPONDENTS No.1 to 12 BY:    M/s  Allah  Wasaya  Malik  and 
Chaudhry, 
Iqbal 
Zafar 
Advocates.  
 
RESPONDENTS No.13 to 15 BY:  Malik  Muhammad  Azeem, 
Additional  Advocate  General 
Punjab.  
 
 
 
AMIN-UD-DIN KHAN, J.     Through  this  writ  petition 
the 
judgment  dated  20.08.2009  passed  by 
the  Member 
(Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue  Punjab  Lahore  in  ROR 
No.904  of  1996  titled  “Abdul  Haee  etc  Versus  Consolidation 
Department  etc”  has  been  challenged,  whereby  the  revision  was 
accepted and it was declared that: 
“The  mutations  No.48  and  49  are  not  rejected  in  total  but 
remains void to the extent the changes which have already 
taken  place  and  may  undergo  further  changes  through  the 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
2 
legal  orders  of  competent  forums.  The  Revision  Petition 
No.904/1996 to that extent is accepted. The parties are free 
to  establish  their  specific  claims  before  the  revenue 
authorities.  As  for  as  challenging  the  basic  impugned 
mutation is concerned it must stop now for good.” 
 
2. 
 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  argues  that 
mutations No.48 and 49 are  in  issue  in this litigation. Originally 
the  property  subject  matter  of  these  mutations  was  recorded  in 
the name of AALA MALKAN and ADNA MALKAN. With the 
abolition  of  AALA  MALKIAT  through  Para  22  of  Martial  Law 
Regulation  64  of  1959  the  case  of  petitioners  that  they  being 
ADNA  MALKAN  in  ‘Shamlat  Deh’  became  the  owners  in 
accordance with Notification dated 3rd of March, 1960. Through 
mutation  No.48  AALA  MALKIAT  was  abolished,  whereas 
through attestation of mutation No.49 the ownership of land was 
created.  Previously  when  the  matter  came  before  this  Court 
through  Writ  Petition  No.683  of  1962  this  Court  advised  the 
petitioners or their predecessors to approach the civil court in the 
light of judgment passed by the Hon’ble Mr. Justice Karam Elahi 
Chauhan dated 11.11.1971.  ADNA MALKAN filed a suit in the 
civil court on 21.11.1973, the suit was dismissed on 14.03.1975. 
An  appeal  was  preferred,  which  was  accepted  by  the  learned 
District  Judge,  Mianwali  vide 
judgment  &  decree  dated 
24.09.1975  and  both  the  mutations  were  cancelled.  Second 
Appeal  was  filed  by  AALA  MALKAN  bearing  RSA  No.700  of 
1975,  which  was  dismissed  on  11.12.1975.  AALA  MALKAN 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
3 
went  to  the  august  Supreme  Court  through  Civil  Appeals 
No.432,  433  and  434  of  1980,  which  were  dismissed  on 
05.03.1991.  The  petitioners  filed  an  application  before  the 
ADC(C)  for  implementation  of  order  of  learned  District  Judge. 
The application was accepted on 09.10.1995. The other side went 
in  appeal  before  the  Additional  Commissioner  (Consolidation). 
The  appeal  was  dismissed  vide  order  dated  04.06.1996, 
therefore,  AALA  MALKAN  filed  ROR  No.904  of  1996  before 
the  Board  of  Revenue,  which  was  accepted  through  the 
impugned judgment dated 20.08.2009.  
The first point raised before this Court is that the judgment 
was handed down by the learned Member (Consolidation) Board 
of  Revenue  after  about  one  year  of  the  announcement  of 
decision. Learned counsel has referred the judgments reported as 
“Messrs  MFMY 
INDUSTRIES  LTD.  and  others  versus 
FEDERATION  OF  PAKISTAN  through  Ministry  of  Commerce 
and others” (2015 S C M R 1550), “MUHAMMAD OVAIS and 
another  versus  FEDERATION  OF  PAKISTAN  through  Ministry 
of Works and Housing Pakistan, Islamabad and others” (2007 S 
C  M  R  1587)  and  “Syed  IFTIKHAR-UD-DIN  HAIDAR 
GARDEZI  and  9  others  versus  CENTRAL  BANK  OF  INDIA 
LTD., LAHORE and 2 others” (1996 S C M R 669) to state that 
when  the  decision  was  written  after  30  days,  same  is  nullity  in 
the eye of law. States that the counsel who was appearing before 
the  Member  (Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue  on  behalf  of 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
4 
present petitioners  filed  his affidavit to this effect, therefore, the 
first  prayer  was  that  after  setting  aside  the  order  passed  by  the 
Member  (Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue  the  matter  be 
remanded  back  to  the  Member  (Consolidation)  Board  of 
Revenue. Further learned counsel has argued that when there is a 
judgment  passed  by  the  learned  District  Judge  dated  24.09.1975 
the  Member  (Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue  cannot  declare 
that  the  impugned  mutations cannot  be  fully cancelled/set-aside. 
Learned  counsel  has  further  referred  the  order  passed  in  Writ 
Petition No.17270 of 1993 by the Hon’ble Mr. Justice Munir  A. 
Sheikh.  Refers  Para  3  of  the  judgment  whereby  as  per  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioners  the  impugned  mutations  were  totally 
declared  to  be  nonexistent.  Prays  for  acceptance  of  the  Writ 
Petition  and  declaration  of  the  judgment/order  passed  by  the 
Member  (Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue  dated  20.08.2009 
without jurisdiction.  
3. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  Additional  Advocate 
General  Punjab  as  well  as 
learned  counsel  for  private 
respondents  have  vehemently  opposed  the  arguments  advanced 
by the  learned counsel  for the petitioners. Argue that there is  no 
solid  evidence  with  regard  to  the  fact  that  order/judgment  was 
written  by  the  Member  (Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue  after 
about one year of the announcement of decision and further that 
there  is  no  illegality  or  infirmity  in  the  order  impugned  nor  the 
same  is without jurisdiction, therefore,  if there was any delay  in 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
5 
writing  of  the  judgment,  that  is  irrelevant  when  there  is  no 
jurisdictional  defect  and  even  this  Court  while  exercising 
jurisdiction  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  cannot  go 
into 
the  factual 
controversy,  unless  the  order  is  without  jurisdiction,  it  is  the 
discretion  of  court  to  ignore  this  point  of  argument.  While 
referring  the  final  Para  of  the  impugned  judgment  states  that 
even  the  petitioners  approached  the  civil  court  in  the  light  of 
judgment  passed  by  this  Court  in  Writ  Petition  No.683  of  1962 
and  this  discretionary  jurisdiction  is  not  available  with  the 
petitioners  to  challenge  the  order  passed  by  the  Member 
(Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue.  Further  argues  that  the 
Member  (Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue  has  decided  the 
matter exactly in accordance with the judgment handed down by 
the  Hon’ble  Mr.  Justice  Karam  Elahi  Chauhan.  Finally  learned 
Additional  Advocate  General  Punjab  supports  the  judgment 
passed  by  the 
learned  Member  (Consolidation)  Board  of 
Revenue dated 20.08.2009.  
4. 
 
I  have  heard  the  lengthy  arguments  of  learned 
counsel for the parties and gone through the record as well as the 
case  law  with  the  able  assistance  of  learned  counsel  for  the 
parties  and  the  judgment  impugned  through  this  writ  petition  as 
well as the voluminous record appended with this petition.  
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
6 
5. 
 
The matter in issue started with the promulgation of 
Martial Law Regulation 64 of 1959. Para 22 is relevant, which is 
reproduced as under:- 
interests 
subsisting 
immediately  before 
“22.  Intermediary  interest.---  Ala-Milkiat  and  similar 
other 
the 
commencement  of 
this  Regulation,  shall  on  such 
commencement,  stand  abolished,  and  no  compensation 
shall  be  claimed  by,  or  paid,  person  affected  by  the 
abolition.” 
 
To  implement  Para  22  referred  above  the  Board  of  Revenue 
issued  various  notifications.  Notification  No.ASP-2/59/2241-LC 
West  Pakistan  Land  Commission,  Lahore  dated  the  20th  June, 
1959 is relevant, which is reproduced as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“From  
 
 
 
To  
Malik Khuda Bakhsh, T.K.(I), P.C.S.  
Secretary, West Pakistan Land Commission,  
Lahore.  
All  Deputy  Land  Commissioners 
(Deputy 
Commissioners,  Settlement  Officers;  and  Political 
Agents) in West Pakistan, except Kalat Division and 
Collector, Karachi.  
Subject: 
Intermediary 
interests-  Abolition  of  Ala 
Malkiat;          ESQUIRE,  C.S.P.,  CHIEF  LAND 
COMMISSIONER, WEST PAKISTAN LAHORE.  
Sir,  
I  am  directed  to  invite  your  attention  to  paragraph 
22 of the Martial Law Regulation No.64, under which Ala 
Malkiat and similar other  interests subsisting  immediately 
before the commencement of the Regulation, shall on such 
commencement, 
any 
compensation,  and  to  the  replies  received  from  you  to 
letter  No.551/59/1266-LR  I,  dated  the  17th  March,  1959 
from  the  Secretary,  Board  of  Revenue.  The  matter  was 
considered  by  the  West  Pakistan  Land  Commission  in  its 
meeting  held  on  the  9th  June,  1959,  and  it  was  decided 
that:- 
abolished  without 
stand 
(a)  Adna Maliks should be  made full proprietors 
of land held by them as such;  
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
7 
(b)  Adna  Maliks 
should 
not 
pay 
compensation  to  the  Ala  Maliks  or 
Commission;  
any 
the 
(c)  With effect from Rabi 1959, the Adna Maliks 
should stop paying anything in cash or kind to 
the Ala Maliks;  
(d)  Where  a  person  is  entered  as  Ala  Malik  and 
as well as  Adna Malik, or where  land  is  held 
only  by  an  Ala  Malik  and  there  is  no  Adna 
Malik  under  him,  the  Ala  Malik  should  be 
considered as a full proprietor and the entries 
in  the  revenue  records  should  be  corrected 
accordingly;  
(e)  No  Ala  Malik  will  be  entitled 
to  any 
compensation 
the 
extinguishment  of  his  rights  as  laid  down  in 
Paragraph 22 of the martial Law Regulation;  
account 
on 
of 
 
 
 
I  am  to  request  you  that  necessary  action  may  be 
2. 
taken  in  accordance  with  the  above  decisions  of  the 
Commission.  
   Your obedient servant,  
 
 
 
 
 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY,  
For Secretary Land Commission 
 The concluding Para of the judgment dated 11.11.1971 passed in 
Writ Petition No.683 of 1962 by the Hon’ble Mr. Justice Karam 
Elahi Chauhan is as under:- 
“From what has been written above, it will be evident that 
this  case  involves  dispute/questions  of  fact  which  require 
leading  of  evidence  oral  and  documentary  and  going 
through  the  volumes  of  revenue  records  exrending  over 
decades. It is obvious that such a question cannot be gone 
into  by  this  Court,  specially,  when  the  persons  against 
whom  the  rights  are  being  claimed  have  neither,  been 
impleaded  in  the  writ  petition  nor  other  vice  their  names 
have been disclosed in any other form. In cases of the kind 
in  hand,  in  my  opinion,  the  petitioners’  have  a  remedy  of 
approach  of  the  civil  Court  by  making  out  a  proper  case 
for  the  relief  desired  by  them.  In  this  writ  petition,  no 
copies of any revenue record have been  filed and the case 
of  the  petitioners’  rests  solely  on  their  oral  averment  case 
on  in  the  writ  petition.  In  these  circumstances,  the  writ 
petition  shall  have  to  be  dismissed  leaving  the  petitioners 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
8 
their  rights  by  an  appropriate  jurisdiction  in  accordance 
with law which I  hereby do. There shall be no order as to 
costs.” 
 
 
I have also gone through the judgment of this Court 
6. 
reported as “GHULAM HAIDER versus GHULAM RAZA SHAH 
AND  12  others”  (PLD  1979  Lahore  481)  whereby  this 
judgment  was  handed  down  by  the  Hon’ble  Mr.  Justice  Aftab 
Hussain while deciding Regular Second Appeal No.764 of 1967. 
Paragraphs  Nos.28  to  36  of  this  judgment  being  relevant  are 
reproduced as under:-  
“28.  Even  if  this  provision  had  not  been  there  the 
conclusion would not have been different. The division of 
the  proprietary  rights  and  consequent  rights  of  superior 
proprietor and  inferior proprietors  have been dealt with  in 
Punjab  Settlement  Manual  by  Sir  James  M.  Douic  (15th 
Edn.)  in  paras,  143,  167,  168,  169  and  171.  The  origin  of 
the rights  may differ  from district to district but the rights 
of both types of proprietors are almost uniform. The rights 
of  both  categories  of  proprietors  in  Muzaffargarh  District 
particularly  with  reference  to  waste  as  explained  by  Mr. 
O’Brien  are  dealt  with  in  para.  169  of  the  Settlement 
Manual.  The  relevant  portion  of  this  quotation  is  as 
follows:- 
“The  superior  proprietors  claim  to  be  owners  of  all 
unappropriated  land.  The  malikan  adna  are  full 
proprietors of the land in their possession subject to 
the payment of the share of the old proprietors, and 
not  liable  to  eviction  on  failure  to  pay  it,  and  are 
entitled to introduce tenants without reference to the 
superior  proprietors………Their  rights  (rights  of 
superior proprietors) are restricted……..to disposing 
of  the  unappropriated  waste  in  the  village……The 
unappropriated  waste  belongs 
the  superior 
proprietors………….” 
 
to 
In  para.  171  it  is  stated  that  the  title  of  the  superior 
landlord has been most fully preserved in Mianwali and in 
the Sanawan Tehsil of Muzaffargarh. Reference is made to 
Mr. Tucker’s Settlement Report of Dera Ismail Khan.  
 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
9 
to 
reproduce 
29.  A  copy  of  this  report  has  been  shown  to  me  by  the 
learned  counsel  for  the  respondents.  It  is  not  however 
necessary 
this 
unauthenticated  copy  since  the  same  principles  have  been 
evolved  by  a  Division  Bench  of  Lahore  High  Court  in 
Malik  Gulzar  Haider  v.  Haider  a  case  of  Tehsil  Bhakkar. 
The rules laid down by Mr. Tucker have been summed up 
as follows:- 
any  portion 
from 
“(1)  The  ala  makiyat  is  not  ordinarily  to  be 
partitioned,  though  such  partition  may  be  allowed 
for sufficient reasons. In case of partition, the rights 
of  the  adna  maliks  in  the  common  lands  of  the 
whole  village  will  be  continued  as  before.  For 
instance,  an  adna  malik  will  continue  to  graze  his 
cattle  and  to  beak  up  waste  in  all  the  pattis  into 
which a Mauzah may be divided.  
(2)  The  ala  maliks  will  have  the  first  right  to 
cultivate  waste,  and  after  them  the  adnas.  Failing 
these  the  ala  maliks  may  give  lands  to  outsiders  to 
cultivate.  
(3)  Though  the  ala  maliks  have  paid  no  jhuri 
hitherio, they will pay it in future for any lands they 
may  clear.  There  will,  however,  be  this  difference 
between  them  and  the  adna  maliks  that  it  will  be 
optional  with  the  ala  maliks  to  take  jhuri  from  an 
adna  malik,  in  which  case  he  will  remain  an 
occupancy  tenant only.  The  individual ala  malik on 
the other hand, will be entitled, if he chooses, to pay 
jhuri  at  a  fair  rate,  and  to  thus  become  an  adna 
malik. In such a case the other ala maliks will not be 
able to refuse to take jhuri.  
(4)  The question as to the taking of jhuri, or as to 
its amount, will  for the  future be determined by the 
ala  maliks  as  a  body,  and  the  decision  come  to  be 
recorded by the Patwari.  
(5)  The  lambardar  will  be  entrusted  with  the 
power  of  allotting  common  waste  for  cultivation. 
Any  persons  feeling  aggrieved  at  the  way  in  which 
he exercises such power, must put in a complaint at 
once,  otherwise  persons  clearing  jungle,  with  the 
lambardar’s  permission,  will  acquire  occupancy 
rights,  and  pay  rent  at  the  customary  village  rate  to 
the superior proprietary body.  
(6)  The  right  to  profits  from  the  produce  of 
common  waste  lands,  other  than  grazing,  has  been 
continued  to  the  superior  proprietors  subject  to  the 
right of the adna  maliks and cultivators to take first 
what they want  for their own requirements. The ala 
maliks  have  been  given  the  option  of  taking  a  third 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
10 
of  whatever  munj  grass  there  may  be,  leaving  the 
rest  to  the  cultivating  body  generally  or  of  leaving 
the  whole  to  the  adna  maliks  till  1st  January  after 
which  the  ala  maliks  are  at  liberty  to  sell  the 
remainder.  In  neither  case  are  the  adna  maliks  at 
liberty  to  sell  any  munj  grass  that  they  may  have 
out, or dispose of it to outsiders.  
(7)  All  classes  of  cultivators  are  entitled  to 
firewood  from  the  common  lands.  Non-cultivators 
such  as  traders  and  artisans,  will  in  future  pay  8 
annas  a  year  for  the  privilege  of  taking  grass  and 
wood  and  munj  from  the  common  lands.  Payment 
under  this  head  will  go  to  meet  the  grazing  jama 
assessed  on  such  lands,  and  will  not  be  a  pre-
requisite of the ala maliks.  
In  some  cases  partial  partition  of  the  waste 
(8) 
may  be  effected.  In  such  cases,  the  existing  waste 
can  be  divided  among  the  superior  proprietary 
shares  without  touching  the  cultivated  lands,  and  it 
can  be  provided  that  the  malikana  due  on  the 
partitioned  lands,  when  these  are  brought  under  the 
cultivation,  will  be  paid  into  the  common  fund.  In 
this  way  the  right  to  the  malikana  will  continue  to 
be held undivided as before, but each ala malik will 
be  able  to  make  his  own  arrangement  for  taking 
jhuri,  etc.  for  the  lands  that  may  have  fallen  to  his 
portion.  A  portion  of  this  sort,  though  it  effectively 
protects 
the  shares  claiming 
partition,  is  not  generally  what  the  ala  maliks  care 
for. The  great  idea of every ala  malik  is to get patti 
of  his  own,  with  adna  maliks  over  whom  he  can 
rule, and a share of the lambardari.” 
interests  of 
the 
 
30.  After  considering  the  nature  of  this  tenure  in 
detail  it  was  concluded  by  the  Division  Bench 
(page102) that:- 
(1)  Ala  malkiat  means  the  right  to  give 
waste land for cultivation to others.  
(2) 
Persons  among  the  body  of  the  ala 
maliks can bring a portion of the waste under 
cultivation  and  become 
the  adna  malik 
themselves.  This  proprietorship  is  subject  to 
the  right  of  ala  malik  to  the  payment  of  jhuri 
and malikana.  
(3)  Where  the  waste  is  not  common  land 
and  the  title  of  the  maliks  of  the  village  to  it 
and not only to ala malkiat in it is recognized 
by  Government,  the  waste  is  the  property  of 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
11 
the  ala  maliks,  which  they  may  use  in  any 
way they like, and  
If the  unappropriated waste is common 
(4) 
land  (Shamilat-i-deh)  it  is  not  the  exclusive 
property  of  any  body  but  the  nature  and 
extent  of  such  rights  will  depend  upon  the 
terms  of  the  Wajibularz  which  incorporates 
the agreement  in respect of this land between 
the  Government,  the  ala  maliks,  the  adna 
maliks  and  the  other  representatives  of  the 
village.  
 
31.  On  the  facts  of  that  case  it  was  held  that 
according to the conditions of the Wajibularz the ala 
maliks have the first right to bring the Shamilat land 
under cultivation. Though it was held that ala maliks 
could not be deemed to be the exclusive owner but a 
decree  for  ejectment  of 
the  defendants,  adna 
malikan, was passed. This case was, as stated above 
taken to the Supreme Court by the defendant but the 
appeal was not pressed and was dismissed as such.  
 
32.  
 The  other  case  decided  by  a  Division  Bench 
of  Lahore  High  Court  is  K.  B.  Muhammad  Abdul 
Rahim  Khan  v.  Hussaina  (1)  This  case  dealt  with 
the  land  in  villages Hetu and Tinda Thal of District 
Mianwali. On the basis of  wajibularz of the village, 
the  ala  maliks  were  held  entitled  to  partition  of  the 
shamilat  deh  and  were  held  to  be  sole  owners  of  it, 
which  means  that  they  had  full  proprietary  interest 
in  it  to  the  exclusion  of  the  adna  maliks  and 
tirniguzars.  It  was  observed  that  the  wajibularz 
determines  the  rights  inter  alia  of  the  two  types  of 
proprietors.  
 
33.  The  view  that  ala  maliks  have  the  right  to 
partition  of  waste  land  is  thus  uniform.  Similarly 
position  of  the  wajibularz  as  a  charter  of  rights  of 
right holders in an estate is undisputed.  
 
34.  The  Wajibularz  in  the  present  case  is  proved 
as Exh.P.3. It is the charter of rights. It appears from 
para.2  of  this  document  that  the  land  of  the  village 
was governed by  Sind Sagar Doab Act, 1902 under 
which 
into  an 
agreement  with  the  ala  maliks  in  their  capacity  as 
exclusive  owners  of  the  shamilat  and  had  agreed  to 
give to them land equivalent to 1/4th of the shamilat 
taken  from  them  (ala  maliks).  It  was  further 
the  Government  had  entered 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
12 
 
in 
that  case  also 
provided that during the currency of this agreement, 
no  other  proprietary  interest  could  intervene  in  the 
shamilat. In para. 3 it was stated that the preferential 
right  to  sink  well  in  the  shamilat  would  be  that  of 
the  ala  maliks  and  any  right  of  adna  maliks  were 
subject to this preferential right and in case the adna 
maliks  were  not  in  a  position  to  sink  the  well,  the 
ala  maliks  had  a  right  to  give  the  land  to  others  on 
proper  conditions.  But  in  case  of  reclamation  of 
barani  area,  no  right  or  interest  of  ownership  or  of 
tenancy  on  the  basis  of  breaking  the  waste  would 
accrue to any person.  
 
35. 
This document is of the same pattern as 
the  wajibularz  in  the  case  decided  in  K.  B. 
Muhammad  Abdul  Rahim  Khan  v.  Hussaina  and 
supports  the  principles  laid  down  in  Mr.  Tucker’s 
report.  Another  document  is  Exh.D.2,  a  judgment 
between  ala  maliks  and  the  adna  maliks  of  village 
Daggar  Yar  Shah  dated  10-06-1933  delivered  by 
Mr. P. R. B. May, District Judge, Mianwali. The ala 
maliks  were  held 
to  have 
proprietary rights in the shamilat area. As a result of 
this  finding  the  suit  of  the  adna  maliks  who  had 
claimed a right in the shamilat of village and a right 
to  claim  its  partition,  was  dismissed  by  the  said 
learned  District 
judgment  was 
confirmed by the High Court in Civil Case No.1863 
of  1933  on  26-4-1935  (copy  Exh.D.3).  From  the 
facts as stated above as well as law it is clear that: 
(1)  Ala  maliks  bringing  any  of  the  area  of 
 
shamllat under cultivation will also become the adna 
maliks of that area with the result that their right of 
proprietorship becomes all exclusive.  
 
In  case  of  reclamation  of  barani  area, 
no  right  of  adna  milkiyat  can  be  claimed  by  the 
person breaking the waste, and.  
 
(3)  The ala maliks have a right to partition 
of the waste without any interference  from the adna 
maliks.  
 
36.  The  abolition  of  ala  milkiyat  only  removes 
the  superior  proprietary  interest.  It  does  not  take 
away  the  adna  milkiyat  right  or  right  to  exclusive 
possession  of  even  uncultivated  waste  which  once 
vested  in  the  owners  as  ala  maliks.  The  effect  of 
para.22  of  Martial  Law  Regulation  64  in  case  of 
such  land  is  that  the  danger  of  the  ala  maliks  ever 
losing  the  land  to  adna  maliks  evaporates  and 
Judge.  This 
(2) 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
13 
notwithstanding any right given in the wajibularz to 
persons  reclaiming  the  waste  by  breaking  the  land, 
the ala maliks will become exclusive owners of that 
property. The argument of the learned counsel about 
resumability  of  the  land  by  the  Government  is, 
therefore, without merit.  
 
7. 
 
The  copies  of  suit  and  judgment  of  learned  trial 
court  are  not  available  on  record.  The  appellate  judgment  is 
available. No doubt the suit was decreed at appellate stage as the 
prayer  was  with  regard  to  the  specific  land  by  the  specific 
persons  and  in  civil  litigation  the  impugned  mutations  were 
declared  null  and  void  totally,  whereas  through  the  judgment 
reported as “GHULAM HAIDER versus GHULAM RAZA SHAH 
AND  12  others”  (PLD  1979  Lahore  481)  the  ratio  of  this 
judgment  as  well  as  of  the  judgment  handed  down  by  the 
Hon’ble  Mr.  Justice  Karam  Elahi  Chauhan  passed  in  Writ 
Petition  No.683  of  1962  dated  11.11.1971  that  if  a  person 
establishes  his  right  through  a  decree  of  civil  court  of  ADNA 
MALIK,  to  that  extent  the 
impugned  mutations  are  not 
sustainable  and  in  the  way  of  rights  created  through  a  decree  of 
civil  court  the  impugned  mutations  will  not  be  a  hurdle.  If  the 
intention  of  judgment  was  to  declare  the  impugned  mutations 
null and void in toto, then there was no need to ask the claimant 
of  status  of  ADNA  MALIK  for  getting  a  decree  for  declaration 
of  their  status  as  ADNA  MALIK  from  the  civil  court.  Against 
the  above  said  judgment  no  judgment  of  august  Supreme  Court 
or  of  this  court  has  been  produced  whereby  the  impugned 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
14 
mutations  were  declared  null  and  void  in  toto  except  passing 
remarks  passed  by  the  Hon’ble  Mr.  Justice  Munir  A.  Sheikh  in 
Para  3  of  the  judgment  while  dismissing Writ  Petition  No17270 
of 1993 in limine vide order dated 22.2.1994, passing remarks on 
the  basis  of  assertion  of  learned  counsel  for  the  writ  petitioner 
that  mutations  No.48  and  49  have  been  declared  as  void  by  the 
august  Supreme  Court,  no  point  was  decided  by  the  learned 
Judge  of  this  Court,  therefore,  the  value  of  said  judgment  of 
learned  single  Judge  of  this  Court  is  not  more  than  passing 
remarks  about  mutations  No.48  and  49.  Even  the  same  learned 
Judge  thereafter  decided  Writ  Petition  No.11126  of  1994  vide 
order dated 12.02.1995. Para 5 of the judgment is reproduced as 
under:- 
learned  counsel 
“After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner and Syed 
Jamshed  Ali  Shah,  Advocate 
for 
respondent  No.2  at  limine  stage,  I  do  not  find  myself  in 
agreement  with  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  that  in 
the  said  suit  mutations  48  and  49  as  a  whole  in  general 
were  declared  to  be  inoperative  and  void.  The  petitioner 
was  declared  to  be  the  owner  of  land  measuring  206 
kanals 15 marlas and qua this land and the petitioner rights 
of  ownership  in  it  that  mutation  No.48  and  49  were 
declared to be ineffective and nothing  more. He could  not 
claim  that  the  consolidation  in  the  village  qua  the  other 
land  as  a  whole  should  be  stayed  treating  the  said 
mutations  as  a  whole  inoperative.  The  petitioner  has  been 
granted ownership rights in the land measuring 206 kanals 
15  marlas 
through  mutation  No.84  sanctioned  on 
10.02.1976  therefore  he  cannot  claim  any  land  in  excess 
thereof.” 
 
8. 
 
In  the  above  circumstances,  it  is  clear  that  the 
property of which there was no ADNA MALIK was to be given 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
15 
to  the  AALA  MALIK  and  they  became  the  full  owner.  It  will 
also be important to note here that in accordance with Para 18 of 
the Land Reforms Regulation, 1972 as well as Para 15 of Martial 
Law  Regulation  No.  77, 
the  excess 
land  after  retaining 
permissible holding was to be resumed by the Land Commission 
and  was  to  be  allotted  in  accordance  with  the  scheme  of  Land 
Reforms  to  the  persons  entitled  for  the  same  and  actually  after 
resumption the land was allotted to the persons entitled under the 
Land  Reforms,  some  property  was  given  to  the  Pakistan 
Railways  and  some  to  the  Canal  Department.  If  both  these 
mutations  are  declared  null  and  void  in  toto,  all  the  legal 
proceedings  and  legal  transfers  of  land  to  the  persons  entitled 
under  the  Martial  Law  Regulation  of  resumed  land  as  well  as 
Railways  and  Canal  Departments  will  be  reversed,  which  is  not 
permissible  under 
the 
law.  The  declaration  of 
impugned 
mutations  as  null  and  void  in  toto  is  not  the  requirement  of  any 
previous  judgment  passed  by  this  court  or  the  intention  of  any 
notification  issued  by  the  Government.  Some  property  was  of 
non-Muslim  owners,  after  their  migration  to  India,  the  property 
vested  to  the  Custodian  and  Settlement  Department  allotted  the 
land under their own schemes.  
9. 
 
The  resume  of  above  discussion  is  that  mutations 
No.48  and  49  will  be  void  to  the  extent  of  decree  passed  by  the 
civil  court  in  individual  suit  as  held  by  the  Hon’ble  Mr.  Justice 
Karam  Elahi  Chauhan  in  the  judgment  passed  in  Writ  Petition 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
16 
No.683  of  1962.  The  Additional  Deputy  Commissioner  decided 
the  matter  in  accordance  with  the  said  judgment.  Against  the 
decision  of  A.D.C.,  Writ  Petition  No.11126  of  1994  was  filed, 
which  was  dismissed  in  limine  on  12.02.1995  by  the  Hon’ble 
Mr.  Justice  Munir  A.  Shiekh  and  it  was  held  that  mutations 
No.48  and  49  as  a  whole  are  not  void.  The  Additional 
Commissioner (Consolidation) declared  mutations No.48 and 49 
as  void  in  toto  passing  his  findings  that  learned  District  Judge 
has declared as such. The same  findings were absolutely against 
the facts as well as law. The property in dispute in the lis routed 
through  the  civil  court,  subject  matter  of  appeal  decided  by  the 
learned  District  Judge  mentioned  supra,  was  206  kanals  15 
marlas,  whereas  the  property  subject  matter  of  the  mutations 
No.48  and  49  was  28000  kanals  and  only  2000  kanals  was  of 
ADNA  MALKAN.  It  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  here 
that  none  of  the  parties  have  disputed  the  notification  issued  by 
the  Land  Commission  as  I  have  referred  notification  dated 
20.06.1959.  In  accordance  with  Clause  (d)  of 
the  said 
notification when AALA MALIK is in possession and as a whole 
the ADNA MALIK who is to be treated as full owner, therefore, 
where AALA MALIK made the land of shamilat-i-deh cultivable 
and  they  qualify  the  definition  of  ADNA  MALIK,  they  were  to 
be  declared  as  full  owner  and  mutations  impugned  through  this 
writ  petition  have  rightly  been  declared  as  not  come  in  the  way 
of  ADNA  MALIK  when  they  established  their  right  in  the  light 
W.P.No.15971 of 2010.  
17 
of  judgment  passed  by  this  court  and  through  a  decree  of  civil 
court.  
10. 
 
I  am  clear  in  my  mind  that  when  a  party  comes  to 
this  court  through  a  constitution  petition  filed  under  Article  199 
of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  the 
party  must  show  the  order  impugned  through  the  petition  or 
action  taken  by  the  respondents  to  be  without  jurisdiction  or 
contrary to any legislative provision of law or at least against the 
notified  policy  of  the  Government.  None  of  the  above  said 
eventualities  could  be  proved  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioners  in  case  in  hand.    In  these  circumstances,  I  see  no 
infirmity  or  illegality  in  the  judgment  passed  by  the  Member 
(Consolidation)  Board  of  Revenue  Punjab  Lahore,  which  is  in 
accordance  with  the  previous  judgment  passed  by  this  court. 
Therefore,  very  writ  petition  is  not  maintainable,  same  stands 
dismissed. No order as to costs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             (Amin-ud-Din Khan) 
 
               Judge 
 
Qurban* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Announced in Open Court on______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Judge  
Approved for Reporting  
 
 
 
 Judge  
