Stereo HCJAD 38 
Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. W.P. No.177608 of 2018 
Hascol Petroleum Limited 
Versus 
Rent 
Urban 
Registrar, 
and another. 
Registrar/ 
Sub-
Sialkot 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Decision: 
08.05.2018 
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 
 
M/s.  Sheikh  Sajid  Mehmood, 
Khawaja  Farooq  Dildar  Ahmed, 
Tahir  Butt,  Usman  Fazal  and 
Shahzada 
Durrani, 
Advocates.  
Ch.  Sultan  Mahmood,  Assistant 
Advocate-General. 
 
Jahandur 
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J.-    Through  the  instant  constitutional 
petition,  filed  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (the  “Constitution”),  the  Petitioner  has 
made the following prayers: 
“In  view  of  the  circumstances  mentioned  above,  it  is, 
therefore,  most  respectfully  prayed  that  the  impugned 
order dated 18.01.2018 may kindly be set aside as being 
illegal, coram non judice, and without lawful authority. 
It is further prayed that direction may kindly be issued to 
Respondent  to  register  tenancy  agreement  under  the 
provision of section 5 of Rent Premises Act, 2009.”  
 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
2 
2. 
The  facts  tersely  revealed  from  the  petition  are  that  the 
Petitioner  got  land  on  tenancy  from  the  Respondent  No.2  (the  “Pro 
forma  Respondent”)  and  in  this  regard  a  tenancy  agreement  (the 
“Agreement”)  was  executed  between  the  Petitioner  and  the  Pro 
forma  Respondent  for  a  period  of  twenty  (20)  years.  To  fulfil  the 
requirement  of  Section  5  of  the  Punjab  Rented  Premises  Act,  2009 
(the  “Act”),  the  Petitioner  and  the  Pro forma  Respondent  submitted 
an application for registration of the agreement to the Respondent but 
he refused vide the impugned order dated 18.01.2018 (the “Impugned 
Order”). Hence, this petition.  
3. 
The learned counsel for the Petitioner inter alia submitted that 
the Impugned Order is against the law and facts; that the reasons for 
refusing  the  application  of    the  Petitioner  for  registration  of  the 
agreement  are  unjust  and  against  the  spirit  of  law  as  the  agreement 
was  submitted  for  the  registration  under  the  Act  which  does  not 
burden  payment  of  stamp  duty  to  the  landlord  and  tenant  for  the 
registration  of  tenancy;  that  the  Respondent  was  not  authorized  to 
refuse  the  application  of  the  Petitioner  imposing  certain  conditions 
rather  was  bound  to  register  the  agreement  under  Section  5  of  the 
Act;  that  the  only  meant  for  registration  of  agreement  before  the 
Respondent is proof of relationship of landlord and tenant; that as per 
the requirements of law stamp paper of Rs.1200/- was purchased for 
the  purpose  of  execution  of  agreement  between  the  parties,  as  such 
the reason for refusing the application that stamp papers of different 
nature  were  used    for  writing  the  agreement is also illegal;   that the 
condition  of  stamp  duty  @  5.25%  under  Article  35  (c)(1)  of  the 
Punjab  Finance  Act,  2017  (the  “Finance  Act”)  only  applies  to  lease 
agreements  which  are  for  more  than  twenty  (20)  years;  that  the 
Impugned  Order    has    been  passed  against  Article  4  of  the 
Constitution. 
4. 
On 
the  other  hand, 
learned  Law  Officer  vehemently 
controverted  the  arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
Petitioner and prayed for dismissal of the petition on the grounds that 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
3 
as the  Petitioner neither  adopted the  prescribed  mode  of issuance of 
stamp paper nor accompanied the Government levied stamp duty, the 
agreement  was  rightly  refused  to  be  registered;  that  the  agreement 
was  also  extendable  for  additional  10  years  as  per  Article  2  of  the 
agreement;  that  the  Impugned  Order  was  passed    in  pursuance  of 
provisions  of  the  Stamp  Act,  1899  (the  “Stamp  Act”)  as  amended 
under  the  Finance  Act  under  Section  35(1)  of  the  Stamp  Act;  that 
infact it was not a tenancy agreement rather a lease agreement as the 
contents of the agreements matter and the caption does not matter. 
5. 
I  have  heard  the  detailed  arguments  from  both  sides  and 
perused the record minutely. 
6. 
In  the  instant  petition,  the  Petitioner  has  sought  a  judicial 
review by this Court of the Impugned Order dated 18.01.2018 passed 
by  the  Respondent,  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution.  The 
Respondent has refused the registration of the agreement on two (2) 
grounds, namely (1) stamp papers were purchased by the local stamp 
paper  vendor  whereas  it  was  required to be  issued  in the  form  of  e-
stamp  papers  by  the  Bank  of  Punjab,  and  (2)  the  agreement  is 
required  to  be  affixed  stamp  paper  duty  at  the  rate  of  5.25%  under 
Article  35(I)  of  the  Stamp  Act  because  the  period  of  the  tenancy  is 
more than twenty (20) years. The main grievance of the Petitioner is 
that while passing the Impugned Order, the Respondent went beyond 
his  jurisdiction  and  even  has  failed  to  exercise  his  authority  within 
the  prescribed  parameters  of  law.  Before  touching  the  merits  of  the 
case, the mechanism of the law has to be looked into.  
7. 
The  Act  was  enacted  to  regulate  the  relationship  of  landlord 
and  the  tenant.  The  “tenancy  agreement”  is  defined  under  Section 
2(m) of the Act as: “an agreement in writing by which a landlord lets 
out a premises to a tenant”; “landlord” is defined under Section 2(d) 
of the Act as: “the owner of a premises and includes a person for the 
time  being  entitled  or  authorized  to  receive  rent  in  respect  of  the 
premises”; and the “tenant” is defined under Section 2(l) of the Act 
as under: 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
4 
2(l)  “Tenant  means  a  person  who  undertakes  or  is 
bound to pay rent as consideration for the occupation 
of  a  premises  by  him  or  by  any  other  person  on  his 
behalf and includes; 
(i)   a person who continues to be in occupation of the 
premises  after  the  termination  of  his  tenancy  for  the 
purpose of a proceeding under this Act; 
(ii)   legal heirs of a tenant in the event of death of the 
tenant  who  continue  to  be  in  occupation  of  the 
premises; and 
(iii)    a  sub-tenant  who  is  in  possession  of  the 
premises  or  part  thereof  with  the  written  consent  of 
the landlord.” (emphasis added) 
8. 
The  Rent  Registrar  is  not  defined  under  the  Act.  The 
Rent  Registrar  is,  however,  appointed  under  Section  17  of  the 
Act which reads as under: 
“17.  Rent  Registrar.–  (1)  The  Government  shall 
appoint a Rent Registrar in a district or an area as it 
may deem necessary. 
(2)   The  Rent  Registrar  shall  maintain  a  register  to 
enter  particulars  of a  tenancy  agreement,  agreement 
to  sell  or  any  other  agreement  in  respect  of  rented 
premises.” (emphasis added) 
9. 
It  is  evident  from  the  language  of  Section  17  that  the 
Rent Registrar is only required to maintain a register of tenancy 
agreement  and  its  particulars,  with  any  other  agreement  in 
respect of the rented premises. Section 5 of the Act, reproduced 
below,  provides  a  mechanism  to  register  the  tenancy  or  any 
other  agreement  with  the  Rent  Registrar  executed  between  the 
landlord  and  the  tenant,  which  is  considered  a  proof  of  their 
relationship:  
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
5 
“5.   Agreement between landlord and tenant. – (1) A 
landlord  shall  not  let  out  a  premises  to  a  tenant 
except by a tenancy agreement. 
(2)   A  landlord  shall  present  the  tenancy  agreement 
before the Rent Registrar. 
(3)  The Rent Registrar shall enter the particulars of 
the tenancy in a register, affix his official seal on the 
tenancy agreement, retain a copy thereof and return 
the original tenancy agreement to the landlord. 
(4)  The entry of particulars of the tenancy shall not 
absolve the landlord or the tenant of their liability to 
register  the  tenancy  agreement  under  the  law 
relating to registration of documents. 
(5)   A  tenancy  agreement  entered  in  the  office  of  a 
Rent Registrar or a certified copy thereof shall be a 
proof of the relationship of landlord and tenant. 
(6)   Any  agreement  which  may  be  executed  between 
the landlord and the tenant in respect of the premises 
shall  be  presented  before  the  Rent  Registrar  in  the 
same manner as provided in sub-section (2).” 
 
10.  From  the  above  reproduced  Section  5(1),  (2)  and  (6),  the 
landlord  is  required  to  execute  a  tenancy  agreement  with  the  tenant 
and  to  present  such  tenancy  agreement,  or  any  other  agreement 
between  them,  before  the  Rent  Registrar  for  its  registration  into  the 
register  maintained  by  the  Rent  Registrar  under  Section  17.  Under 
Section  5(3)  and  (6),  the  Rent  Registrar  is  required  to:  (i)  enter  the 
particulars  of  the  tenancy  and  any  agreement  executed  between  the 
landlord and the tenant in that register; (ii) affix his official seal on the 
tenancy  agreement;  (iii)  retain  its  copy;  and  (iv)  return  the  original 
tenancy agreement to the landlord. The registered tenancy agreement 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
6 
or  its  certified  copy  is  considered  a  proof  of  the  relationship  of  the 
landlord and the tenant. 
 
11.  Section  6(1)  of  the  Act  lays  down  the  contents  of  the  tenancy 
agreement,  which  include:  (a)  particulars  of  the  landlord  and  the 
tenant;  (b) description  of the premises;  (c)  period  of the  tenancy;  (d) 
rate  of  rent,  rate  of  enhancement,  due  date  and  mode  of  payment  of 
rent; (e) particulars of the bank account of the landlord, if the rent is to 
be paid through a bank; (f) the purpose  for  which  the  premises is  let 
out; and (g) amount of advance rent, security or pagri, if any. 
12.   Under Section 8 of the Act, the existing landlord and tenant are 
required to bring the tenancy in conformity with the provisions of this 
Act: 
 “8.  Existing  tenancy.–  An  existing  landlord  and  tenant 
shall,  as  soon  as  possible  but  not  later  than  two  years 
from  the  date of coming into force of this Act, bring the 
tenancy in conformity with the provisions of this Act.” 
13.  Section  9  of  the  Act  provides  the  penalty  to  be  paid  by  the 
tenant  and  landlord  for  non-compliance  of  the  provisions  of  the  Act, 
in case they approach and file an application under the Act before the 
Rent Tribunal:  
 “9.  Effect  of  non-compliance.–  If  a  tenancy  does  not 
conform to the provisions of this Act, the  Rent Tribunal 
shall not entertain an application under this Act– 
 (a)  on  behalf  of  the  tenant,  unless  he  deposits  a  fine 
equivalent to five percent of the annual value of the rent 
of the premises in the Government treasury; and 
 (b)  on  behalf  of  the  landlord,  unless  he  deposits  a  fine 
equivalent to ten percent of the annual value of the rent 
of the  premises in  the  Government  treasury.”  (emphasis 
added) 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
7 
 
14.  Neither any provision of the Act restricts the period of tenancy, 
nor it require the tenant or the landlord to pay any specific stamp duty 
on  the  tenancy  agreement.  Section  3  of  the  Stamp  Act  read  with  its 
Schedule  I,  however,  lays  down  the  amount  of  the  stamp  duty 
chargeable on each instrument mentioned in Schedule I, and provides: 
 “3.      Instruments  chargeable  with  duty.–  Subject  to  the 
provisions  of  this  Act  and  the  exemptions  contained  in 
Schedule I, the following instruments shall be chargeable 
with duty of the amount indicated in that schedule as the 
proper duty therefor respectively, ….” 
15.  Section 17 of the Stamp Act provides: 
 “17. Instruments executed in Pakistan.– All instruments 
chargeable  with  duty  and  executed  by  any  person  in 
Pakistan  shall  be  stamped  before  or  at  the  time  of 
execution.” 
16.  Section 35 of the Stamp Act provides: 
 “35.  Instruments  not  duly  stamped  inadmissible  in 
evidence, etc.– No instrument chargeable with duty shall 
be  admitted  in  evidence  for  any  purpose  by  any  person 
having  by  law  or  consent  of  parties  authority  to  receive 
evidence,  or  shall  be  acted  upon,  registered  or 
authenticated  by  any  such  person  or  by  any  public 
officer, unless such instrument is duly stamped.” 
17.  Serial  No.  35  of  Schedule  I  of  the  Act  provides  following 
Proper Stamp-duties to be paid on the instruments: 
LEASE,  including  an  under  lease  or  sub-lease  and  any 
agreement to let or sub-let: 
 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
8 
(1)      where  by  such  lease  the  rent  is  fixed  and  no 
premium is paid or delivered: 
… 
 (b)  Where  the  lease  purports  to  be  for  a  term  of  twenty 
years: 
(i) in case of immovable property in an urban area: 5.25% 
of the average annual rent of the lease. 
(ii) in any other case: 3.25% of the average annual rent of 
the lease. 
 (c) where the lease purports to be for a term in excess of 
twenty years or in perpetuity: 
 (i)  in  case  of  immovable  property  in  an  urban  area: 
5.25% of the consideration equal to the whole amount of 
rent  which  would  be  paid  or  delivered  in  respect  of  the 
first ten years of the lease. 
(ii) in any other case: 3.25% of the consideration equal to 
the  whole  amount  of  rent  which  would  be  paid  or 
delivered in respect of the first ten years of the lease. 
 (d)  where  the  lease  does  not  purport  to  be  for  any 
definite term: 
 (i) in case of immovable property in an urban area; and 
(ii) in any other case. 
 (2)  
(a) where the lease is granted for money advanced 
and where no rent is reserved: 
 (i) in case of immovable property in an urban area; and 
(ii) in any other case 
 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
9 
(b) where the lease is granted for a fine or premium and 
where no rent is reserved: 
 (i) in case of immovable property in an urban area; and 
(ii) in any other case 
(3)  
(a) where the lease is granted for money advanced 
in addition to the rent reserved: 
 (i) in case of immovable property in an urban area; and 
(ii) in any other case 
 (b)  Where  the  lease  is  granted  for  a  fine  or  premium  in 
addition to the rent reserved: 
 (i) in case of immovable property in an urban area; and 
(ii) in any other case (emphasis added). 
18.  Section 5 of the Act has to be read with Sections 17 and 6 of the 
Act and its non-compliance is specified in Sections 8 and 9 of the Act, 
therefore,  it  was  obligatory  to  the  Petitioner  to  get  the  agreement 
registered  with  the  Rent  Registrar  under  Section  5  of  the  Act.  This 
Section  emphasized  the  preamble  of  the  Act  and  also  facilitates  the 
landlord to file ejectment petition under Section 15 of the Act. From 
the bare reading of the Section 5 of the Act, it is unequivocal  that all 
the sub-Sections of Section 5 of the Act lay emphasize only to register 
the  particulars  of  the  agreement.  It  does  not  specify  the  powers  of 
Rent Registrar to direct the parties to pay the duty as per the Finance 
Act.  The  basic  purpose  of  the  entry  of  the  agreement  with  the  Rent 
Registrar  is  to  bind  the  landlords  and  the  tenant  to  comply  with  the 
requirements of the registered tenancy agreement.  The Section 12(a) 
of the Act states that the landlord shall provide a certified copy of the 
agreement to the tenant. The certified copy can only be provided if it 
is  made  under  Section  5(3)  of  the  Act.    The  above  said  Sections  are 
introduced  to  maintain  record  and  also  to  mitigate  the  un-necessary 
litigation  pertaining  to  rent/lease.  They  also  provide  the  method  for 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
10 
the registration of the rent agreement in order to streamline the rights 
and obligations arising out of the rent agreement.  
19.  Before  going  any  further,  let  us  examine  the  contents  of  the 
tenancy  agreement  attached  with  the  instant  Petition.  The  Tenancy 
Agreement  was  signed  between  Headquarters  8-Division,  Sialkot 
Cantonment  through  Project  Officer  (the  “Headquarters”)  and  the 
Petitioner  in  2017,  for  the  purpose  of  setting  up,  installing  and 
operating  Petrol  Pump  on  Company-Owned-Company-Operated 
basis, on a land owned by the Headquarters. The period of tenancy is 
twenty  (20)  years,  extendable  for  another  ten  (10)  years  with  mutual 
consent of the parties, under Article 2 of the Tenancy Agreement: 
 “Article  No.  2.  The  contract  shall  be  for  a  period  of 
twenty  (20)  years  and  extendable  for  another  ten  (10) 
years  after  mutual  consent  of  the  Parties.  The  period  of 
contract  will  commence  the  day  Petrol  Station  starts 
operation/functioning.” 
20.  Article  3  of  the  Tenancy  Agreement  provides  the  rent  of  the 
land for first period of twenty (20) years: 
 “Article  No.  3.  The  HASCOL  shall  pay 
to 
the 
Headquarters  8  Division  Rs.  235000/-  per  month  as 
rental  amount  for  the  said  land  for  first  period  of  20 
years.” 
21. 
In  view  of  above,  reproduction  of  relevant  Article  of  the 
tenancy  agreement,  it  is  clear  that  the  agreement  is  for  only  twenty 
years  and  not  in  excess  of  twenty  years  rather  only  extendable  for 
another ten years after mutual consent of the parties, meaning thereby 
that,  it  may  be  extended  with  the  mutual  consent  of  the  parties.  It 
cannot, however, be presumed at this stage that the agreement will be 
extended in future. The law does not base on predictions/presumptions 
rather  specific 
language  of  agreement 
is 
to  be 
taken 
into 
consideration.  Therefore,  the  contention  of  the  Respondent  that  the 
agreement  is  for  a  period  exceeding  twenty  years  is  incorrect  and 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
11 
accordingly  declined.  As  such,  the  Impugned  Order  is  illegal  and  is 
not  sustainable  in  the  eye  of  law.  So  far  as  the  other  reason  in  the 
Impugned Order is concerned, in this regard, I have gone through the 
whole file and found nothing which could support the contentions of 
the Respondent.  
22. 
In  view  of  the  above,  it  is  apparent  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Rent  Registrar  is  barred  to  pass  the  Impugned  Order  when  a  special 
law  had  been  promulgated  and  its  functions  have  specifically  been 
mentioned.  Reliance  in  this  regard  can  be  placed  on  the  case  titled 
Syed Mohammad Areeb Abdul Khafid Shah Bukhari v. Government 
of the Punjab and others (PLD 2018 Lahore 390) wherein this Court 
recently held that after issuance of the Notification No.SO (JUDL-III) 
4-24/2004  dated  26.01.2012  whereunder  the  appointment  of  a  Rent 
Registrar was made and the power of compulsory registration of rent 
agreement stood vested to notified Registrar and no other authority is 
competent  to  register  any  rent  agreement,  as  such, the  Rent  Tribunal 
established under Section 35 (d) of the Act has no jurisdiction even to 
entertain  application  and  pass  an  order  on  the  application  under 
Section  5 of  the  Act for  registration of  rent  agreement  after  issuance 
of  the  above  said  notification  dated  26.01.2012  whereas  learned 
Tribunal  functioning  as  Rent  Registrar  has  illegally  assumed  the 
jurisdiction and passed the impugned order dated 06.01.2015 which is 
patently  illegal  void  ab  initio  and  same  is  hereby  set  aside.  The 
application under Section 5 of the Act filed by the petitioner may be 
returned to the petitioner to file before the notified Rent Registrar for 
registration of rent agreement. 
23.  The  Article  4  of  the  Constitution  guarantees  the  right  of  the 
Petitioner  to  enjoy  the  protection  of  law  and  to  be  treated  in 
accordance with law being his inalienable right; no action detrimental 
to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of the Petitioner shall 
be  taken  except  in  accordance  with  law;  the  Petitioner  shall  not  be 
compelled to do that which the law does not require him to do. Under 
the  said  Article  every  individual  has  the  right  to  be  dealt  with  in 
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
12 
accordance with law and no person is liable to do which the law does 
not  require  him  to  do.  In  the  case  titled  Faisal  Sultan  v.  E.D.O. 
(Education) and others (2011 PLC (C.S.) 419 [Lahore]), it has been 
clearly held as under:  
“An integral, intrinsic and incidental part of "law" under 
Article 4 is  the right to procedural due process, right to 
be treated fairly at all times, right to procedural fairness 
and  right  to  procedural  propriety.  Right  to  a  fair 
procedure  is,  therefore,  constitutionally  guaranteed  in 
Pakistan and makes the Constitution standout proudly in 
the  Constitutions  of 
the  world.  Article  4  of 
the 
Constitution  is  a  robust  and  dynamic  amalgam  of  the 
cardinal principle of natural justice, procedural fairness 
and  procedural  propriety  of  the  English  jurisprudence 
and  Procedural  Due  Process  of 
the  American 
jurisprudence.  Constitution  of  Pakistan  has  boldly 
recognized  this  right  to  be  an  inalienable  right  of  every 
citizen or of any person for the time being in Pakistan.” 
24. 
It  has  been  established  in  the  case  of  Azizullah  Memon  v. 
Province  of  Sindh  and  another  (2007  SCMR  229)  that  since 
impugned  action  was  initiated  and  taken  to  its  logical  conclusion 
under a misconception of law and under a wrong law, it had vitiated 
entire proceedings including final order, which could not be sustained 
under the law. The Supreme Court converted petition into appeal and 
proceedings as well as impugned order of the Service Tribunal, were 
set  aside  accordingly.  Furthermore,  in  the  case  of  Muhammad 
Haleem  and  another  v.  General  Manager  (Operation)  Pakistan 
Railways  Headquarter,  Lahore  and  others  (2009  SCMR  339),  it 
was clearly held that when initial order or act relating to initiation of 
proceedings  was  contrary  to  law  and  illegal,  then  all  subsequent 
proceedings and actions taken thereon would have no basis and would 
fall.  
W.P. No.177608 /2018 
13 
25. 
It  is  an  established  principle  of  law  that  where  procedure  had 
been  provided  for  doing  a  thing  in  a  particular  manner  then  same 
should  be  done  in  that  manner  alone  and  not  in  any  other  way  or  it 
should  not  be  done  at  all;  otherwise  it  would  be  considered  non-
compliance of the legislative intent and would be deemed illegal. (rel. 
Abdul  Khaliq  Mandokhel  v.  Chairman,  Balochistan  Public 
Service Commission (2016 PLC(CS) 1184 [Quetta]); Falak Niaz v. 
Amal  Din  (2016  YLR  2047  [Peshawar]);  Sabz  Ali  Khan  v. 
Inspector  General Of  Police,  KPK  (2016  YLR  1279  [Peshawar]); 
Cantonment Board Clifton v. Sultan Ahmed Siddiqui (2016 CLC 
919  [Karachi]);  and  Federation  of  Pakistan  v.  Asad  Javed  (2016 
PLD 53 [Islamabad])) 
26.  As  discussed  above  and  in  view  of  the  applicable  law  and  the 
judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, referred above, 
the Respondent has not acted in accordance with law wrongly stating 
that the period of tenancy is for more than twenty years. Therefore, in 
this  case, the  act  of  the  Respondent/Rent  Registrar  is  patently  illegal 
and void.  
27. 
In view of what has been discussed above, the instant petition is 
accepted  and  the  impugned  order  dated  18.01.2018  is  set  aside; 
consequently,  the  case  is  remanded  to  the  Rent  Registrar  with  the 
direction to the Respondent to decide the case of the Petitioner afresh 
under  the  applicable  law  and  considering  the  fact  that  the  period  of 
tenancy is for twenty (20) years only. 
 
                                          
                                
       
 
   
 
       (JAWAD HASSAN) 
 
JUDGE 
 
       
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
*M.NAVEED* 
