  
 
Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
 
LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
                                    
Case No.  Writ Petition  No.222534 of 2018 
 
Fawad Ahmed   Versus  Election  Appellate Tribunal, 
Rawalpidi, etc.  
Date of order of 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
Parties  or counsel, where necessary 
05.7.2018.  Mr. Ahsan Bhoon, Advocate for the petitioner  
 
S. No of  
order 
/proceedings 
  
Ch. Umer Hayat, Advocate/Director Legal Election 
Commission of  Pakistan  
Syed  Fakhar  Haider  Kazmi  Advocate  for  the 
respondent No.2.  
  
 
 
The  grievance  voiced by the petitioner in the 
present  constitutional  petition  is  that  respondent 
No.1  vide  order  dated  27.6.2018  allowed  the 
election  appeal  filed  by  respondent  No.2  and 
disqualified  the  petitioner  from  contesting  General 
Election, 2018 from NA-67-Jhelum-II.  
 
2.     Briefly,  the facts necessary for  the disposal of 
this  petition  are  that  the  petitioner  and  respondent 
No.2  along-with  other  candidates 
filed 
their 
nomination 
papers 
for 
NA-67-Jhelum-II.  
Respondent No.1, filed objection petition and leveled 
certain  allegations  of  suppressing  material  facts 
regarding  avocation, income, evasion of income tax, 
making  mis-declaration,  incomplete  affidavit,  etc;. 
The Returning Officer did not entertain the objection 
petition  as  the  nomination  papers  of  the  petitioner 
were  accepted  prior 
to 
objection  petition.  
Respondent  No.2  filed  Election  Appeal  No.07/2018 
in  terms  of  section  63  of  the  Election  Act,  2017, 
dismissed  being  incompetent  by  respondent  No.1 
vide  order  dated  20.6.2018.  Thereafter,  Election 
Appeal No.14 of 2018 was filed by respondent No.2 
against  the  petitioner,  allowed  vide  order  dated 
19.6.2018. Hence, this petition.   
Writ Petition  No.222534 of 2018                                  2 
 
3.        Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  made  the 
following submissions: 
 
(i)      that the impugned order  was nullity in the 
eye  of  law  as  second  appeal  was  not 
maintainable; 
 
that  Election  Tribunal  enjoys  vast  powers 
under  section  63(4)  of  the  Election  Act, 
2017 to scrutinize  a matter but the learned 
Appellate  Tribunal  not  issued  show  cause  
notice to the petitioner;    
(ii)   
(iii) 
that the appeal  filed by the petitioner could 
not have been  treated as knowledge of the 
Appellate Tribunal as no show cause notice 
has  been  issued  to  the  petitioner  calling 
upon  him 
to  show  cause  why  his 
nomination papers may not be rejected; 
(iv)     that the appeal itself was incompetent; 
(v)      that there was no provision in Election Act, 
2017 regarding successive petitions;  
(vi)      that  petition  of  respondent  No.2  was    time 
barred on the day of scrutiny, thus, appeal 
was not maintainable;  
(vii) 
the 
criterion 
that the appellate authority misconceived   
 and  misconstrued 
to 
disqualify    a  person    from  becoming  the 
member  of “Majlas-i-Shoora” as envisaged 
under  Articles  62  and  63  of 
the 
Constitution 
of 
Islamic  Republic 
Pakistan,  1973  read  with  section  231  of 
the Election Act, 2017; 
of 
 
(viii)  that 
all 
the 
objections 
regarding 
candidature  of  the  petitioner  were  mere 
oral assertions  and respondent No.2 never  
provided  any  evidence  to  substantiate    his 
claim; 
 
(ix)     that  the  Appellate  Tribunal  cannot  be 
law  having 
in 
to  make  a  declaration 
equated  with  a  Court  of 
jurisdiction 
summary proceedings; 
 
(x)      that  there  was  no  mandatory  requirement 
that a fresh account  shall be opened under 
section 60(2) (b) of the Election Act, 2017; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition  No.222534 of 2018                                  3 
 
 
 
(xi)     that  power  of  review  can  only  be exercised 
if  specifically  provided  by  statute,      thus, 
Suo Moto review of the earlier order by the 
appellate  forum  was 
  after 
pronouncing  judgment  dated  20.6.2018,  it 
became functus officio; 
illegal  as 
(xii) 
that  complicated  and  disputed    questions 
of  facts  cannot  be  decided  while  holding  
summary proceedings;  
 
4. 
 Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent 
No.2  maintained  the validity  of  the  impugned  order 
by submitting  that  principle of res-judicata  was not 
attracted  in  this  case.  To  augment  his  contention, 
learned  counsel  relied  upon  “Miss Sumaeea  Zareen 
Versus Selection Committee, Bolan Medical College, 
Quetta  and  others”  (1991  SCMR  2099).  Adds, 
there  was  sufficient  material  on  the  file  that  the 
petitioner  submitted  incorrect,  incomplete  and  false 
affidavit  concealing  material  particulars  regarding 
assets/accounts,  thus,  the  impugned  order  was 
unexceptionable.      
 
5.      We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
parties and have also perused the record.  
 
6.    We first deal with the legal objections raised by 
the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  regarding 
maintainability  of  the  appeal.  It  is  true  that  under 
section  63  of  the  Election  Act,  2017,  only  a 
candidate/objector can file  appeal. However, under 
section  63(4), 
the 
tribunal  on 
the  basis  of 
information  or  material  brought  to  its  knowledge 
may call upon the candidate to show cause why his 
nomination  papers  may  not  be  rejected  and  if  the 
tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the  candidate  actually 
suffers  from  any  disqualification,  it  may  reject  the 
nomination papers.  The  contentions of the learned 
counsel for the petitioner  appears to be correct that 
mere  issuance  of  the  notice  of  appeal  is  not 
Writ Petition  No.222534 of 2018                                  4 
 
sufficient  and  in  substantial  compliance  of  the 
provisions  of  law,  show  cause  notice  is  necessary 
which was not issued  by the tribunal to dispose of 
the    reference  neither  numbered    as    such  nor 
disposed  of.    In  the  reported  case  of  “Haji  Khuda 
Bux Nizamani V. Election Tribunal & Others” (2003 
MLD 607),  it was observed as follows: 
 
 
Court 
Supreme 
“The  second  objection,  however,  appears  to 
have more merit. It is no doubt correct that 
substantial  compliance  with  the  principles 
of natural justice was effected when notice 
of the  appeal  was  given  to  the  petitioner. 
Nevertheless  with  profound  respects 
it 
ought  to  have  been  kept  in  view  that  the 
Honourable 
has 
consistently  held  that  when  notice  to  a 
party  is  required  by  way  of  an  express 
provision  of  law  as  distinguished  from  a 
mere  principle  of  natural  justice  strict 
compliance  ought  to  be  made  and  mere 
substantial  compliance  might  not  be 
sufficient.  We  are  constrained  to  record 
these  observation  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
adequate  documentary  material  did  not 
appear to come to the notice of the learned 
Tribunal  in  the  absence  of  a  proper  show 
cause notice”   
 
7.    It has been provided under section 63(2) of the 
Election Act, 2017  that  any order passed  in  appeal 
shall be final. The law allows a losing party to have 
their  case  reviewed  by  Higher  Court  which  is 
known as appeal and is a request to a higher Court 
to  review  the  decision  made  in  a  lower  Court  to 
determine  whether  any  legal  errors  were  made 
during  the  original  proceedings.  It  is  a  statutory 
right.  No  right  of  second  appeal  or  review  is 
provided under Election Act, 2017, thus, the appeal 
filed  by  respondent  No.2  was  incompetent  and  the 
order  of  the  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  is  thus, 
liable  to  be  set  aside  being    illegal  as  the    learned 
Appellate  Tribunal  became  functus  officio  after 
decision of Election Appeal No.07/2018. 
 
8. 
In  this  case  Election  Appeal  No.07  filed  by 
respondent  No.02  was  dismissed  by  the  learned 
Writ Petition  No.222534 of 2018                                  5 
 
Appellate Tribunal on 20.6.2018.Thereafter, another 
Election  Appeal  No.14/2018  was  filed,  allowed  by 
the  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  on  25.6.2018.  It  is 
often said that litigants only get one kick at the can 
and cannot be tried again later with a better pair of 
boots. As general rule, once a judge has rendered a 
final decision, he is barred for reopening, varying or 
retracting  his  decision.  He  cannot  do  so  because, 
having pronounced judgment--provided that there is 
no reservation of any kind  in the judgment- judge is 
said  to  be  functus  officio. 
(Latin  for  “having 
performed  one’s  office”)  and 
is  divested  of 
jurisdiction over the matter.  If the decision is wrong 
or  otherwise,  unsatisfactory,  the  recourse  for  the 
aggrieved  party  is  to  the  next  forum  as  prescribed 
by the law.  With regard to an officer or official body 
it  means  without 
further  authority  or 
legal 
competence because the duties and the  functions of 
the  original,  “functous  officio”  commission  have 
been fully accomplished. 
 
         When  used  in  relation  to  a  Court,  it  may  also 
means  whose  duties  or  authority  has  come  to  an 
end. Once a Court has passed a valid order after  a 
lawful  hearing,  it  is  functus  officio  and  cannot  re-
open the case. The United States Supreme  Court in 
“ Bayne V.  Morris”  68 US (One-Wall)  provided  the 
following definition of the doctrine: 
 
 
“Arbitrators exhaust their powers when they 
make  final  determination  on  the  matter 
submitted to them. They have no power after 
having  made  an  award  to  alter  it;  the 
authority  conferred  on  them  is  then  at  an 
end” 
           The  doctrine  of  functus  officio  has  been 
firmly  in  place  for  well  over  a  century,  uncertainty 
remains as to when a decision is considered final so 
as to trigger the doctrine. Traditionally, formal entry 
of a judgment, as clear sign of finality, is necessary, 
Writ Petition  No.222534 of 2018                                  6 
 
such  that  each  is  not  functus  officio  before  the 
judgment  is  entered.    Justice  Sopinka  put  it  crisply 
in  “Chandler  V.  Alberta  Association  of  Architects” 
(1989)2  S.C.R  848)  “The  rule  applied  only  after  the 
formal  judgment  had  been  drawn  up,  issued  and 
entered.  
 
           Most  recently,  in  He  v.  Furney,  (2018)  O.J 
No.1618  (S.C.J),  Justice  Partick  Monahan  declared 
himself  functus  officio  even  though  his  order  had 
yet to be entered. He reasoned: “I do not attach any 
particular  significance,  for  purpose  of  the  functions 
officio doctrine, to the requirement that Court orders 
be  ‘entered’.    The  entering  of  Court  order  is  purely 
administrative  matter  performed  by  the  Registrar. 
As  Justice  Thomas  Cromwell  (as  he  then  was) 
explained  in  Nova  Scotia  Government  and  General  
Employees  Union  V.  Capital  District  Health 
Authority  (2006  NSCA  85)  “once  a  tribunal    has 
completed  its  job,  it  has  no  further  power  to  deal 
with 
the  matter.  Here, 
I  have 
issued  an 
endorsement  and  signed  the  order  dismissing  the 
appeal. There is nothing further for me to do, thus, I 
am functus  officio.  The  timing  of  the entering  of  the 
order  by 
the  Registrar  does  not  require  my 
involvement and, in my view, cannot determine and 
define my jurisdiction.  
 
       The  functus  officio  is  the  principle  in  terms  of 
which the decisions of tribunals/Courts are deemed 
to  be  final  and  binding  once  they  are  made.  They 
cannot,  once  made,  be  revoked  by  the  decision 
maker. Both the granter and receiver of rights know 
where  they  stand.  The  doctrine  supports  fairness 
and certainty. If a Court could  continually entertain 
applications to amend its decisions then   appellate 
record,  would  be  subject  to  change,  as  would  the  
litigants  relative    legal  positions,  making    for 
Writ Petition  No.222534 of 2018                                  7 
 
breeding grounds for Choas Finality lends  credence 
to  the  validity  of  the  judicial  decision.    A  decision 
that  at  the  mercy  of  the  judge’s  change  of  heart 
after  it  is  made  is  uncertain  and  unreliable  and  by 
extension  lacks  validity.  Moreover,  the  doctrine  of 
functus-officio  enables  effective  administration  of 
justice  by  ensuring  a  stable  case  for  appellate 
review.  
 
9.       A review of the record demonstrates that the 
nomination  papers  were  accepted  by  the  Returning 
Officer.  The  objection  petition  filed  by  respondent 
No.2  was not entertained as the nomination papers 
have  already  been  accepted.  The  appeal  earlier 
filed  by  respondent  No.2  was  dismissed  on 
20.6.2018  with  the  observations  that  the  objection 
petition  before the Returning Officer was  filed after 
the  acceptance  of  the  nomination  papers    of  the 
petitioner  and  that    respondent  No.2  failed  to 
establish    his  locus  standi  to  file  the  appeal, 
dismissed 
being 
incompetent. 
Thereafter, 
respondent  No.2  filed  the  second  appeal,  allowed 
by 
the  Appellate  Tribunal  vide  order  dated 
25.6.2018  whereby  the  petitioner  was  disqualified 
in  terms  of  Article  62(1)(f)  of  the  Constitution  of 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  on  the  basis  of 
summary  proceedings.  In  a  recent  judgment  titled 
“Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi Versus Mian Muhammad  
Nawaz    Sharif,  Prime  Minister  of  Pakistan/Member 
National  Assembly,  Prime  Minister’s  House, 
Islamabad  and  9  others”      (PLD  2017  SC  265),    
the Court observed as under:  
 
“However,  disqualification  envisaged  by  Article 
62(1)  (f)  and  Article  63(2)  of  the  Constitution  in 
view of words used therein have to be dealt with 
differently.  In  the  former  case  the  Returning 
Officer or any other fora in the hierarchy would 
not reject the nomination  of a person from being 
elected  as  a  member  of  Parliament  unless  a 
Court  of  law  has  given  a  declaration  that  he  is 
not  sagacious,  righteous,  non-profligate,  honest 
Writ Petition  No.222534 of 2018                                  8 
 
and ameen. Even the Election Tribunal, unless it 
itself  proceeds  to  give  the  requisite  declaration  
on    basis  of  the  material  before  it,  would  not 
disqualify  the  returned  candidate  where  no 
declaration, as mentioned above, has been given 
by  a  Court  of  law.  The  expression  “  a  Court  of 
law” has not been defined in Article  62   or any 
other  provision  of  the  Constitution    but  it 
essentially  means  a  Court 
plenary 
jurisdiction,  which  has  the  power  to  record 
evidence  and  give  a  declaration  on  the  basis  of 
the  evidence  so  recorded.  Such  a  Court  would 
include a Court exercising original,  appellate or 
revisional  jurisdiction  in  civil  and  criminal 
cases.  But  in  any  case  a  Court  or  a  forum 
jurisdiction  cannot  decide 
lacking  plenary 
questions  of  this  nature  at 
least  when 
disputed.”  
of 
 
 
The  learned  Appellate  Tribunal  declared  the 
petitioner  being  not  sagacious  without  any  
evidence  and  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  this 
case  does  not  attract  disqualification  as    per 
criterion    laid  down  in  Articles  62  and  63  of  the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic  of Pakistan, 1973.      
 
10.      For  the  foregoing  reasons,  this  petition  is 
allowed and the impugned order of respondent No.1 
dated 27.6.2018 is hereby set aside.  
 
(SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI)  ( SARDAR AHMED NAEEM) 
                         JUDGE                                     
     JUDGE  
 
irfan*  
 
  
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
 
 
               
      
 
 
 
 
 
irfan* 
  Judge 
 
 
