JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
           
C.O No.649 of 2013 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A. 
 
 
Date of Hearing. 
Versus   
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
J U D G M E N T 
18-04-2018 
 
PETITIONERS BY:  M/s  Syed  Hassan  Ali  Raza  and  Asad  Javed, 
RESPONDENTS BY:  Mr. Waleed Khalid, Advocate. 
Advocates. 
 
Shahid  Karim,  J:-  This  judgment  will  decide  an 
application  under  Section  6  of  the  Recognition  and 
Enforcement  (Arbitration  Agreements  and  Foreign 
Arbitral Awards) Act, 2011 (Act, 2011).  It requests 
this Court: 
i.  “to  order  that  the  Appeal  Award  dated 
30.09.2011 be filed in this Hon‟ble Court; 
ii. 
to pronounce Judgment and Decree in favour 
of  the  Plaintiff  and  against  the  Defendant  in 
terms of the Appeal Award; 
iii. 
to award the costs of this Suit to the Plaintiff; 
and 
iv. 
to grant any other relief as this Hon‟ble Court 
may  deem  fit  in  the  circumstances  of  this 
case.” 
2.  A  summation  of  essential  facts  which  form  the 
historical  background  of  the  instant  application  is 
given  below.    The  facts  have  been  culled  out  from 
the factual brief given by the applicant and have not 
been  contradicted  in  material  particulars  by  the 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
2 
respondent.    Any  fact  to  the  contrary  shall  be  dealt 
with as a matter of defence by the respondent: 
Background: 
 
1.  Acro Textile Mills Limited (“Acro”) was desirous to sell 
a  quantity  of  raw  cotton  to  Louis  Dreyfus  Commodities 
Suisse S.A., (“Applicant”).  
 
2.  In  this  transaction,  the  parties  followed  the  standard 
procedure  applicable  to  international  sale  of  goods  and 
each  party  shared 
the  contracts 
proposing terms and conditions.  
 
their  version  of 
3.  To  this  end,  the  Respondent,  provided  (6)  Sellers 
Contracts  on  its  letterhead  identifying  the  terms  and 
conditions of the said contracts, which are identical. The 
particulars of the contracts are as follows:  
 
Sellers Contract 
Annex 
Page No.  
Date of Contract 
No. 
Price (US 
cents/lbs) 
Date of Shipment 
Acro/Ctn/001-10  
A 
21 
3 September 2010 
92 
Acro/Ctn/002-10 
A1 
Acro/Ctn/003-10 
A2 
Acro/Ctn/004-10 
A3 
Acro/Ctn/005-10 
Acro/Ctn/006-10 
A4 
A5 
23 
25 
27 
29 
31 
October – first 
half of November 
2010 
October – 21 
November 2010 
October – 21 
November 2010 
8 September 2010 
93 
14 September 2010 
95.90 
 
22 September 2010 
103.75 
October – 21 
8 October 2010 
15 October 2010 
110 
117 
November 2010 
Nov/Dec – 2010 
Nov – 2010 
 
  
4.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Applicant  also  provided  six  (6) 
Purchase  Contracts  on  its  letterhead  identifying  its  version  of 
the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  said  contracts  (all  Purchase 
Contracts have identical terms), which are as follows: 
Purchase 
Contract 
No. 
P00040 and 
Amendment 
Page No. in 
Date of Contract 
C.M. for 
Additional 
Documents 
Price (US 
cent/lbs.) 
Date of Shipment 
8 to 10A 
3 September 2010 
91 
 
October – first half of 
November 2010 
Note: Price 
amended to 92 
through 
amendment 
P00041 and 
Amendment 
11 to 13A 
7 September 2010 
92 
 
October through to latest 
21 November 2010 
Note: Price 
amended to 93 
through 
amendment 
P00047  
14 to 15A 
14 September 2010 
95.90 
October through to latest 
21 November 2010 
P00058 
16 to 17A 
22 September 2010 
103.75 
October through to latest 
21 November 2010 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
3 
P00084 
18 to 19A 
 
 
8 October 2010 
110 
November – December – 
2010 
P00089 
20 to 21A 
14 October 2010 
117.50 
November 2010 
 
The  Rules  and  Bylaws  of  International  Cotton  Association 
(ICA)  were  made  applicable  to  the  contracts.    As  regards  dispute 
resolution, it was agreed that the disputes relating to the contract will 
be  resolved  through  arbitration  in  accordance  with  the  bylaws  of 
ICA and the seat of arbitration shall be Liverpool, England. 
 
 
5.  On  27  October  2010,  the  terms  of  the  contracts  were 
finalized  by  the  parties  and  the  Applicant  vide  its  email 
dated  28  October  2010  (Attached  as  Annex  B  at  Page 
No. 33) sent the scanned copy of the bilaterally executed 
Sellers‟  Contracts  to  Acro.  In  the  same  email,  the 
Applicant  requested  Acro 
to  start  all  operations 
immediately.  
 
6.  Acro  failed  to  perform  the  contracts  and  the  Applicant 
vide  its  email  dated  15  November  2010  (to  Mr.  Sheikh 
Rehman  Anwar,  CEO  Acro  Textile  Mills  Limited) 
(Attached  as  Annex  C  at  Page  No.  34)  held  Acro  in 
breach  of  the  contract  and  claimed  US$  4,435,104.05. 
Moreover,  the  Applicant  informed  the  Respondent  of  its 
intention  to  refer  the  matter  to  International  Cotton 
Association  (“ICA”)  for  arbitration,  in  case  Acro  failed 
to pay the said amount. 
 
7.  On 8 December 2010, one of the officials of the Applicant 
emailed to  Acro  (Attached as  Annex D at  Page No. 36) 
offered  to  convince  the  management  to  accept  “in 
addition  to  the  848,771  usd  a  cash  settlement  of 
3,150,000.00 usd paid within this week”. 
 
8.  On  10  December  2010,  Mr.  Rehman  Anwar,  CEO  of 
Acro, emailed to the Applicant proposing a settlement at 
US$ 836,441.00 (Attached as Annex E at Page No. 39).  
In reply to the same, the Applicant vide its email dated 14 
December 2010  (also  attached as  Annex E at  Page No. 
38),  rejected  Acro‟s  proposal  and  informed  Acro  that 
“this is our final notice on this matter. LDC will proceed 
with ICA technical arbitration. LDC have appointed Mr. 
Arthur Aldcroft as our arbitrator on 14 December 2010. 
According  to  ICA  Bylaws  and  Rules,  we  invite  Acro  to 
appoint their arbitrator on or before 28 December 2011. 
On  commencement  of  arbitration,  LDC  shall  not 
negotiate this matter any further.” 
 
9.  Accordingly,  the  Applicant  submitted  a  request  for 
arbitration  under  Bylaw  302  of  the  Bylaws  and Rules  of 
the ICA (Attached as Annex F at Page No. 40).  
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
 
4 
10. The ICA emailed ICA‟s Reference No. A01/2010/67 dated 
15 December 2010 (Attached as Annex F/1 at Page No. 
42) to Acro vide ICA‟s email (Attached as Annex F/2 at 
Page No. 43). Through this Reference, the ICA requested 
Acro to appoint its arbitrator within the stipulated period 
in Bylaw 303. Annex F/1 and F/2 were also couriered via 
FedEx to Acro, receipt of which is attached as Annex F/3 
(at Page No. 47). 
 
11. On  27  December  2010,  Mr.  Rehman  Anwar,  CEO  of 
Acro,  vide  his  email  (Attached  as  Annex  H/1  at  Page 
No.  49)  to  the  ICA,  appointed  Mr.  C.  J.  Harman  as 
arbitrator.  
 
12. On  30  December  2010,  the  ICA  through  its  email 
(Attached  as  Annex  H/2  at  Page  No.  50)  to  Acro,  sent 
the ICA‟s letter (Attached as Annex H/3 at Page No. 51) 
confirming the appointment of C. J. Harman and, further 
informed  them  of  its  intention  to  inform  Acro  of  the 
appointment  of  the  third  arbitrator  who  shall  serve  as 
Chairman  of  the  Tribunal.  A  copy  of  the  said  letter  was 
also  sent  to  the  Applicant  (Attached  as  Annex  H/4  at 
Page No. 52).  
 
13. On 10 January 2011, the ICA sent its letter (Attached as 
Annex  I/1  at  Page  No.  53)  to  Acro  through  ICA  email 
(Attached  as  Annex  I/3  at  Page  No.  55)  confirming  the 
appointment  of  I.  J.  Magrane  as  the  Chairman  of  the 
Arbitral Tribunal. 
 
14. On  12  January  2011,  ICA  vide  its  email  (Attached  as 
Annex J/1 at Page No. 51) sent ICA‟s letter (Attached as 
Annex J/2 at Page No. 57) to Acro along with copy of the 
details  of  the  claims  received  from  the  Applicant.  ICA 
also requested Acro to submit a reply to the claim within 
14  days  of  the  receipt  of  the  documents  together  with  a 
deposit of £3,0001.  
 
15. On  3  February  2011,  the  ICA  sent  its  ICA‟s  letter 
(Attached as Annex K/1 at Page No. 63) to Acro through 
ICA‟s  email  (Attached  as  Annex  K/2  at  Page  No.  64) 
informing  Acro  that  the  deadline  for  receipt  of  its 
documents had passed / expired but, the Chairman of the 
Tribunal had extended the deadline by seven (7) days so 
that  Acro  could  submit  a  reply.  Acro  was  also  informed 
that in case it failed to submit any documents  within  the 
extended  period,  the  Tribunal  would  proceed  with  the 
arbitration  and  would  make  an  Award  as  permitted 
Bylaw 306(5).  
 
16. As  Acro  did  not  submit  a  reply  (or  any  documents),  the 
Arbitral  Tribunal  after  proper  application  of  mind  and 
following  due  process  of  law  issued  an  Arbitral  Award 
dated 18 March 2011 (Attached as Annex L at Page No. 
67) in favor of the Applicant.  
 
                                                 
 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
5 
Acro  had  been  pre-empted  by  ICA  in  its  letter  dated  16 
March  2011  (Attached  as  Annex  M/1  at  Page  No.  111) 
that the Award will be published on 18 March 2011. The 
letter was emailed by the ICA to Acro on 16 March 2011 
(Attached as Annex M/2 at Page No. 113).  
 
17. On  21  March  2011,  the  ICA  sent  its  letter  (Attached  as 
Annex  N/1  at  Page  No.  115)  to  Acro  through  ICA‟s 
email  (Attached  as  Annex  N/2  at  Page  No.  116) 
informing that the Arbitral Award was stamped and made 
effective on 18 March 2011 by the ICA. The ICA further 
informed  Acro  that  any  notice  of  appeal  against  this 
Award should reach the ICA on or before 15 April 2011 
in accordance with ICA Bylaw 311. 
 
18. On  1  April  2011,  the  ICA  sent  its  letter  (Attached  as 
Annex P/1 at Page No. 118) to Acro through ICA‟s email 
(Attached as Annex P/2 at Page No.119) informed that a 
notice of appeal has been received by the Applicant who 
shall submit the reasons for appeal by 29 April 2011.  
 
19. On  5  May  2011,  the  ICA  sent  its  letter  (Attached  as 
Annex  Q/1  at  Page  No.  120)  to  Acro  through  ICA‟s 
email  (Attached  as  Annex  Q/2  at  Page  No.  121) 
confirming  to  have  received  the  Applicant‟s  reasons  for 
appeal within the time allowed and enclosed a copy of the 
same to Acro. Further, the ICA requested Acro to submit 
its comments to the Appeal Committee within a period of 
twenty-eight (28) days (under Bylaw 313). 
 
20. On  25  May  2011,  the  ICA  sent  its  letter  (Attached  as 
Annex T/2 at Page No. 132) to Acro through ICA‟s email 
(Attached as Annex T/3 at Page No. 133) confirming the 
appointment  of  the  members  of  the  Technical  Appeal 
Committee.  Furthermore,  under  Bylaw  312.7,  ICA  gave 
Acro  seven  (7)  days  to  object  to  any  member  of  the 
Technical Appeal Committee. 
 
21. On  8  June  2011,  ICA  sent  its  letter  (Attached  as  Annex 
R/1  at  Page  No.  125)  to  Acro  through  ICA‟s  email 
(Attached  as  Annex  R/2  at  Page  No.  126)  along  with  a 
copy of the documents that were due to be put before the 
Appeal Committee. 
 
22. On 30 September 2011, the Technical Appeal Committee 
issued the Appeal Award dated 30 September 2011 after 
application  of  mind  and  following  due  process  of  law 
(Attached as Annex O at Page No. 99). 
 
 
Respondent’s defence: 
 
3.  The  respondent,  Acro  Textile  Mills  Limited 
(“Acro”) filed its reply to the application.  However, 
in  terms  of  section  7  of  the  Act,  2011  read  with 
Article V of the  Convention on the Recognition and 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
6 
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York 
Convention)  Acro  was  obliged  to  furnish  objections 
on the grounds which have been delineated in Article 
V along with proof that the grounds which are being 
invoked  by  the  respondent  are  sufficient  for  the 
refusal of recognition and enforcement of the award.  
The reply filed by Acro shall be treated as objections 
in  terms  of  Article  V  of  the  New  York  Convention 
read  with  Section  7  of  the  Act,  2011.    It  may  be 
stated that in terms of section 2(a) of the Act, 2011, a 
reference  to  the  Article  in  the  Act  shall  mean  an 
Article  of  convention  which  has  been  made  part  of 
the Act, 2011 and the  two  must  be read together for 
the  purpose  of  a  decision  by  this  Court  on  an 
application under Section 6 of the Act, 2011 seeking 
the  recognition  and  enforcement  of  foreign  arbitral 
award.    The  portions  of  the  objections  put  forth  by 
Acro  and  relevant  for  our  purposes  are  being 
reproduced as under: 
“That  at the  outset,  it  is  submitted  that  the  alleged 
Contracts  that  have  been  made  the  basis  of  the 
titled Application as well as the alleged Award are 
false and fabricated and the same are denied.  It is 
denied  that  any  such  Contracts  were  executed 
between  the  parties.    Based  on  the  above,  it  is 
submitted  that  there  was  neither  any  Contract 
between  the  parties  as  alleged  by  the  Plaintiff  nor 
any  agreement  to  refer  any  dispute  to  arbitration 
before  any 
the  International 
Cotton Association (ICA).  Therefore, it is submitted 
that  the  alleged  Award  as  well  as  any  and  all 
proceedings  in  connection  therewith  are  invalid, 
unlawful  and 
  The  same  cannot  be 
recognized  and  therefore,  the  titled  Application  is 
liable to be dismissed. 
 
including 
illegal. 
forum, 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
7 
falls  outside 
 
 
“(ii) 
 Any purported award issued pursuant to the 
alleged  arbitration  agreement  cannot  be  construed 
as a „foreign award‟ in terms of the Act.  Hence, the 
same  would  not  fall  within  the  purview  of  the  Act.  
Consequently,  any  such  Award  would  be  a  local 
award  and  would  have  to  be  dealt  with  under  the 
provisions of Arbitration Act,  1940.  In view of the 
above, it is submitted that any alleged award or its 
recognition  or  enforcement 
the 
jurisdiction of this Honourable Court.” 
 
D) 
That  it  is  submitted  that  the  alleged  Award 
and  any  and  all  proceedings  connected  therewith 
are illegal and unenforceable on account of the fact 
that  the  Defendant  received  no  notice  whatsoever, 
as  required  in  terms  of  applicable  laws,  regarding 
the appointment of the arbitrators or of the arbitral 
proceedings. 
  The  alleged  proceedings  were 
admittedly ex-parte and conducted behind the back 
of  the  Defendant  and  are  thus  of  no  value  in  the 
eyes of law as the Defendant was not able to present 
his case…” 
 
“3….It  is  specifically  denied  that  the  alleged 
Contracts  were entered into  between the parties  or 
that the same were executed by the Defendant.  On 
the  contrary,  at  or  around  that  time,  there  were 
some  discussions  for  the  sale  of  different  kinds  of 
cotton.    Such  discussions  were  don  with  various 
brokers  and  intermediaries.    One  of  the  important 
aspects  of  such  discussions  was  the  payment 
mechanism for any such goods as it was a business 
norm  that  any  payment  would  be  through  an 
acceptable  Letter  of  Credit.    The  acceptable  terms 
of  a  Letter  of  Credit  for  such  purpose  included  an 
irrevocable and confirmed letter of credit that could 
be  negotiated  with  any  local  bank  in  Pakistan  and 
that  any  charges  outside  Pakistan  would  be  the 
buyer‟s responsibility.  However, the Defendant was 
made to understand that the Plaintiff was unwilling 
or unable to meet such terms and hence, there was 
no finalization of any contract between the parties.  
Accordingly,  there  was  no  transaction  that  took 
place in that context.” 
 
4.  The primary objection which has been raised by 
Acro  is  that  the  agreements  relied  upon  by  the 
applicant  are  unenforceable  since  neither  Acro  nor 
any  of 
its 
representatives  executed 
the  said 
agreements  so  as  to  form  binding  obligations  to  be 
performed  by  Acro.    Thus,  the  execution  of  the 
agreement  has  been  denied.    The  signatures  affixed 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
8 
on the agreements on behalf of Acro  have also been 
denied  and  this  aspect  forms  the  main  plank  of  the 
defence of Acro on the basis of which Acro contends 
that  the  application  be  dismissed.    Since  the  award 
(which  purports  to  be  a  foreign  arbitral  award)  is 
based  on  an  invalid  agreement  and  hence  not  liable 
to be recognized and enforced by this Court. 
Act, 2011, its Purpose & Policy: 
5.  The Act, 2011 repeals the Arbitration (Protocol 
and Convention) Act, 1937 and is conspicuous for its 
brevity  and  shortness.    It  makes  the  New  York 
Convention  a  part  of  the  Act  and  also  makes  the 
recognition  and  enforcement  of  the  foreign  arbitral 
award to be dependent upon the Articles of the New 
York  Convention.    Foreign  arbitral  award  has  been 
defined as: 
“(e)  “foreign  arbitral  award”  means  a 
foreign  arbitral  award  made  in  a  Contracting 
State and such other State as may be notified by 
the  Federal  Government 
the  official 
Gazette.” 
in 
 
6. 
It is not the case of Acro that the award sought 
to  be  enforced  is  not  a  foreign  arbitral  award,  for  it 
has been made in a contracting state and according to 
the  applicant,  between  Acro  and  the  applicant  by 
arbitrators  appointed  in  terms  of  the  agreement 
between the parties and under the Bylaws and Rules 
of  the  International  Cotton  Association  Limited.  
Section 6 of the Act, 2011 reads as under: 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
9 
“6.  Enforcement  of  foreign  arbitral  award.-(!) 
Unless the Court. pursuant to section 7, refuses the 
application seeking recognition and enforcement of 
a foreign arbitral award, the Court shall recognise 
and  enforce  the  award  in  the  same  manner  as  a 
judgment or order of a court in Pakistan. 
 
(2)  A  foreign  arbitral  award  which  is  enforceable 
under  this  Act,  shall  be  treated  as  binding  for  all 
purposes  on  the  persons  as  between  whom  it  was 
made,  and  may  accordingly  be  relied  on  by  any  of 
those  persons  by  way  of  defence,  set  off  or 
otherwise in any legal proceedings in Pakistan. 
 
7.  Therefore, the court can refuse the enforcement 
and recognition of the award only in terms of section 
7, which too is relevant and provides that: 
“7.  Unenforceable  foreign  arbitral  awards.-  The 
recognition  and  enforcement  of  a  foreign  arbitral 
award  shall  not  be  refused  except  in  accordance 
with Article V of the Convention.” 
 
8. 
It is clear upon a reading of section 7 above that 
the recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral 
award shall not be refused except in terms of Article 
V  of  the  Convention.    It  follows  ineluctably  that 
ordinarily  the  court  will  grant  recognition  and 
enforcement  to  a  foreign  arbitral  award  and  any 
refusal  is  hedged  in  by  the  mandate  of  Article  V  of 
the  Convention  which  forms  part  of  the  Act,  2011.  
This 
is 
the 
intention  of 
the 
legislature  and 
encapsulates  what  has  been  described  as 
the 
underlying  theme  of  the  Convention  which  “can  be 
said to have a pro-enforcement bias and a strong case 
can be made out that the grounds under Article V are 
to  be  applied  restrictively  and  construed  narrowly”.  
(Redfern  &  Hunter,  et.  Al.,  Law  and  Practice  of 
International Commercial Arbitration, 4th ed. 2004). 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
10 
9.  Sections 6 and 7 of the Act, 2011 are the pivot 
around  which  the  entire  Act,  2011  revolves.    These 
provisions  direct  themselves  to  the  recognition  and 
enforcement  of  the  award  and  not  the  arbitration 
agreement.  This is the crucial aspect which needs to 
be hammered in.  The enumeration made in section 7 
captures  the  entire  intention  of  the  legislature.    This 
enumeration  will  be  kept  in  view  by  the  court  and 
take  precedence  over  any  other  construction  sought 
to  be  put  on  the  scheme  of  the  Act,  2011  or  on  the 
basis  of 
the  New  York  Convention  which 
is 
appended  as  a  schedule.    The  schedule  will  have 
relevance  so  far  as  it  is  referred  to  in  the  primary 
enactment  itself.    The  ineluctable  inference  upon 
reading  of  section  7  is  that  the  only  grounds  of 
refusal for recognition and enforcement of the award 
shall  be  those  given  in  Article  V  of  the  Convention 
and no other.  By necessary corollary, therefore, any 
challenge premised on Article II read with Article IV 
stand  ousted.    Sections  6  and  7  of  the  Act,  2011, 
when  read  in  combination,  oblige  the  court  to 
recognize  and  enforce  an  award  unless  it  finds  the 
award to run foul of Article V of the Convention. 
10.  Article  V  exercises  a  gravitational  pull  on  the 
decision  to  be  rendered  on  an  application  of  this 
nature and must be reproduced in order to understand 
its precise scope and sweep: 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
11 
to  arbitration,  or 
Recognition  and  enforcement  of  the  award  may  be 
refused, at the request of the party against 1vhom it 
is  invoked,  only  if  that  party  furnishes  to  the 
competent  authority  where  the  recognition  and 
enforcement is sought, proof that:- 
 
(a)  The  parties  to  the  agreement  referred  to  in 
article  II  were,  under  the  law  applicable  to  them, 
under some incapacity, or the said agreement is not 
valid  under  the  law  to  which  the  parties  have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under 
the law of the country where the award was made; 
or 
 
(b)  The  party  against  whom  the  award  is  invoked 
was  not  given  proper  notice  of  the  appointment  of 
the  arbitrator  or  of  the  arbitration  proceedings  or 
was otherwise unable to present his case; or 
 (c)  The  award  deals  with  a  difference  not 
contemplated  by  or  not  falling  within  the  terms  of 
the  submission 
it  contains 
decisions  on  matters  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
submission  to  arbitration,  provided  that,  if  the 
decisions  on  matters  submitted  to  arbitration,  can 
be separated from those not so submitted, that part 
of  the  award  which  contains  decisions  on  matters 
submitted  to  arbitration  may  be  recognized  and 
enforced; or 
(d) The composition of the arbitral authority or the 
arbitral  procedure  was  not  in  accordance  with  the 
agreement  of 
such 
agreement,  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  of 
the country where the arbitration took place; or 
(e)  The  award  has  not  yet  become  binding  on  the 
parties,  or  has  been  set  aside  or  suspended  by  a 
competent.  authority  if  the  country  in  which,  or 
under the law of which, that award was made. 
 
2.  Recognition  and  enforcement  of  an  arbitral 
award  may  also  be  refused  if  the  competent 
authority  in  the  country  where  recognition  and 
enforcement is sought finds that:- 
 
(a)  The  subject  matter  of  the  difference  is  not 
capable  of  settlement  by  arbitration  under  the  law 
of that country; or 
 
(b)  The  recognition  or  enforcement  of  the  award 
would  be  contrary  to  the  public  policy  of  that 
country.” 
 
 
the  parties,  or, 
failing 
11.  However,  three  other  Articles  will  also  be 
engaged in the discussion that follows and which are 
Articles  II,  III  and  IV.    They  may  also  be  brought 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
12 
forth  in  order  to  complete  the  narration  of  the 
structure of the Act, 2011: 
“ARTICLE II 
in 
them 
contractual 
respect  of  defined 
or 
 1.  Each  Contracting  State  shall  recognize  an 
agreement  in  writing  under  which  the  parties 
undertake  to  submit  to  arbitration  all  or  any 
differences  which  have  arisen  or  which  may  arise 
legal 
between 
relationship,  whether 
not, 
concerning  a  subject  matter  capable  of  settlement 
by arbitration. 
 
2. The term " agreement in writing" shall include an 
arbitral  clause  in  a  contract  or  an  arbitration 
agreement, signed by the parties or contained in an 
exchange of letters or telegrams. 
 
3. The court of a Contracting State, when seized of 
an action in a matter in respect of which the parties 
have made an agreement within the meaning of this 
article  shall,  at  the  request  of  one  of  the  parties, 
refer  the  parties  to  arbitration,  unless  it  finds  that 
the said  agreement is  null and void, inoperative  or 
incapable of being performed. 
 
ARTICL.E Ill 
Each  Contracting  State.  shall  recognize  arbitral 
awards as binding and enforce them in accordance 
with  the  rules  of  procedure  of  the  territory  where 
the award is  relied upon, under the conditions  laid 
down  in  the  following  articles.  There  shall  not  be 
imposed  substantially  more  onerous  conditions  or 
higher  fees  or  charges  on  the  recognition  or 
enforcement  of  arbitral  award'  to  which  this 
·Convention  applies  than  arc  imposed  on  the 
recognition  or  enforcement  of  domestic  arbitral 
awards. 
ARTICLE IV 
I.  ·  To  obtain  the  recognition  and  enforcement 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  article,  the  party 
applying  for  recognition  and  enforcement  shall,  at 
the time of the. application, supply:- 
(a) The duly authenticated original award or a duly 
certified copy thereof; 
(b)  The  original  agreement  referred  to  in  article  II 
or a duly certified copy thereof. 
2. If the said award or agreement is not made in an 
official language of the country in which the award 
is  relied  upon,  the  party  applying  for  recognition 
and  enforcement  of  the  award  shall  produce  a 
translation  of  these  documents  into  such  language. 
The  translation  shall  be  certified  by  an  official  or 
sworn  translator  or  by  a  diplomatic  or  consular 
agent.” 
 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
13 
12.  Therefore, these provisions will have to be read 
cumulatively  and  holistically  in  order  to  understand 
the  policy  of  the  law.    There  is  no  doubt  that  the 
purpose  of  the  law  is  to  give  recognition  and 
enforcement to a foreign arbitral award expeditiously 
and with all deliberate speed.  In short, the Act, 2011 
has  been  enacted  to  give  effect  to  the  New  York 
Convention  which  is  a  binding  agreement  between 
the  Contracting  States  and  the  underlying  purpose 
being that any awards issued by international arbitral 
forums ought to be enforced and recognized so as to 
curtail  the  time  of  the  contracting  parties  in  the 
enforcement of their financial obligations.  Article V, 
it may be seen upon its perusal, places the burden of 
proof  upon  the  party  against  which  the  recognition 
and  enforcement  of  the  award  has  been  invoked.  
That  party  is  required  to  furnish  to  the  Court  where 
the  recognition  and  enforcement  is  sought  of  the 
necessary proof so as to establish one or more of the 
grounds given in Article V which may be taken as a 
defence  against  the  enforcement  of  the  award.  
Article  IV  prescribes  the  documents  which  are 
required  to  be  supplied  to  the  court  and  which  will 
trigger  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court  to  proceed  to 
recognize and enforce the foreign arbitral award.   
13.  The concept relating to the policy  of the Act is 
of  paramount  importance  and  all  interpretation  must 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
14 
be  done  in  accordance  with  the  policy  and  the 
intention of the legislature found therein.  From time 
to  time  public  authorities  have  set  their  face  against 
the  policy  of  an  Act,  and  either  declined  to 
implement  it  or  else  attempted  to  frustrate  it. 
Needless to say, this is an unlawful motive. This has 
been dealt with in Administrative Law, H.W.R. Wade 
&  C.f.  Forsyth  (Eleventh  Edition)  in  the  following 
manner: 
the  milk  marketing 
“In  two  strong  and  almost  simultaneous  decisions 
of 1968 the House of Lords and the Court of Appeal 
boldly applied the law as so often laid down. In one, 
the  House  of  Lords  asserted  legal  control  over  the 
allegedly  absolute  discretion  of  the  Minister  of 
Agriculture  and  held 
that  he  had  acted 
unlawfully…” 
“In  Padfield  v.  Minister  of  Agriculture,  Fisheries 
and  Food  the  House  of  Lords  had  to  consider  a 
dispute  under 
scheme 
established  under  the  Agricultural  Marketing  Act 
1958.  The  Act  provided 
for  a  committee  of 
investigation  which  was  to  consider  and  report  on 
certain  kinds  of  complaint  „if  the  Minister  in  any 
case so directs…” 
 
Lord  Reid  expressly  rejected  „the  unreasonable 
proposition that it must be all or nothing—either no 
discretion  at  all  or  an  unfettered  discretion‟.  He 
said: 
 
Parliament must have conferred the discretion with 
the  intention  that  it  should  be  used  to  promote  the 
policy and objects of the Act; the policy and objects 
of the Act must be determined by construing the Act 
as  a  whole  and  construction  is  always  a  matter  of 
law  for  the  court.  In  a  matter  of  this  kind  it  is  not 
possible  to  draw  a  hard  and  fast  line,  but  if  the 
Minister,  by  reason  of  his  having  misconstrued  the 
Act  or  for  any  other  reason,  so  uses  his  discretion 
as to thwart or run counter to the policy and objects 
of  the  act,  then  our  law  would  be  very  defective  if 
persons  aggrieved  were  not  entitled 
the 
protection of the court. 
 
Lord Upjohn said that the minister‟s stated reasons 
showed  a  complete  misapprehension  of  his  duties, 
and  were  all  bad  in  law.  The  scarcely  veiled 
allusion  to  fear  of  parliamentary  trouble  was,  in 
to 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
15 
inadmissible.  One  of 
particular,  a  political  reason  which  was  quite 
extraneous  and 
the 
fundamental  matters  confounding  the  minister‟s 
attitude was his claim to „unfettered‟ discretion: 
 
First,  the  adjective  nowhere  appears  in  section  19 
and  is  an  unauthorised  gloss  by  the  Minister. 
Secondly,  even  if  the  section  did  contain  that 
adjective I doubt if it would make any difference in 
law  to  his  powers,  save  to  emphasise  what  he  has 
already, namely that acting lawfully he has a power 
of  decision  which  cannot  be  controlled  by  the 
courts; it is unfettered. But the use of that adjective, 
even  in  an  Act  of  Parliament,  can  do  nothing  to 
unfetter  the  control  which  the  judiciary  have  over 
the  executive,  namely  that  in  exercising  their 
powers  the  latter  must  act  lawfully  and  that  is  a 
matter  to  be  determined  by  looking  at  the  Act  and 
its scope and object in conferring a discretion upon 
the Minister rather than by the use of adjectives.” 
 
“Yet  as  we  have  seen  it  is  commonplace  for  the 
judges  to  impose  limits  on  apparently  unqualified 
discretions  derived  from  „the  policy  and  objects  of 
the Act‟. And in both the recent cases mentioned the 
judges,  in  fact,  recognized  that  such  limitations 
might  be  imposed  and  required  that  the  discretion 
of  the  Secretary  of  State,  although  wide,  be 
exercised  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  reason. 
Thus  the  incautious  use of  the  word  „unfettered‟  to 
describe  a  broad  statutory  discretion  does  not 
adumbrate 
foundational 
principle of administrative law just described.” 
the  rejection  of 
the 
 
 
The  importance  of  the  Padfield  decision  was 
underlined  by  Lord  Denning  MR  in  Breen  v 
Amalgamated  Engineering  Union  [1971]  2  Q  B  175 
at 190: 
“The  discretion  of  a  statutory  body  is  never 
unfettered. It is a discretion which is to be exercised 
according  to  law.  That  means  at  least  this:  the 
statutory  body  must  be  guided  by  relevant 
considerations and not by irrelevant. If its decision 
is influenced by extraneous considerations which it 
ought  not  to  have  taken  into  account,  then  the 
decision  cannot  stand.  No  matter  that  the  statutory 
body may have acted in good faith; nevertheless the 
decision  will  be  set  aside.  That  is  established  by 
Padfield  v.  Minister  of  Agriculture,  Fisheries  and 
Food which is a landmark in modern administrative 
law.” 
 
 
  Wade further elaborated the rule as: 
 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
16 
 
“The  Padfield  case,  already  discussed,  shows  the 
„statutory  policy‟  doctrine  as  applied  to  a  minister 
of  the  Crown.  The  House  of  Lords  held  that  in 
refusing  to  refer  the  milk  producers‟  complaint  to 
the statutory committee the minister had acted so as 
to  frustrate  the  policy  of  the  Act,  despite  the  fact 
that its words were merely permissive; and that the 
political  and  other  reasons  given  were  irrelevant 
and indicative of unlawful motives…” 
The  House  of  Lords  also  rejected  the  Crown‟s 
argument  that  the  minister  need  have  given  no 
reasons  and  that  therefore  such  reasons  as  he 
volunteered  to  give  could  not  be  criticized.  Going 
still  further,  the  House  declared  that  if  in  such  a 
case he refused to give any reasons, the court might 
have  to  assume  that  he  had  no  good  reasons  and 
was acting arbitrarily. In other words, the minister 
may not be able to disarm the court by taking refuge 
in silence…” 
 
14.  In England, the enforcement and recognition of 
foreign  arbitral  awards  under 
the  New  York 
Convention  are  governed  under  the  Arbitration  Act, 
1996,  Ss.  100-103.    In  Russell  on  Arbitration,  24th 
edition,  the  concept  of  refusal  of  recognition  and 
enforcement,  in  the  paradigm  of  the  policy  of  the 
Convention, has been stated thus: 
“Refusal  of  recognition  and  enforcement.    The 
grounds  on  which  recognition  of  New  York 
Convention  awards  will  be  refused  under  ss.  101-
103  of  the  1996  Act  are  very  limited.    Section  103 
accordingly embodies a pro-enforcement approach.  
So  unless  the  ground  for  refusal  falls  within  the 
terms of s.103, the court must recognize and enforce 
a  New  York  Convention  award.    The  court  also 
apparently  has  a  very  limited  discretion  to  enforce 
the  award  even  where  one  or  more  of  the  grounds 
are made out.” 
In China Minmetals Materials Import & Export 
15. 
Co. V  Chi Mei Corp.,  Court  of Appeal,  Third  Circuit, 
United States of America, 26 June 2003, 02-2897 and 
02-3542,  the  purpose  of  the  Convention  has  been 
alluded to in the following words: 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
17 
it,  was 
to  encourage 
“The  goal  of  the  Convention,  and  the  principal 
purpose  underlying  American  adoption  and 
implementation  of 
the 
recognition  and  enforcement  of  commercial 
arbitration  agreements  in  international  contracts 
and  to  unify  the  standards  by  which  agreements  to 
arbitrate  are  observed  and  arbitral  awards  are 
enforced  in  the  signatory  countries." Scherk  v. 
Alberto-Culver  Co., 417  U.S.  506,  520  n.  15,  94  S. 
Ct. 2449, 2457 n. 15, 41 L. Ed. 2d 270 (1974). In an 
oft-cited  opinion  concerning  enforcement  of  a 
foreign arbitration award, the Court of Appeals for 
the  Second  Circuit  noted 
the  "general  pro-
enforcement  bias 
the  Convention," 
explaining  that  the  Convention's  "basic  thrust  was 
to 
foreign 
arbitral  awards." Parsons  &  Whittemore  Overseas 
Co.  v.  Societe  Generale  de  L'Industrie  du  Papier, 
508 F.2d 969, 973 (2d Cir. 1974). 
liberalize  procedures 
for  enforcing 
informing 
 
As the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has 
noted,  "  [t]here  is  now  considerable  caselaw 
holding  that,  in  an  action  to  confirm  an  award 
rendered  in,  or  under  the  law  of,  a  foreign 
jurisdiction,  the  grounds  for  relief  enumerated  in 
Article  V  of  the  Convention  are the  only grounds 
available for setting aside an arbitral award." Yusuf 
Ahmed  Alghanim  &  Sons,  W.L.L.  v.  Toys  `R'  Us, 
Inc.,  126  F.3d  15,  20  (2d  Cir.  1997)  (emphasis 
added) (citing M & C Corp. v. Erwin Behr GmbH & 
Co.,  87  F.3d  844,  851  (6th  Cir.  1996); Int'l 
Standard  Elec.  Corp.  v.  Bridas  Sociedad  Anonima 
Petrolera,  Industrial  Y  Comercial, 745  F.  Supp. 
172, 181-82 (S.D.N.Y. 1990); Brandeis Intsel Ltd. v. 
Calabrian  Chems.  Corp., 656  F.  Supp.  160,  167 
(S.D.N.Y. 1987). 
 
Assuming  that  this  case  had  come  to  the  district 
court and the IAAF had sought to compel Slaney to 
arbitrate her claims, a determination as to whether 
there had been a writing might pose a barrier to the 
IAAF's  position.  However,  that  is  not  the  case. 
Here,  an  arbitration  has  already  taken  place  in 
which,  as  we  have  determined,  Slaney  freely 
participated.  Thus,  the  fact  that  Slaney  suggests 
there  is  no  written  agreement  to  arbitrate,  as 
mandated by Article II of the New York Convention 
is  irrelevant. See,  e.g.,  Coutinho  Caro  &  Co., 
U.S.A.,  Inc.  v.  Marcus  Trading  Inc.,  2000  WL 
435566  at  *5  n.  4  (D.  Conn.  March  14,  2000) 
(recognizing  a  difference  between  the  situation 
where  a  party  seeks  to  compel  arbitration  and  a 
situation  in  which  one  attempts  to  set  aside  an 
arbitral award that has already been issued). What 
is highlighted here is the difference between Article 
II  of  the  Convention,  which  dictates  when  a  court 
should compel parties to an arbitration, and Article 
V, which lists the narrow circumstances in which an 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
18 
arbitration  decision  between  signatories  to  the 
Convention should not be enforced. 
 
16.  Thus  the  general  pro-enforcement  bias  which 
permeates the Act, 2011 is the policy of the law and 
must be the underlying thrust to liberalise procedures 
for enforcing foreign arbitral awards.  The courts, on 
a  proper  objective  analysis  must  give  effect  to  the 
intention  of  the  legislature  and  the  purpose  of  the 
New York Convention, in the enforcement of foreign 
arbitral  awards.    The  centrality  of  the  statutory 
enterprise  consists  in  shunning  a  tendency  to  view 
the  application  with  scepticism  and  to  consider  the 
arbitral  award  as  having  a  sound 
legal  and 
foundational  element.    This  presumption  is  for  the 
respondent  to  rebut  upon  proof  being  furnished.  
More  importantly,  the  policy  of  the  Act,  2011 
requires  this  Court  to  dispose  of  issues  by  the  usual 
test for summary judgment, and not by a regular trial. 
Threshold objection of Articles II and IV: 
17.  Acro  contended  that  the  applicant  has  failed  to 
fulfill  the  requirements  of  Article  IV  and,  therefore, 
the  application  ought  to  be  dismissed  on  the 
threshold.    Acro  argues  that  the  original  agreement 
referred  in  Article  II  has  not  been  produced  and 
which makes the application deficient and hence not 
maintainable.    This  has  been  urged  on  the  basis  of 
the  defence  taken  by  Acro  as  regards  the  lack  of 
execution  of  the  agreement  relied  upon  by  the 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
19 
applicant.  In this regard, Acro has placed reliance on 
a number of judgments from the foreign jurisdiction 
under  similar  circumstances  in  which  the  issue 
regarding  the  supply  of  documents  in  terms  of 
Article  IV  has  been  found  to  be  a  baseline  question 
and has been required to be determined ahead of the 
objections under Article V.  I shall deal with the case 
law  cited  by  the  respondent  in  the  first  instance 
before proceeding ahead: 
18.  Two of these cases would require mention and a 
detailed  scrutiny.    Reliance  was  placed  on  the 
holding  of the Court of Appeal of Germany  in  Case 
No.8 Sch 11-2, 4 September 2003, Oberlandesgericht  
[OLG]  Celley.    Clause  19  of  the  contract  provided 
for  arbitration  at  the  China  International  Economic 
and Trade Arbitration  Commission.   The respondent 
argued  that  the  parties  did  not  validly  enter  into  a 
contract as its representatives did not have the power 
of  attorney  to  sign  that  contract  on  behalf  of  the 
respondents.    The  Court  of  Appeal  noted  that  (and 
this  is  crucial)  “the  original  arbitration  agreement 
supplied by the claimant together with its request for 
enforcement  was  illegible  and  the  readable  copy 
also supplied by the claimant was unsigned.”  The 
court held that the formal requirements of Article IV 
were left unanswered as the preliminary requirement 
that  there  is  a  valid  arbitration  agreement  between 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
20 
the  parties  was  not  met  in  the  present  case.    With 
regard  to  the  claimant‟s  argument  that  the  issue  of 
the  respondent‟s  representation  had  already  been 
settled in the arbitral award it was held that: 
that,  although 
in 
“The  Court  also  noted 
principle  the  party  opposing  enforcement  has 
the  burden  to  prove  the  grounds  for  refusal  of 
enforcement  in  Art.  V  convention,  the  party 
seeking  enforcement  has  the  burden  to  prove 
the  “pre-condition  for  the  existence  of  such 
grounds  for  refusal”,  that  is,  that  “the  parties 
have  concluded  an  arbitration  agreement 
pursuant  to  Art.  II  Convention”.    The  court 
dismissed  the  claimant‟s  argument  that  the 
issue  of  the  defendant‟s  representation  had 
already  been  discussed  and  settled  in  the 
arbitral  award,  holding 
the  arbitral 
tribunal‟s findings as to its own jurisdiction are 
not  binding  on  the  enforcement  court,  which 
reviews them independently…” 
that 
 
19. 
It further held that: 
“The  claimant  supplied  the  original  arbitral 
award…pursuant  to  Art.  IV(1)(a)  Convention, 
as  well  as  translation  thereof  as  requested  by 
Art.  V  [rectius,  [IV](2)  Convention.    However, 
it  failed  to  supply  the  original  arbitration 
agreement  pursuant  to  Art.  IV(1)(b)  together 
with  Art.  II(1)  Convention.    The  claimant  did 
supply  (the  alleged  original  printout  of)  a  fax 
that  it  received  from  the  defendant.    According 
to Art. II(2) Convention, „agreement in writing‟ 
in  Art.  II(1)  means  an  arbitration  clause  in  a 
contract  or  an  arbitration  agreement,  if  the 
contract  or  the arbitration  agreement  is signed 
by  the  parties  or  contained  in  an  exchange  of 
letters  or  telegrams  between  them.    Modern 
forms  of  communication,  such  as  the  telefax, 
may  be  deemed  to  fall  within  the  scope  of  this 
provision.    [In  the  present  case,]  it  is  decisive 
that the original of the fax is illegible to a large 
extent,  whereas  the  „readable  copy‟  thereof, 
which 
is  not 
signed.” 
the  claimant  also  supplied, 
 
20. 
The decision went on to conclude as follows: 
“Ultimately, this question may remain open, as 
there  is no  valid  arbitration  clause  pursuant  to 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
21 
Art. V(1)(a) together with Art. II(1) Convention.  
According 
to  Art.  II(1)  Convention,  each 
contracting  State  shall  recognize  an  agreement 
in writing under which the parties undertake to 
submit  to  arbitration  all  or  any  differences 
which  have  arisen  or  which may  arise  between 
them  in  respect  of  a  defined  legal  relationship, 
as  long  as  the  subject  matter  is  capable  of 
settlement  by  arbitration.    In  the  present  case, 
the  claimant  did  not  meet  its  burden  to  prove 
that  it  validly  concluded  a  contract  with  the 
defendant  on  25  [rectius,  29]  April  2000,  so 
that  also  the  arbitration  clause  contained  in 
that contract (clause 19) is valid.” 
[8]  “Contrary  to  the  claimant‟s  opinion,  the 
defendant  does  not  have  the  burden  to  prove 
that Mr. U did not have the power of attorney to 
conclude 
the  arbitration  agreement  under 
Chinese  law.    Admittedly,  according  to  Art. 
V(1)  Convention,  the  burden  to  prove  the 
existence  of  the  grounds  on  which  recognition 
and  enforcement  of  a  foreign  arbitral  award 
can be refused under that article is on the party 
against  which  enforcement  is  sought:  hence, 
thus,  the  defendant.    However,  a  pre-condition 
for  the  existence  of  such  grounds  for  refusal  is 
that  the  parties  have  concluded  an  arbitration 
agreement pursuant to Art.II Convention.  Only 
when 
the 
existence of an arbitration agreement is met can 
there  be  grounds  for  refusal  of  the  recognition 
and enforcement of an arbitral award.” 
fundamental  condition  of 
this 
 
21. 
The German Court of Appeal held that although 
according  to  Article  V  of  the  New  York  Convention, 
the  burden  to  prove  the  existence  of  the  grounds  on 
which  recognition  and  enforcement  of  foreign  arbitral 
award  can  be  refused  was  on  the  party  against  which 
enforcement  was  sought,  a  pre-condition  for  the 
existence  of  said  grounds  for  refusal  was  that  the 
parties  had  concluded  an  arbitration  agreement 
pursuant  to  Article  II  of  the  Convention.    Thus,  the 
German  Court  of  Appeal  by  bifurcating 
the 
determination  to  a  two-tier  procedure,  held  it  as  a  pre 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
22 
condition for enforcement that the existence of a valid 
arbitration  agreement  pursuant  to  Article  II  of  the 
Convention  must  be  proved  and  the  burden  of  which 
was on the claimant.  It is reiterated that on the facts of 
the case before the German Court of Appeal there was 
no legible copy of the  agreement  before the court and 
which  was  also  unsigned.    Therefore,  the  findings  of 
the German Court of Appeal turn on the peculiar facts 
before  that  Court  and  upon  which  the  decision 
ultimately  hinged.    However,  the  German  Court  of 
Appeal  did  not  advert  to  the  aspect  of  severability 
under  which  the  courts  have  generally  dismissed  this 
argument  to  hold  that  an  arbitration  agreement  is 
legally  independent  from  the  underlying  contract 
which contains it and that the nullity of a contract does 
not  imply  that  the  arbitration  agreement  therein  is 
invalid.    This  doctrine  has  been  recognized  in  a 
number  of  other  cases  from  the  German  Court  of 
Appeal  and  which  have  been  referred  to  in  the  Guide 
on 
the  Convention  on 
the  Recognition  and 
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards issued by the 
UNCITRAL  Secretariat  (The  Guide).    At  the  same 
time  the  precedent  cited  by  the  counsel  for  the 
respondent does not take into account contrary view of 
the  German  Courts  as  to  the  form  requirements  of 
Article  II  such  as  Oberlandesgericht  [OLG]  Celley, 
Germany,  14  December  06,  8  Sch  14/05  and  
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
23 
Oberlandesgericht  [OLG]  Celley,  Germany,  18 
September 2003 8 Sch 12/02.  In  a series of  decisions 
German  Courts  have  applied  the  more  favourable 
provisions  of  the  German  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  at 
the  award  enforcement  stage  to  assess  the  validity  of 
an arbitration agreement under Article V(1)(a). 
22.  A  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  Italy  was 
also  referred  which  reinforces  the  principle  that  the 
original  arbitration  agreement  or  a  certified  copy  be 
supplied  at 
the 
time  of  filing 
the  request  for 
enforcement  and  this  is  an  aspect  which  concerns  the 
admissibility of the enforcement proceedings.  In Italy 
No.182,  Microware  s.r.l.  in  liquidation  (Italy)  v. 
Indicia  Diagnostics  S.A.,  Corte  di  Cassazione 
[Supreme Court], First Civil Chamber, 17291, 23 July 
2009 it was held that: 
The  Supreme  Court  annulled  the  lower  court‟s 
decision  and  denied  enforcement,  confirming  its 
consistent  jurisprudence  that  the  requirement  in 
Art. IV of the 1958 New York Convention (mirrored 
in  Art.  839(2)  of 
the  Italian  Code  of  Civil 
Procedure)  that  the  original  arbitration  agreement 
or a certified copy thereof be supplied at the time of 
filing  the  request  for  enforcement  concerns  the 
admissibility of the enforcement proceedings rather 
than 
  As  a 
consequence,  it  is  not  a  mere  condition  for  the 
action whose lack can be cured in the course of the 
proceeding.” 
the  evidence-collecting  phase. 
 
23. 
Therefore, the supply  of the original arbitration 
agreement  was  held  to  concern  the  admissibility  of 
enforcement  proceedings  which  really  seems  to  echo 
the  enumerations  of  Article  IV  of  the  Convention  and 
one cannot doubt the requirement to be essential to set 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
24 
in motion the proceedings for enforcement.  However, 
Acro on the contrary, invites this Court to blur the line 
between  the  Article  IV  requirement  and  Article  V 
defence  of  validity  of  agreement. 
  The 
term 
“agreement in writing” has to be seen in the context of 
Article II and which specifies that the arbitral clause in 
a  contract  or  an  arbitration  agreement  may  be  either 
signed  by  the  parties  or  alternately  may  be  teased  out 
of an exchange of letters or telegrams.  By the passage 
of  time  and  with  the  onset  of  far  more  innovate 
technology,  emails  and  other  forms  of  modern 
information  systems  can  justifiably  be  included  in  the 
term  “exchange  of  letters  or  telegrams”  so  as  to 
enlarge and broaden the scope and to give effect to the 
Convention 
in  present 
times. 
  Otherwise 
the 
Convention will be rendered unworkable and pedantic 
and  thus  unsuitable  for  changing  times.    In  essence, 
therefore, the claimant has merely to supply a copy of 
the  agreement,  whether  signed  or  unsigned,  or  based 
on  “exchange  of  letters  or  telegrams”  and  that  is 
sufficient  compliance  of  Article  IV. 
  All  other 
questions  are  in  the  realm  of  validity  or  otherwise  of 
the  agreement,  including  the  question  of  its  proper 
execution as raised by Acro herein, and thus to be dealt 
with  as  a  defence  under  Article  V. 
  In  Smita 
Conductors  Ltd.  v  Euro  Alloys  Ltd.,  Appeal  (civil) 
12930 of 1996, the Indian Supreme Court held that: 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
25 
“What needs to be understood in this context is that 
the  agreement  to  submit  to  arbitration  must  be  in 
writing.  What  is  an  agreement  in  writing  is 
explained by para 2 of Article II. If we break down 
para  2  into  elementary  parts,  it  consists  of  four 
aspects.  It  includes  an  arbitral  clause  (1)  in  a 
contract containing an arbitration clause signed by 
the  parties,  (2)  an  arbitration  agreement  signed by 
the  parties,  (3)  an  arbitral  clause  in  a  contract 
contained  in  exchange  of  letters  or  telegrams,  and 
(4) an arbitral agreement contained in exchange of 
letters or telegrams. If an arbitration clause falls in 
any one of these four  categories, it must be treated 
as an agreement in writing.” 
 
“If  the  two  contracts  stood  affirmed  by  reason  of 
their conduct as indicated in the letters exchanged, 
it must be held that there is an agreement in writing 
between the parties in this regard.” 
 
24. 
Similarly in Russell on Arbitration, 24th edition, 
the following statement reiterates the rule: 
“Procedure  for  summary  enforcement  of  a  New 
York Convention award.   Section 102 specifies the 
procedure for recognizing or enforcing a New York 
Convention award as follows: 
“102.(1)  A  party  seeking 
the  recognition  or 
enforcement of a New York Convention award must 
produce: 
a)  the  duly  authenticated  original  award  or  a 
duly certified copy of it, and  
b)  the original arbitration agreement or a duly 
to 
these 
the  satisfaction  of 
to  certification  under  s.102(1) 
certified copy of it. 
(2) 
If  the  award  or  agreement  is  in  a  foreign 
language, the party must also produce a translation 
of  it  certified  by  an  official  or  sworn  translator  or 
by a diplomatic or consular agent.” 
Production  of  these  documents  suffices  for  the 
purpose  of  recognition  of  the  award  by  the  court.  
The  court  is  likely  to  take  a  liberal  and  pragmatic 
approach 
formal 
requirements.    The  Court  of  Appeal  took  such  an 
approach 
in 
Lombard  knight  v  Rainstorm  Pictures  Inc,  where 
although 
the  arbitration 
agreements  did  not  expressly  refer  to  the  accuracy 
of  the  copy,  it  was  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of 
requirement 
s.102(1). 
for 
independent 
the  arbitration 
agreement.    Certification  also  does  not  go  to 
validity of the arbitration agreement, which is dealt 
with  at  the  next  stage  under  s.  103(2)(a),  (b).  
Equally,  the  party  seeking  recognition  does  not 
have  to  show  at  that  stage  that  the  award  was 
binding upon the party against whom recognition is 
sought.  Any such question is for the latter to raise 
at the next stage under s. 103(2).” 
  There  was  no 
certification  of 
the  certification  of 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
26 
 
25.  China  Minmetals  Materials  Import  and  Export 
Col.  Ltd  v.  Chi  Mei  Corporation,  Court  of  Appeals 
Third  Circuit  United  States,  26  June,  2003  is  a  case 
which has been relied upon by the learned counsel for 
the  respondent.    However,  in  the  Guide,  China 
Minmetals  has  been  relied  upon  as  authority  for  the 
proposition  that  various  articles  of  the  New  York 
Convention  contemplate  as  a  whole  that  an  enforcing 
court should enforce valid agreements to arbitrate and 
only awards base on those agreements.   
26. 
The  primary  issue  before  the  Court  of  Appeal 
was stated thus: 
the 
that 
the  documents  providing 
“The  primary  issue  in  this  case  is  whether  the 
district  court  properly  enforced 
foreign 
arbitration  panel's  award  where  that  panel,  in 
finding  that  it  had  jurisdiction,  rejected  Chi  Mei's 
argument 
for 
arbitration  were  forged  so  that  there  was  not  any 
valid  writing  exhibiting  an  intent  to  arbitrate.  This 
issue actually involves two distinct questions. First, 
we  must  consider  whether  a  foreign  arbitration 
award  might  be  enforceable  regardless  of  the 
validity  of  the  arbitration  clause  on  which  the 
foreign body rested its jurisdiction.” 
 
27. 
In its holding, the Court of Appeal referred to a 
number  of  precedents  which  established  a  strong 
federal  policy  in  favour  of  arbitration  and  that  the 
presumptions  in  favour  of  the  arbitration  carries 
special  force  when 
international  commerce  was 
involved.  Secondly, the Court of Appeal distinguished 
two  contrary  judgments  of  the  Courts  of  Appeal  and 
held  them  to  be  authorities  for  their  own  facts.  
However, the fact remains that in those precedents the 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
27 
Courts of Appeal had held that once an arbitration had 
already  taken place, Article V will be triggered which 
lists the narrow circumstances in which  an arbitration 
decision between signatories to the Convention should 
not be enforced.  Also that the New York Convention 
maintains  very  different  regimes  for  the  review  of 
arbitral awards and that the Convention was very clear 
that  when  an  action  for  enforcement  was  brought  in  a 
foreign state, the state may refuse to enforce the award 
only on the grounds explicitly set forth in Article V of 
the  Convention.    In  my  opinion  the  contrary  view 
referred to in China Minmetals of a co-ordinate Court 
of  Appeal  has  a  better  reading  of  the  New  York 
Convention and its representations.  However, the crux 
of the holding in China Minmetals is the following: 
that 
find 
therefore 
“We 
the  absence  of  any 
reference  to  a  valid  written  agreement  to  arbitrate 
in  Article  V  does  not  foreclose  a  defense  to 
enforcement on the grounds that there never was a 
valid  agreement  to  arbitrate.  Minmetals  cannot 
point  to  any  case  interpreting  Article  V  of  the 
Convention so narrowly as to preclude that defense 
and  we  are  aware  of  none.12   Nor  do  the  text  and 
structure  of 
the  Convention  compel  such  an 
interpretation.  Indeed,  although  only  Article  II 
contains  an  "agreement  in  writing"  requirement, 
Article  IV  requires  a  party  seeking  to  enforce  an 
award  under  Article  V  to  supply  "  [t]he  original 
agreement  referred  to  in  article  II"  along  with  its 
application for enforcement. Furthermore, Article V 
the  party  opposing 
expressly  provides 
enforcement  may 
the  competent 
authority where the recognition and enforcement is 
sought  proof  that  ...  the  said  agreement  is  not 
valid...." Read as a whole, therefore, the Convention 
contemplates that a court should enforce only valid 
agreements  to  arbitrate  and  only  awards  based  on 
those  agreements.  Thus,  the  concern  we  expressed 
in 
cases 
like Sandvik and Deutz — 
that  parties  only  be 
required to arbitrate those disputes they intended to 
furnish  "to 
in  Article 
decisions 
that 
our 
II 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
28 
arbitrate  —  is  likewise  present  in  this  case.  We 
therefore hold that a district court should refuse to 
enforce an arbitration award under the Convention 
where  the  parties  did  not  reach  a  valid  agreement 
to  arbitrate,  at  least  in  the  absence  of  a  waiver  of 
the  objection  to  arbitration  by  the  party  opposing 
enforcement.13  
 
28.  It can be seen from the above that the Court of 
Appeal in China Minmetals read the Convention as a 
whole and found that the defence on the basis of the 
validity or invalidity of an agreement could be culled 
out from a reading of Article V itself and, therefore, 
reading it cumulatively the Convention contemplated 
that  court  will  enforce  only  valid  agreements  to 
arbitrate  and  awards  based  on  those  agreements.  
This conclusion in China Minmetals generally agrees 
with  the  construction  that  ought  to  be  put  upon  a 
holistic reading of the New York Convention.  In my 
opinion, the only requirement of Article II read with 
Article IV of the Convention is that an original copy 
of  the  agreement  or  its  certified  copy  was  produced 
by the claimant at the time of making the request for 
the  recognition  and  enforcement  of  the  award.    This 
requirement  cannot  be  considered  within  the  narrow 
confines of a strict agreement in writing but has to be 
seen in the context of the concept of an agreement in 
writing given in Article II of the  Convention.  Also, 
it would be reasonable basis for the Court to proceed 
under  the  Act,  2011  read  with  the  New  York 
Convention  if  the  Arbitral  Tribunal  has  rendered  an 
award  on  the  basis  of  an  arbitration  agreement  and 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
29 
by  considering  the  defence  regarding  the  validity  or 
otherwise of that agreement.  In the present case, the 
original  copies  of 
the  agreements  have  been 
produced  which  are  all  signed.    Therefore,  the 
requirements of Article II read with Article IV stand 
fulfilled  and  therefore  this  court  is  only  obliged  to 
consider  the  objections  and  defences  raised  on  the 
basis  of  Article  V  regarding  the  validity  of  the 
agreement.    The  ground  of  defence  taken  by  the 
respondent  herein  viz.  that  the  respondent  had  not 
signed  the  arbitration  agreement  is  one  of  the 
grounds  which  concerned 
the  validity  of  an 
arbitration agreement pursuant to Article V(1)(a) and 
thus,  will  be  amenable  to  the  jurisdiction  of  this 
Court  under  Article  V  and  for  which  the  burden  of 
proof  is  squarely  on  Acro.    Thus,  it  is  clear  that  the 
requirements  of  Article  II  have  been  fulfilled  by  the 
claimant whereas the onus of Article V has not been 
discharged  by  Acro  and  has  gone  abegging.  
Doubtless,  section  5  read  with  Article  IV  of  the 
convention  places  a  prior  duty  on  the  claimant  to 
supply  the  duly  authenticated  original  award  or  a 
duly  certified  copy 
thereof  and 
the  original 
agreement  or  a  duly  certified  copy  to  the  court  to 
trigger the process.  But this, at best, is a procedural 
formality  and  if  an  agreement  in  any  form  has  been 
produced,  the  duty  stands  discharged  and  any 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
30 
objection to the agreement may only be raised within 
the periphery of Article V and not under Article II of 
the  Convention.    For,  all  such  objections  will  be 
covered  within  the  broad  contours  of  the  defence  of 
incapacity  or  invalidity  under  the  law.    The  Act, 
2011 and the Convention do not countenance a two-
tier adjudicative process.  The policy and purpose of 
law  will  suffer  grievously  if  such  an  interpretation 
was  allowed  to  be  weighed  with  the  Courts.    I  have 
no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  in  all  such  maters  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  court  is  hedged  in  by  the 
provisions of sections  6 and  7 which require  a court 
to consider and dilate upon Article V defences only.  
This  will  include  all  defences  regarding  nullity  of  a 
contract or that one of the parties had not signed the 
arbitration  agreement.    This  view  is  reinforced  in  a 
case  if  the  Arbitral  Tribunal  has  already  considered 
this  objection  and  determined  it  in  favour  of  the 
claimant.    A  fortiori,  in  such  a  case  if  the  same 
original agreement is produced, it will be considered 
as  sufficient  compliance  of  Article  IV  and  the  court 
will proceed to decide the Article  V defences set  up 
by the respondent for which the proof requires to be 
furnished.  This is also the consistent view of the U.S 
Court  of  Appeals  for  the  Second  Circuit  as  noted  in 
China  Minmetals  (which  was  a  slightly  divergent 
view  from  earlier  cases). 
  Article  II  of 
the 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
31 
Convention  has  been  reproduced  above.    It  requires 
each  Contracting  State  to  recognize  an  agreement  in 
writing  under  which  the  parties  undertake  to  submit 
to arbitration all or any differences which have arisen 
between.    Clause  2  of  Article  II  gives  an  inkling  of 
the scope of the term “agreement in writing”.  It has 
been  defined  to  include  an  arbitral  clause  in  a 
contract  or  arbitration  agreement,  signed  by  the 
parties  or  contained  in  an  exchange  of  letters  or 
telegrams.  Modern forms of communication, such as 
email,  telefax  etc.  fall  within  the  scope  of  this 
provision.    Thus  a  claimant  may  produce  and  rely 
upon  an  agreement  in  writing  which  may  either  be 
signed  by  the  parties  or  is  contained  in  an  exchange 
of emails etc. meaning thereby that this other form of 
agreement  is  writing  need  not  be  signed.    In  other 
words, if a set of emails or other correspondence by 
any modern means of communication is supplied (as 
in  the  present  case)  by  the  claimant,  he  will  be 
deemed to have crossed the threshold of section 5 of 
the  Act,  2011,  read  with  Article  IV  of 
the 
Convention  and  any  objection  to  their  validity  can 
only  be  dealt  with  as  Article  V(1)(a)  defence  to  be 
treated as such. 
UNCITRAL Guide and its relevance: 
29.  Article IV is preceded by Article III and which 
enjoins  a  Contracting  State  to  recognize  arbitral 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
32 
awards as binding and to enforce them in accordance 
with  rules  of  procedure  of  the  territory  where  the 
award  is  relied  upon.    Thus,  Article  III  places  a 
primary  obligation  on  a  Contracting  State 
to 
recognize  arbitral  awards.    It  must  be  emphasized 
that  what  is  sought  to  be  recognized  is  the  arbitral 
awards  and  not  the  agreement  referred  to  in  Article 
IV.  Article IV begins  with the words “to  obtain the 
recognition  and  enforcement  mentioned 
in 
the 
preceding  Article”.    Therefore,  Article  IV  refers  to 
the  preceding  Article 
in  order 
to  obtain 
the 
recognition  and  enforcement  and  the  preceding 
Article  III  refers  to  the  recognition  and  enforcement 
of arbitral awards.  What follows thereafter is merely 
a  ministerial  act  of  supplying  to  the  court  the  duly 
authenticated original award or a duly certified copy 
of the original agreement referred to in Article II.  It 
does  not  matter  whether  the  original  agreement  is 
invalid  under  the  law  to  which  the  parties  have 
subjected it or its execution has been denied.  These 
are  questions  which  will  be  determined  in  the  ambit 
of Article V objections for which the proof lies upon 
the objector.  Article II merely reinforces the concept 
that  every  Contracting  State  shall  recognize  an 
agreement 
in  writing  under  which 
the  parties 
undertake 
to  submit 
to  arbitration  or  of  any 
differences  which  have  arisen  or  which  may  arise 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
33 
between them in respect of defined legal relationship 
whether  contractual  or  not.    The  words  “whether 
contractual  or  not”  are  significant  and  have  a  close 
nexus  with  the  byelaw  201  of  the  Byelaws  of  ICA.  
Byelaw 201 says that: 
Subject 
“Bylaw 201  
1 
the 
following clauses will apply to every contract made 
under our Bylaws and Rules, or containing words to 
similar effect: 
to  Bylaws  302  and  318, 
  The  contract  will  incorporate  the  Bylaws 
and  Rules  of 
the  International  Cotton 
Association  Limited  as  they  were  when  the 
contract was agreed. 
If  any  contract  has  not  been,  or  will  not  be 
performed, 
treated  as 
cancelled. It will be closed by being invoiced 
back to the seller under our Rules in force at 
the date of the contract. 
it  will  not  be 
 
  All  disputes  relating  to  the  contract  will  be 
resolved  through  arbitration  in  accordance 
with  the  Bylaws  of  the  International  Cotton 
Association  Limited.  This 
agreement 
incorporates  the  Bylaws  which  set  out  the 
Association‟s arbitration procedure. 
  Neither  party  will  take  legal  action  over  a 
dispute  suitable  for  arbitration,  other  than 
to obtain security for any claim, unless they 
have  first  obtained  an  arbitration  award 
from  the  International  Cotton  Association 
Limited  and  exhausted  all  means  of  appeal 
allowed by the Association‟s Bylaws. 
The  words  „all  disputes‟  can  be  changed  to  read 
„quality  disputes‟  or  „technical  disputes‟.  But  if 
nothing else is agreed, the words „all disputes‟ will 
apply. 
2  
Attention  is  drawn  to  Bylaws  302  and  318 
which allow the Directors to deny arbitration, if, on 
the day before the date of the contract giving rise to 
the dispute, either party has its name circulated on 
the  ICA  List  of  Unfulfilled  Awards  in  accordance 
with Bylaws 315 and 354. 
3 This Bylaw will apply even if: 
is  held 
the  contract 
ineffective, or was not concluded; or 
the recommended form of contract set out in 
Appendix A has not been used.” 
invalid  or 
to  be 
 
 
 
30. 
From  the  bylaw  201,  reproduced  above,  it  is 
clear  that  the  bylaw  will  apply  even  if  the  contract  is 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
34 
held  to  be  invalid  or  ineffective  or  was  not  concluded 
as  is  the  stance  taken  by  Acro.    To  reiterate,  Acro 
asserts that certain negotiations did take place between 
the parties but no agreement was concluded.  In such a 
case  as  well,  the  disputes  relating  to  the  contract  will 
be resolved through arbitration in accordance with the 
Bylaws of ICA.  Be that as it may I do not agree with 
the  threshold  objection  taken  by  Acro  with  regard  to 
the  filing  of  the  original  agreement  which  in  this  case 
has been done along with an authenticated copy of the 
original  award  and  hence  the  requirements  of  Article 
IV  of  the  New  York  Convention  have  indeed  been 
fulfilled.  It is a  different  matter that Acro has chosen 
to deny the execution of the agreement but that aspect 
will  be  covered  under  Article  V  and  must  be  taken  as 
an objection under that Article for which the proof lies 
upon Acro.  The flip side is that in case the reply filed 
by Acro is not taken as objections under Article V then 
for  all  intents  and  purposes  there  are  no  objections 
under Article V and this Court will proceed to enforce 
and  recognize  Foreign  Arbitral  Award,  for  this  is  the 
mandate of section 7 of the Act, 2011. 
31. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  applicant  also 
referred  to  the  UNCITRAL  Secretariat  Guide  on  the 
Convention  on  the  Recognition  and  Enforcement  of 
Foreign  Arbitral  Awards  (New  York  1958)  (2016 
Edition).    The  Guide  is  a  product  of  the  work  of  the 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
35 
Secretariat  based  on  expert  input  and  is  a  United 
Nations  publication.    An  extensive  summary  of  the 
grounds  of  Article  V  has  been  brought  forth  based  on 
the  publication  of  the  experts  as  well  as  case  law 
which  has  developed  in  different  jurisdictions.    The 
purpose  of  the  New  York  Convention  has  been 
delineated in the following words: 
to  prove 
“2. 
The  drafters  of  the  New  York  Convention 
sought  to  overcome  the  hurdles  that  an  applicant 
had  to  meet  under  the  previous  regime  and 
enforcement  of  foreign  arbitral  awards.    The  1927 
Geneva Convention placed the burden on the party 
relying  on  an  arbitral  award 
five 
cumulative conditions in order to obtain recognition 
and  enforcement,  including  that  the  award  was 
“final”,  which  in  practice  required  the  party  to 
effectively obtain two decisions of exequatur, one at 
the country where the award was issued, and one at 
the  place  of  enforcement.    As  a  further  obstacle, 
under  the  1927  Geneva  Convention  a  court  was 
required  to  refuse  recognition  and  enforcement  if 
the  award  had  been  annulled  in  its  country  of 
origin, if the respondent had not been given proper 
notice  or  was  under  a  legal  incapacity,  or  if  the 
award  dealt  with  differences  not  contemplated  in 
the  parties‟  arbitration  agreement.    The  1927 
Geneva  Convention  also  allowed  a  party  opposing 
recognition and enforcement to raise any additional 
grounds 
law 
governing the arbitration. 
3. 
While  the  first  draft  of  article  V  of  the  New 
York  Convention  closely  followed  the  wording  of 
the  1927  Geneva  Convention,  significant  changes 
wee  introduced  during  the  drafting  process.    The 
final text of article V reflects the recommendation of 
the  Dutch  delegation  to  eliminate  the  requirement 
of  double  exequatur,  to  restrict  the  grounds  for 
refusal  of  recognition  and  enforcement  as  much  as 
possible  and  to  place  the  burden  of  proving  such 
grounds  on  the  party  opposing  recognition  and 
enforcement.    Furthermore  while  the  1927  Geneva 
Convention 
and 
enforcement  shall  be  refused  if  one  of  the  grounds 
for  non-enforcement  in  its  article  II  were  present, 
the  final  text  of  article  V  omits  any  language  that 
makes 
enforce 
mandatory.” 
for  refusal  available  under 
recognition 
recognize 
provided 
refusal 
that 
and 
the 
to 
 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
36 
32.  With  regard  to  the  construction  which  has 
generally  been  put  by  the  courts  in  the  Contracting 
States, it is said that: 
“4. 
As  discussed  in  the  following  chapters  on 
article  V  of  the  guide,  courts  in  the  Contracting 
States  have  generally  construed  the  grounds  for 
refusal  under  the  Convention  narrowly,  and  have 
exercised their discretion to refuse recognition and 
enforcement  of  Foreign  Arbitral  Awards  under  the 
New York Convention in exceptional cases only.” 
  
33.  As  regards  the  exhaustive  nature  of  the  ground 
under Article V, the Guide has this to say: 
“9. 
The  grounds  for  refusal  under  article  V  do 
not include an erroneous decision in law or in fact 
by  the  arbitral  tribunal.    A  court  seized  with  an 
application  for  recognition  and  enforcement  under 
the  Convention  may  not  review  the  merits  of  the 
arbitral  tribunal‟s  decision.    This  principle  is 
unanimously  confirmed 
law  and 
commentary on the New York Convention.” 
the  case 
in 
 
34. 
The  above  statement  is  based  on  the  case  law 
and  the  commentary  on  the  New  York  Convention 
which  unanimously  holds  that  the  courts  seized  with 
an  application  for  recognition  and  enforcement  may 
not  review 
the  merits  of 
the  arbitral 
tribunal‟s 
decisions.    As  regards  the  burden  of  proof  it  was 
provided that: 
“15.  The  introductory  sentence  of  article  V  (1) 
provides that recognition and enforcement may only 
be  refused  “at  the  request  of  the  party  against 
whom  the  award  is  invoked”,  and  if  that  party 
“furnishes  proof”  of  the  grounds  listed  in  that 
paragraph.    In  accordance  with  this  wording, 
courts  in  the  Contracting  States  have  consistently 
recognized that the party opposing recognition and 
enforcement has the burden of raising  and proving 
the  grounds  for  non-enforcement  under  article 
V(1).” 
 
35. 
The  interpretation  of  Article  V(1)(a)  was  also 
the  subject  of  discussion  in  the  Guide  and  which  was 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
37 
based on a summation of the discussions and reports of 
the  committees  which  preceded  the  drafting  of  the 
New  York  Convention  as  well  as  the  case  law  which 
developed  over  time  in  different  jurisdictions  of  the 
Contracting  States.    Here  we  are  not  concerned  with 
the  first  part  of  the  objection  embodied  in  Article  V 
with regard to the lack of capacity of the parties.  We 
are,  however,  concerned  with 
invalidity  of  an 
arbitration agreement.  As to the meaning of invalidity 
based on reported case law, the following discussion is 
relevant for our purposes: 
is 
from 
legally 
invalid. 
independent 
“36.  Reported  case  law  shows  that  parties  have 
seldom been successful in opposing recognition and 
enforcement  of  an  arbitral  award  pursuant  to 
article  V  (1)  (a)  on  the  ground  that  the  arbitration 
agreement was invalid. 
37. 
In  a  number  of  cases,  the  party  opposing 
recognition and enforcement argued that a defect in 
the  main  agreement  rendered 
the  arbitration 
agreement 
  Courts  have  generally 
dismissed this argument pursuant to the principle of 
severability,  which  holds 
that  an  arbitration 
agreement 
the 
underlying  contract  which  contains  it,  and  the 
nullity  of  a  contract  does  not  imply  that  the 
arbitration agreement therein is invalid. 
38. 
in  some  cases,  parties  have  argued  that  the 
arbitration  agreement  was  invalid  pursuant  to 
article V (1)(a) on the ground that one of the parties 
had  not  signed  the  arbitration  agreement.    For 
instance,  in  Dallah,  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  Kingdom  denied  enforcement  of  an  award 
on the ground that one party to  the award was not 
validly  bound  by 
the  arbitration  agreement.  
Conversely,  the  supreme  Court  of  Victoria  in  IMC 
Mining Solutions, in assessing a challenge based on 
Section  8(5)(a)  of  the  Australian  International 
Arbitration  Act  of  1974  (implementing  article  V 
(1)(a) of the Convention), held that the party which 
had  allegedly  not  signed  the  arbitration  agreement 
was validly bound by it in accordance with the law 
applicable to the arbitration agreement, which was 
different  from  the  law  applicable  to  the  main 
agreement.    Similarly,  a  Swiss  court  enforced  an 
arbitral  award  rendered  on 
the  basis  of  an 
arbitration  agreement  by  reference  despite  it  not 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
38 
being  signed  by  one  of  the  parties.    In  some 
jurisdictions,  courts  have  ruled  that,  despite  not 
having  signed  the  arbitration  agreement,  a  party‟s 
behavior  in  the  arbitral  proceedings,  including  its 
participation 
therein,  could  constitute  a  valid 
arbitration agreement within the meaning of article 
V (1)(a).” 
41. 
In  a  number  of  reported  cases,  however, 
courts  have  assessed  the  validity  of  the  arbitration 
agreement  pursuant  to  the  form  requirements  of 
article II.  As explained by a United States appeals 
court  in  China  Minmetals,  articles  II,  IV(1)(b)  and 
V  (1)(a)  of  the  Convention  contemplate  as  a  whole 
that  an  enforcing  court  should  enforce  only  valid 
agreements  to  arbitrate  and  only  awards  based  on 
those agreements.” 
 
36. 
Further that: 
“44.  With  respect  to  article  V(1)(a),  courts  have 
typically  rules  that  it  is  for  the  party  opposing 
recognition  and  enforcement  to  prove  either  that 
one of the parties was under some legal incapacity 
at  the  time  of  the  conclusion  of  the  arbitration 
agreement  or  that  the  arbitration  agreement  was 
invalid under the applicable law.  The party seeking 
recognition and enforcement only bears the burden 
of 
the 
arbitration agreement pursuant to article IV (1)(b), 
for 
which  provides 
the  party  applying 
recognition  and  enforcement  shall  supply 
the 
original arbitration agreement or a copy thereof.” 
supplying  documentary  evidence  of 
that 
 
37. 
 
38. 
In conclusion, the Guide found that: 
“7. 
The  text  and  the  drafting  history  of  the 
Convention  suggest  that  the  applicant  should  only 
prove  prima  facie  the  existence  of  the  arbitration 
agreement while the party opposing recognition and 
enforcement  has  the  onus  of  proving  its  invalidity.  
Commentators  have  generally 
this 
approach.” 
favoured 
Thus,  upon  a  consideration  of  case  law  as  well 
as  commentaries  and  other  material  on  Article  V 
(1)(a),  it  was  concluded  that  the  applicant  merely  has 
to  prove  prima  facie  existence  of  the  arbitration 
agreement  while  the  party  opposing  the  recognition 
and  enforcement  has  the  onus  to  prove  its  invalidity.  
Not only that this takes care of the threshold objection 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
39 
taken by Acro but also places the onus on it of proving 
that  any  of 
the  objections 
taken  by  Acro  are 
sustainable.    It  is  in  this  context  and  background  that 
the 
application 
shall 
be 
determined 
and 
correspondingly  the  objections  taken  by  Acro  inviting 
this  Court  to  refuse  to  recognize  and  enforce  the 
Foreign Arbitral Award. 
Article V determination: 
39. 
To  reiterate,  the  policy  and  the  purpose  of  the 
law has been adumbrated and which require this Court 
to  recognize  and  enforce  Foreign  Arbitral  Award 
expeditiously  and  with  all  deliberate  speed.    The 
statement  in  this  regard  made  in  Russel  and  the 
approach to be taken by courts is relevant for any such 
discussion.  It says that: 
“Opposing 
enforcement  of  a  New  York 
Convention  Award.    As  stated  above,  subject  to 
production of the required documents the court has 
no  discretion  but  to  recognize  and  enforce  a  New 
York  Convention  award  unless  the  party  opposing 
enforcement  proves  one  or  more  of  the  grounds 
specified  in  s.  103  of  the  Arbitration  Act  1996.  
These grounds of refusal are exhaustive, and if none 
of  the  grounds  is  present  the  award  will  be 
enforced.    Much  has  been  written  about  these 
grounds  and  a  detailed  analysis  of 
their 
international application is beyond the scope of this 
book  but  they  will  be  treated  summarily  in  this 
chapter.    The  onus  of  proving  the  existence  of  a 
ground rests upon the party opposing enforcement, 
but that may not be the end of the matter.  There is 
an  important  public  policy  in  the  enforcement  of 
awards and the courts should only refuse to enforce 
an award under s. 103 in a clear case. 
Approach of the Court.  On an application under s. 
103 issues may arise in respect of which disclosure 
and  cross  examination  is  required.    However,  the 
court  should  be  cautious  about 
that 
approach  and  should  usually  be  able  to  dispose  of 
issues  by  applying  the  usual  test  for  summary 
judgment,  namely  whether  there  is  a  real  prospect 
of  establishing  a  ground  under  s.  103  or  whether 
taking 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
40 
there is some other compelling reason why the court 
should order a full trial.” 
 
40. 
The  above  statement  embodies  the  holding  of 
the  English  courts  which  have  taken  it  as  a  matter  of 
public  policy  to  adopt  a  pro-enforcement  approach.  
The  learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  does  not 
seriously  contest  the  award  to  be  a  Foreign  Arbitral 
Award  within  the  meaning  of  the  provisions  of  the 
Act,  2011.    The  primary  defence  set  up  by  the 
respondent  is  with  regard  to  the  validity  of  the 
agreement  and  denial  of 
its  execution  by 
the 
respondent or any of its representatives or agents.  To 
this end, the learned counsel invites this Court to frame 
issues  and  to  hold  a  regular  trial  by  taking  down 
evidence, pro and contra.  This, in my opinion, cannot 
be  resorted  to  in  a  case  automatically  and  as  a  matter 
of  course.    This  procedure  has  to  be  adopted  as  an 
exception  and  not  as  a  rule.    The  primary  purpose  of 
the  law  is  to  compel  this  Court  to  proceed  to  enforce 
and  recognize  the  Foreign  Arbitral  Award  without 
adverting  to  a  regular  trial  and  on  the  basis  of 
documents  produced  by  the  parties.    For,  if  the 
applicant  complies  with  the  provisions  of  sections  6 
and 7 of the Act, 2011 read with Article IV of the New 
York  Convention,  the  burden  shifts  to  the  respondent 
to  set  up  any  of  the  defences  contemplated  by  Article 
V and in respect of which the proof has to be furnished 
by the respondent especially the grounds on which the 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
41 
recognition  and  enforcement  of  the  Foreign  Arbitral 
Award may be refused. 
41.  No  proof  was  furnished  by  Acro  in  support  of 
the ground that the agreement was not valid under the 
law.  However, the parties were required by this Court 
to  file  their  affidavit  and  counter  affidavit  so  that  the 
determination  of 
the  objections 
raised  by 
the 
respondent may very well be made on the basis of the 
affidavit and counter affidavit submitted by the parties.  
Mr. Rehman Anwar son of Sheikh Muhammad Anwar 
filed an affidavit on behalf of Acro and the contents of 
the affidavit may be reproduced for ready reference: 
“Affidavit  of  Mr.  Rehman    Anwar  son  of  Sheikh 
Muhammad Anwar resident of  104-B, DHA Phase-
V, Lahore. 
I,  the  above  named  deponent,  do  hereby  solemnly 
declare and affirm as under:- 
1.  The  alleged 
contracts 
(the  “Alleged 
Contracts”),  appended  with  Application 
under  Section  6  of  the  recognition  and 
enforcement  (Arbitration  Agreements  and 
Foreign Arbitral Awards) Act, 2011, filed by 
Louis  Dreyfus  Commodities  Suisse  S.A.  as 
Plaintiff  against  Acro  Textile  Mills  Limited 
as  Defendant  were,  to  the  best  of  my 
recollection, not finalized or signed.  Around 
that  time,  there  were  some  discussions  for 
the  sale  of  different  kinds  of  cotton.    Such 
discussions/negotiations  were  done  with 
various 
intermediaries.  
However,  on  account  of  failure  to  agree  on 
terms, 
the 
the  agreements  were  not 
concluded. 
brokers 
and 
2.  For  present  purpose, 
I  examined 
the 
available  record  in  the  Defendants‟  office; 
however,  I  did  not  come  across  any  record 
of  any  of  the  Alleged  Contracts  with  my 
signatures. 
3.  The  only  available  record  of  the  Alleged 
Contracts found in the Defendant‟s office is 
with respect  to  the documents  filed with the 
Application 
titled  proceedings.  
During the course of these proceedings, as a 
matter of caution, a handwriting expert was 
requested  to  examine  and  confirm  whether 
the 
in 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
42 
4.  The 
email 
 
 
the  alleged  signatures  on 
the  Alleged 
Contracts matched with the signatures of the 
undersigned. 
  The  handwriting  expert 
confirmed that the signatures did not match. 
address 
„rehman@acrotextile.com‟ was/ is under my 
use;  however,  I  do  not  recollect  either 
receiving  or  sending  any  of  the  emails  that 
have  been  appended  with  the  Application 
under  Section  6  and  allegedly  sent  to  or 
received  from  the  said  e-mail  address.    The 
email  record  for  the  relevant  period  is  not 
available  due 
time  and 
therefore, the same could not be examined. 
to  passage  of 
 
 
42.  Counter  affidavit  was  filed  by  Muhammad 
Sohail  on  behalf  of  the  applicant  in  order  to  rebut  the 
contents of the affidavit filed by Rehman Anwar.  The 
relevant portion of counter affidavit reads as under: 
“It is further submitted that Mr. Rehman Anwar had 
executed the Contracts, which are enclosed with the 
Petitioner / Applicant‟s Application under Section 6 
(“Petitioner‟s Application”) of the Recognition and 
Enforcement  (Arbitration  Agreement  and  Foreign 
Arbitral  Awards)  Act,  2011  (“2011  Act”)  and  the 
signature  of  Mr.  Rehman  Anwar  on  his  Affidavit 
(i.e. under reply) is identical to his signature on the 
Contracts.” 
The contents of Paragraph No.4 are correct 
“4. 
to  the  extent  that  the  email  address  used  by  Mr. 
Rehman  Anwar  is  rehman@acrotextile.com,  which 
has  now  been  clearly  admitted  by  Mr.  Rehman 
Anwar  in  the  Affidavit  under  reply,  since  the 
inception  of  the  Petitioner‟s  Application.    The 
remaining  contents  of  the  paragraph-under  reply 
are  denied.    It  is  submitted  that  this  email  address 
was  used  by  Mr.  Rehman  Anwar  to  send  the  email 
dated 10 December 2010 (Annexure E at Page 39 to 
the  Petitioner‟s  Application)  in  which  Mr.  Rehman 
Anwar  acknowledged  (1)  the  existence  of  the 
contracts;  (2)  the  existence  of  the  ICA  arbitration; 
and  (3)  offered  a  settlement  amount 
the 
Petitioner  of  USD  836,441.    Likewise,  this  email 
address was also used by Mr. Rehman Anwar on 27 
December  2010  (Annexure  H/1  at  Page  49  of  the 
Petitioner‟s  Application) 
to  appoint  Mr.  C.J. 
Harman  as  his  arbitrator  for  the  arbitration  in  the 
International  Cotton  Association.    Finally,  as  is 
evident 
the 
Petitioner‟s  Application,  the  entire  correspondence 
of the ICA with Mr. Rehman Anwar was sent on this 
admitted  email  address.    The  statement  of  Mr. 
Rehman  Anwar  that  “I  do  not  recollect    either 
the  documents  enclosed 
from 
to 
in 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
43 
receiving  or  sending  any  of  the  emails  that  have 
been appended with the Application under Section 6 
and  allegedly  sent  to  or  received  from  the  said 
email  address”  is  patently  false  and  vehemently 
denied.    Likewise,  Mr.  Rehman  Anwar‟s  statement 
that “the email record for the relevant period is not 
available due to passage of time and therefore, the 
same  could  not  be  examined”  is  also  false  and 
inadmissible  in  terms  of  Section  3  and  4  of  the 
Electronic  Transaction  Ordinance,  2002  read  with 
Article 2(e) of the Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984.” 
 
43. 
It  may  be  stated  that  Rehman  Anwar  was  the 
representative  of  Acro  (its  Chief  Executive  Officer) 
and  allegedly  has  also  executed  the  contracts  which 
form the basis of the claim of the applicant.  It can be 
seen upon a reading of affidavit of Rehman Anwar that 
he does not deny clearly and expressly the execution of 
the  agreements  but  merely  gives  an  evasive  statement 
on  the  basis  of  his  recollection  that  the  agreements 
sought to be enforced were not finalized and signed.  
He however admits that there was some discussion for 
the sale of different kinds of cotton and on account of 
failure to agree on the terms, the agreements were not 
concluded.  Thus, the negotiations are admitted but the 
execution  of  the  agreements  is  denied.    As  submitted 
above, and by reference to bylaw 201 of the Bylaws of 
ICA,  this  too  gives  rise  to  a  cause  for  referring  the 
matter  to  arbitration.    More  importantly  the  email 
address rehman@acrotextile.com has been admitted to 
be  under  the  use  of  the  deponent.    However,  he  very 
conveniently  denies  recollection of  either receiving or 
sending  any  of  the  emails  which  have  been  attributed 
to have been sent or received by the deponent with the 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
44 
applicant  during  the  time  when  the  negotiations  were 
being  held  as  also  while  proceedings  for  arbitration 
were being commenced.  He also states that “the email 
record  for  the  relevant  period  is  not  available  due  to 
passage  of  time  and  therefore  the  same  could  not  be 
examined”.  This statement too does not have a factual 
basis  as  the  email  record  can  very  well  be  recovered 
and  recouped  by  a  person  who  maintains  an  email 
address  and  therefore  it  belies  logic  as  to  why 
deponent  did  not  make  any  effort  to  retrieve  that 
record or to make a categoric statement with regard to 
the acceptance or denial of the emails exchanged with 
the  applicant.    Moreover,  if  on  the  one  hand  the 
deponent  admits  to  discussions  and  negotiations  to 
have  taken  place  during  that  time  it  would  lead  to  the 
inference that these emails must have been exchanged 
between the applicant and Rehman Anwar on behalf of 
Acro  and  this  Court  can  validly  and  lawfully  draw  an 
inference  that  the  deponent  has  deliberately  withheld 
information  regarding  the  said  exchange  of  emails  to 
have taken place between the applicant and Acro.  Yet, 
from  the  contents  of  the  affidavit  it  seems  that  Acro 
labours  under  the  impression  that  a  simple  denial  will 
suffice  and  the  onus  will  then  shift  to  the  applicant  to 
prove the execution and hence validity of the contacts.  
This  is  utterly  misplaced  and  runs  counter  to  the 
mandate of Article V.  It is emphasised once again that 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
45 
it  is  upon  Acro  to  furnish  proof  and  not  otherwise.  
Thus Acro ought to have brought material on record to 
rebut  the  execution  of  contracts  as  well  as  the 
exchange of emails. 
44. 
The  substantive  part  of  the  evidence  set  up  by 
the applicant consists of the emails exchanged between 
the  applicant  and  Rehman  Anwar  on  behalf  of  Acro.  
But  prior  to  that  an  issue,  raised  peripherally,  is 
necessary  to  be  dealt  with.    The  counsel  for  the 
respondent  took  exception  to  the  following  statement 
in  the  award  in  respect  of  the  contracts  sought  to  be 
enforced. 
“6(2)….four  of  the  contracts  were  reduced  to 
writing  on  the  sellers‟  contract  form  and  all  six 
contracts on the buyers‟ form of contract and were 
agreed by both the seller and the buyers”. 
 
45. 
The nature of the transaction which is sought to 
be  enforced  was  such  that  it  involved  “battle  of 
forms”.    This  mean  that  there  was  an  exchange  of 
contracts between Acro as the seller and the  applicant 
as  the  buyer.    These  contracts  were  similar  in  content 
and  language  and  which  were  exchanged  by  both  the 
parties  and  copies  of  which  were  retained  by  them.  
These  contracts  and 
their  contents  have  been 
reproduced  in  the  award.    They  have  also  been 
attached  with  the  application  as  well  as  through  CM 
filed  by  Diary  No.68243  of  2015.    Both  the  sets  of 
contracts have been brought forth however the case of 
the  applicant  is  based  on  the  sellers‟  contracts  which 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
46 
have  all  been  attached  with  the  main  application.    It 
will  be  noticed  that  the  contents  of  these  agreements 
and  the  dates  correspond  with  each  other  and  they 
were exchanged simultaneously.  The sellers‟ contracts 
have  been  sent  by  Rehman  Anwar  on  behalf  of  Acro 
and the basis of the award are both the sets of contracts 
exchanged  by  the  parties.    It  will  be  noticed  that  the 
award  refers  to  the  corresponding  numbers  of  the 
contracts  of  both  the  sellers  as  well  as  the  purchaser.  
This is the practice followed internationally in all such 
transactions  and  is  a  standard  procedure.    These 
numbers  of  the  contracts  find  mention  in  the  emails 
exchanged between the parties. 
46. 
I  will  now  revert  to  the  veracity  and  probative 
value of the documents relied upon by the applicant in 
order to establish its claim.  However, as explicated the 
burden  of  proof  lay  squarely  on  the  respondent  to 
allege  that  the  agreement  was  not  valid  under  the  law 
to which the parties had subjected it.  It will be seen at 
the  end  of  the  conclusion  of  an  appraisal  of  these 
documents  and  the  defence  set  up  by  Acro  that  Acro 
has  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  cast  upon  it  by 
Article V of the New York Convention.  This is being 
said  in  the  context  of  the  objection  taken  by  the 
respondent on the basis of Article II read with Article 
IV  of  the  New  York  Convention  and  as  discussed 
above that burden has been discharged by the applicant 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
47 
by the production of the signed agreement between the 
parties. 
47. 
The first document relied upon by the applicant 
is an email dated 28.10.2010 (Annexure „B) by which 
the  applicant  sent  the  scanned  copy  of  the  bilaterally 
executed  Sellers‟  contracts  to  the  respondent.    In  the 
said  email  the  applicant  also  requested  the  respondent 
to  start  all  operations  to  shipout  the  first  500  MT  of 
P00040.    This  email  also  makes  a  reference  to  the 
meeting  with  Acro  on  the  previous  day  as  well  as  the 
scanned  copy  of  the  papers  send  by  Rehman  Anwar, 
CEO  of  Acro. 
  The  applicant  alleges  that  the 
respondent  failed  to  perform  the  contracts  and  the 
applicant  sent  an  email  dated  15.11.2010  to  Rehman 
Anwar,  CEO  Acro  and  held  the  respondent  in  breach 
of 
the 
contract  while 
claiming  US  Dollars 
4,435,104.05.    The  relevant  portion  is  reproduced 
below: 
“We really are at the end of out patience, no signs 
are  there  that  you  intend  to  ship  the  500  ts  of  P-
00040  which  was  already  in  your  warehouse  and 
you promised to have docs at our bank latest 15 nov 
which  is  today.    Also,  as  far  as  we  know  and 
understand  from  the  market,  not  any  of  our 
purchases  through  Acro  have  even  been  registered 
yet, it is not even under process. 
We  are  therefore  obliged  to  hold  you  in  breach  of 
contract and claim you the market difference as it is 
today. 
If  payment  is  not  received  by  19  nov  2010  we  will 
refer this matter to ICA arbitration.” 
 
48.  On  8.12.2010  one  of  the  officials  of  the 
applicant  emailed  to  Rehman  Anwar  and  offered  to 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
48 
convince  the  management  to  accept  certain  proposals 
made by Acro.  The email stated that: 
“Let me first clarify that I don‟t reply to all since I 
would  like  to  receive  some  more  details/replies  to 
following  questions  so  I  can  eventually  approach 
my  management  and  try  to  convince  them  to  solve 
once and for all these matters.  This message is not 
in name of LDCommodities.” 
 
“The  125.00  usc/lb  value  you  refer  to  is  just  not 
realistic  to  where  the  market  was  trading  and 
we/management  is  basing  itself  on  our  160.00 
usc/lb  value  and  the  4,435,104.05  usd  is  what 
management  is  aiming  for  as  it  is  fair  and 
reasonable (see values above). 
I do understand from your message here under that 
Acro  would  pay  us  125.00-103.16  (our  average 
purchase  price),  or  thus  21.84  usc/lb  on  3500mt 
(lump  sum  1,685,196.24  usd)  and  we  keep  the 
848,771.00  usd.    This  thus  equals  to  a  total  of 
2,533,967.24 usd. 
There  is  thus  a  difference  of  1,901,136.81  usd.  
Honestly, I have no chance to go to the management 
with 
can 
defend/convince  management  to  accept  in  addition 
to 
the  848,771  usd-  a  cash  settlement  of 
3,150,000.00 usd payed within this week 
In  no  circumstances  this  is  a  firm  offer  nor  a  firm 
proposal. 
to  any 
arbitration  proceedings.    Pls  revert  asap  as  the 
dead line that was given to Acro is this Friday 10th 
December.” 
your  proposal.  But 
is  without  prejudice 
  This 
think 
I 
I 
 
49. 
From  a  reading  of  the  email  above,  it  can  be 
seen  that  the  said  email  was  in  response  to  an  offer 
made by Rehman Anwar for payment of a certain sum 
of  money  as  the  average  purchase  price.    On 
10.12.2010  Rehman  Anwar  emailed  back  and  made 
the following proposal: 
Pierre.desomer@ldcom.com 
10.12.2010 07:24 
“From:  Rehman Anwar rehman@acrotextile.com 
To: 
Date: 
Subject:  Re:  invoice  back  P00040,  P00041,  P00047,  P00058,  P00084, 
P00089 
 
 
Dear Mr. Pierce, 
I  have  taken  legal  opinion  on  our  case  regarding  ICA 
arbitration.    According  to  my  understanding  the  breach  of 
contract did not occur on the 15th of November 2010 as LDC 
is  claiming.    Therefore,  the  price  which  the  invoice  back 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
49 
option  is  being exercised  is  not  valid.    However,  I  have been 
trying  to  resolve  this  situation  since  day  one  and  therefore, 
would like to propose the following: 
Invoice back price @ USC 125 
Our average price @ USC 103.16 
Difference 
Difference In USD= 
Credit with LDC  = USD 848,771 
Amount payable by Acro to LDC= USD 836,441 
Validity 10-Dec-2010 for the Invoice back price. 
I  appreciate  your  efforts  but  this  is  the  best  proposal  I  can 
come up with.” 
= USC 21.84 
USD 1,685,212 
 
 
50. 
The above email contains a proposal which was 
agreed  to  be  paid  by  Acro  to  the  applicant  as  cash 
settlement  of  the  claim  being  made  by  the  applicant.  
Two  things  are  at  once  evident  from  the  reproduction 
of  the  email  above.    Firstly,  it  has  been  sent  from  the 
email address of rehman@acrotextile.com which is the 
email  address  confirmed  by  Rehman  Anwar  in  his 
affidavit  to  have  been  under  his  use  and  admitted  to 
belong  to  him.    Secondly,  in  the  column  of  „Subject‟ 
the  reference  of  the  contract  numbers  is  the  same 
which  is  on  buyers‟  form  and  which  has  now  been 
relied  upon  by  the  applicant  for  their  recognition  and 
enforcement.  This email was replied to on 14.12.2010 
in the following words: 
invoice  back  amount 
“We  have  provided  you  with  evidence  as  to  the  market 
on 15 November 2010 and we stand by our market value 
of 160.00 cents/lb. 
We  acknowledge  that  you  have  a  credit  balance  with 
LDC  of  USD  848,771  which  we  agree  to  apply  against 
the 
calculated  at  USD 
4,435,104.50. 
Accordingly,  LDC  demanded  payment  of  USD 
3,586,333.50  by  last  Friday  but  Acro  Textiles  failed  to 
pay. 
This is our final notice on this matter.  LDC will proceed 
with ICA technical arbitration.  LDC have appointed mr 
Arthur  Aldcroft  as  our  arbitrator  on  14th  December 
2010.    According  to  ICA  Bylaws  and  Rules,  we  invite 
ACRO  to  appoint  their  arbitrator  on  or  before  28th 
December  2011,  Upon  commencement  of  arbitration 
LDC shall not negotiate this matter any further.” 
 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
50 
51.  Acro‟s  proposal  was  rejected  by  the  applicant 
and the email certified as a final  notice  on the  matter.  
Simultaneously it  was  informed that the applicant had 
appointed  an  Arbitrator  on  14.12.2010  according  to 
ICA Bylaws and rules.  Acro was invited to appoint its 
arbitrator  on  or  before  28.12.2011.    Accordingly,  the 
applicant  submitted  a  request  for  arbitration  under 
bylaw  302  of  ICA  Bylaws  attached  as  Annexure  „F‟ 
with  the  application.    ICA  emailed  ICA‟s  reference 
number dated 15.12.2010 to the respondent through an 
email  and  was  sent  to  the  email  address  of  Rehman 
Anwar.    Through  this  reference,  ICA  required  the 
respondent 
to  appoint 
its  arbitrator  within 
the 
stipulated time period mentioned in bylaw 303.  At the 
same  time,  the  reference  was  couriered  via  FedEx  to 
the  respondent  and  the  receipt  of  which  has  also  been 
attached as Annexure „F/3‟.   
52.  On  27.12.2010,  Rehman  Anwar  sent 
the 
following email to ICA: 
“Dear Mrs. Simons, 
We  have  appointed  Mr.  C.J.  Harman  as  our 
arbitrator  for  the  arbitration  in  ICA.    Reference: 
A01/2010/67 C.J. HARMAN 
Plexus Cotton Ltd. Birkenhead, UK 
Tel: +44 151 650 8888 
Email: chris@ @plexus-cotton.com.” 
 
53.  By 
this  email,  Acro  appointed 
its  own 
Arbitrator for the arbitration in the ICA reference sent 
to  Acro.    This  was  confirmed  on  30.12.2010  by  ICA 
through  its  email  to  the  respondent  confirming  the 
appointment  of  Acro‟s  Arbitrator  and 
further 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
51 
informing  Acro  of  the  confirmation  of  the  name  of  a 
third  arbitrator  who  will  serve  as  the  Chairman  of  the 
Tribunal which was done vide email dated 10.01.2011 
and a Chairman of the Tribunal was duly appointed.  It 
is  pertinent  to  mention  that  in  respect  of  each  email, 
the  scanned  copies  of  the  documents  and  letters 
received  from  the  applicant  were  being  couriered  to 
Acro  by  ICA.    On  12.1.2011  ICA  enclosed  a  copy  of 
the  details  of  claim  received  from  the  applicant  and 
requested  Acro  to  reply  to  the  claim  within  fourteen 
days  of  the  receipt  of  the  documents.    This  was  not 
done  by  Acro  and  ICA  was  constrained  to  send  an 
email  on  3.2.2011  to  the  respondent  (Annexure  „K/2) 
informing  the  respondent  that  the  deadline  for  receipt 
of  its  documents  had  passed  but  the  Chairman  of  the 
Tribunal  had  extended  the  deadline  by  seven  days  so 
that the respondent could file its reply.   It was further 
informed  that  failure  to  do  so  would  compel  the 
Tribunal to proceed with the arbitration and to make an 
award.    Needless  to  say  that  Acro  did  not  submit  a 
reply  nor  any  documents  and  the  Arbitration  Tribunal 
rendered  its  Award  which  is  now  sought  to  be 
recognized  and  enforced.    Prior  to  that,  ICA  had 
invited  the  respondent  in  its  letter  dated  16.3.2011 
(Annexure „N/1‟) that the Award will be published on 
18.3.2011.  On 21.3.2011, ICA sent a letter once again 
to  the  respondent  through  ICA‟s  email  (Annexure 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
52 
„N/2‟) informing that the Arbitral Award was stamped 
and  made effective on 18.3.2011  by ICA  and a notice 
of  appeal  against  the  Award  was  also  given  thereby.  
On  05.05.2011,  ICA  sent  a  letter  to  the  respondent 
confirming to have received the applicant‟s reasons for 
appeal within the time allowed and enclosed a copy of 
the same to the respondent.  ICA further requested the 
respondent  to  submit  its  comments  to  the  Appeal 
Committee  within  a  period  of  twenty  eight  days.    On 
25.05.2011,  ICA  confirmed  the  appointment  of  the 
members of the Technical Appeal Committee and gave 
the  respondent  seven  days‟  time  to  object  to  any 
member  of  the  Committee.    On  30.09.2011,  the 
Technical Appeal Committee issued the Appeal Award 
dated 30.09.2011.  It may be noticed that Acro did not 
participate  in  the  proceedings  in  arbitration  being 
conducted  by  ICA  after  the  initial  appointment  of  its 
arbitrator referred to above. 
54. 
The documents relied upon by the applicant and 
referred  to  above  are  the  documents  which  have  been 
described as electronic documents having been sent by 
an  automated  information  system  within  the  meaning 
of  the  terms  defined  in  the  Electronic  Transactions 
Ordinance,  2002  (Ordinance,  2002).    An  electronic 
document has been defined as: 
“electronic 
records, 
transactions in electronic form.” 
document” 
information, 
includes 
communications 
documents, 
or 
 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
53 
55. 
Similarly, 
the 
term  „automated‟  has  been 
defined to mean that: 
“automated”  means  without 
intervention”. 
active  human 
 
56.  As  also  the  term  „information  system‟,  which 
has been defined as: 
“information  system”  means  an  electronic  system 
for creating, generating, sending, receiving, storing, 
reproducing,  displaying,  recording  or  processing 
information.” 
 
57. 
This will have to be read with explanation 3 of 
Article  73  of  the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984.  
Explanation 3 has been added to Article 73 by section 
29  of  the  Ordinance,  2002  read  with  the  schedule  to 
the  said  Ordinance.    For  facility,  section  29  of  the 
Ordinance, 2002 says that: 
“29.  Amendment of Presidential Order No. X of 
1984.—For  the  purposes  of  this  Ordinance,  the 
Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984  (P.O.  No.10  of 
1984)  shall  be  read  subject  to  the  amendments 
specified in the Schedule to this Ordinance.” 
 
58. 
Therefore,  to  the  extent  that  the  amendments 
have been specified in the Schedule to  the  Ordinance, 
2002,  the  provisions  of  the  Order,  1984  shall  be  read 
subject to those amendments.  Article 73 of the Order, 
1984  and  the  Explanation  3  may  also  be  reproduced 
for facility: 
“73.  Primary evidence.  Primary evidence means 
the  document  itself  produced  for  the  inspection  of 
the Court. 
Explanation 3. A printout or other form of output of 
an  automated  information  system  shall  not  be 
denied the status of primary evidence solely for the 
reason  that  it  was  generated,  sent,  received  or 
stored 
the  automated 
information  system  was  in  working  order  at  all 
material  times  and,  for  the  purposes  hereof,  in  the 
in  electronic 
form 
if 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
54 
absence  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  it  shall  be 
presumed  that  the  automated  information  system 
was in working order at all material times.” 
 
59. 
Thus, by the enumeration of Article 73, primary 
evidence would mean the document which is produced 
for the inspection of the Court.  In order to extend the 
operation  of  Article  73  to  electronic  documents,  the 
legislature  added  Explanation  3  which  too  has  been 
brought forth above and according to which a printout 
or  other  form  of  output  of  an  automated  information 
system  shall  not  be  denied  the  status  of  primary 
evidence  solely  for  the  reason  that  it  was  generated, 
sent  etc. 
in  electronic 
form 
if 
the  automated 
information  system  was  in  working  order  at  all 
material  times.    Explanation  3  raises  the  presumption 
that  the  automated  information  system  is  in  working 
order at all material times.  This is only subject to  the 
evidence  to  the  contrary.    No  evidence  has  been 
brought  forth  by  the  respondent  in  order  to  establish 
that  automated  information  system  (emails  and  the 
system through which  they were exchanged)  were not 
in  working  order  at  all  material  time.    Therefore,  the 
emails  which  have  been  relied  upon  by  the  applicant 
would be deemed to be primary evidence entitled to be 
treated as such by this Court.  A reference to some of 
the  other  provisions  of  Ordinance,  2002  would  also 
lend  actuality  to  entire  analysis.    Sections  3  and  4  are 
relevant and read as under: 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
55 
record, 
document, 
“3.  Legal recognition of electronic forms.—
No 
information, 
communication  or  transaction  shall  be  denied 
legal  recognition,  admissibility,  effect,  validity, 
proof  or  enforceability  on  the  ground  that  it  is 
in electronic form and has not been attested by 
any witness. 
writing.—The 
4. 
requirement  under  any  law  for  any  document, 
record, 
or 
transaction  to  be  in  written  form  shall  be 
deemed  satisfied  where  the  document,  record, 
information, communication or transaction is in 
electronic  form, if the  same is  assessable so  as 
to be usable for subsequent reference”. 
communication 
Requirement 
information, 
for 
 
60. 
Likewise  section  13  relates  to  the  subject  of 
attribution of communications and provides: 
in 
respect  of 
“13.  Attribution  of  communications.—(1) 
Unless  otherwise  agreed  as  between  an 
originator  and  the  addressee,  an  electronic 
communication  shall  be  deemed  to  be  that  of 
the  originator  if  it  was  sent:  (a)  by  the 
originator himself; (b) by a person who had the 
authority  to  act  for  and  on  behalf  of  the 
originator 
that  electronic 
communication ; or 
(c)  by  an  automated 
programmed by, or on behalf of the originator. 
(2)  Unless  otherwise  agreed  as  between  the 
originator  and  the  addressee,  the  addressee  is 
to regard an electronic communication as being 
that  of  the  originator,  and  is  entitled  to  act  on 
that assumption if: 
(a)  the  addressee  has  no  reason  to  suspect  the 
authenticity of the electronic communication; or 
(b)  there  do  not  exist  any  circumstances  where 
the addressee knows, or ought to have known by 
exercising  reasonable  care,  that  the  electronic 
communication was not authentic.” 
information  system 
 
61. 
Section  13  is  a  crucial  provision  and  says  that 
an  electronic  communication  shall  be  deemed  to  be 
that  of  the  originator  if  it  is  sent  by  the  originator 
himself  and  by  an  automated  information  system 
programmed  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  originator.    There 
is no doubt that the emails relied upon by the applicant 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
56 
are  all  within  the  ambit  of  the  term  „electronic 
communication‟  as  the  term  „electronic‟  has  been 
defined in the Ordinance, 2002 and includes electrical, 
digital,  magnetic,  optical,  biometric,  electrochemical, 
wireless  or  electromagnetic  technology.    Also  the 
addressee  is  entitled  to  act  on  the  assumption  that  the 
electronic  communication  is  that  of  the  originator  if 
the addressee has no reason to suspect the authenticity 
of  the  electronic  communication.    This  is  also  not  the 
case since neither the applicant nor ICA ever suspected 
the  authenticity  of  the  emails  sent  by  the  respondent 
and  considered  those  emails  as  being  that  of  Rehman 
Anwar,  CEO  Acro.    Reading  this  provision  and  the 
assumption  of  the  applicant  with  the  contents  of  the 
affidavit  filed  by  Rehman  Anwar,  it  is  an  ineluctable 
conclusion  that  the  emails  were  sent  by  Rehman 
Anwar  to  both  the  applicant  as  well  as  ICA  from  an 
automated 
information 
system  programmed  by 
Rehman  Anwar  himself.    It  is  also  apparent  from  a 
consideration  of  the  entire  set  of  emails,  referred  to 
above, and upon reading them holistically that Rehman 
Anwar  never  ever  doubted  the  authenticity  of  the 
agreements  which  were  being  relied  upon  by  the 
applicant  and  in  respect  of  which  the  arbitration  was 
invoked.  In fact, Rehman Anwar referred to the same 
number  of  those  contracts  in  his  exchanges  with  both 
the  applicant  as  well  as  ICA.    Ironically  in  the  reply 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
57 
filed  on  behalf  of  Acro, 
the  execution  of 
the 
agreements  has  been  denied  categorically  and  without 
equivocation.    Interestingly  Acro  has  not  filed  any 
documents  with  the  reply  and,  therefore,  Acro  has 
made a bald denial of the execution of the agreements 
without any proof as required by Article V of the New 
York  Convention.    In  contrast,  the  affidavit  filed  by 
Rehman  Anwar  does  not  categorically  deny  the 
execution  of  the  agreements.    In  paragraph  2,  he 
deposes  that  “For  present  purposes,  I  examined  the 
available record in the  Defendant‟s  office; however, I 
did  not  come  across  any  record  of  any  of  the  Alleged 
Contracts with my signatures.” 
62. 
The  above  does  not  constitute  a  clear  denial  of 
the  execution  of  the  contracts  and  thus  the  stance  of 
Rehman  Anwar,  CEO  Acro  does  not  accord  with  the 
stance taken in the reply filed by the respondent. 
63.  Comparison  of  signatures  is  a  permissible 
course and Article 84 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 
1984 allows a Court to make that choice by adopting a 
method  given  therein.    Since  this  court  proposes  to 
give  a  summary  judgment,  resort  to  Article  84  is,  in 
my  opinion,  a  preferred  course  in  the  instant  matter.  
Article 84 of the Order, 1984 provides that: 
84.  Comparison  of  signature,  writing  or  seal 
with others admitted or proved: (1) In order to 
ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is 
that  of  the  person  by  whom  it  purports  to have 
been  written  or  made  any  signature  writing  or 
seal  admitted  or  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
58 
the Court to have been written or made by that 
person may be compared with the one which is 
to  be  proved,  although  that  signature,  writing 
or seal has not been produced or proved for any 
other purpose. 
 
(2) The Court may direct any person present in 
Court  to  write  any  words  or  figures  for  the 
purpose  of  enabling  the  Court  to  compare  the 
words  or  figures  so  written  with  any  words  or 
figures  alleged  to  have  been  written  by  such 
person. 
(3) This Article applies also, with any necessary 
modifications, to finger-impressions. 
 
64. 
The  provisions  of  Article  84  above  empower  a 
court to ascertain the veracity of a signature, writing or 
seal to determine that such signature, writing or seal is 
that  of  a  person  by  whom  it  purports  to  have  been 
written or made and a comparison may be made by the 
court with the admitted or proved signature, writing or 
seal  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  court.    Thus,  for  the 
purposes of comparison of signature, writing or seal, a 
Court  has  been  given  the  power  to  ascertain  the  fact.  
Although,  the  provisions  of  Order,  1984  do  not  apply 
to  the  proceedings  before  this  Court  under  the  Act, 
2011,  this  Court  has  chosen  to  resort  to  a  comparison 
of  the  signatures  which  have  been  denied  by  Rehman 
Anwar,  CEO,  Acro  on  the  contracts  which  are  the 
basis  of  the  claim.    These  signatures  on  the  contracts 
are  being  compared  with  the  signatures  of  Rehman 
Anwar  on  the  affidavit,  filed  by  him  and  which  are 
admitted  to  have  been  made  by  Rehman  Anwar.    The 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
59 
signatures  on  the  contract  allegedly  executed  by 
Rehman Anwar are as under: 
 
 
 
 
65.  The  admitted  signatures  made  by  Rehman 
Anwar  on  the  affidavit  filed  by  him  in  comparison 
are being reproduced as follows: 
 
 
 
66.  The  parties  were  informed  of  the  scrutiny  of 
both the signatures by this Court.  It can be seen from 
a  comparison  of  the  two  signatures  that  there  is  no 
material  difference  in  the  formation,  curves,  semi-
circles,  loops,  smoothness,  angles  and  style  of 
writing. 
  The 
two  signatures  are  substantially 
identical 
in  formation  of  corresponding 
letters, 
including  their  size  and  gaps.      It  is  a  forgone 
conclusion  that  no  person  can  write  his  own 
signatures 
twice  with  precision  and  pinpoint 
accuracy  so  as  to  be  identical  in  almost  all  respects.  
Both 
the  signatures  reflect  swift  and  carefree 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
60 
movement of pen and there is no hesitation which is 
discernible from a comparison of both the signatures.  
This  Court,  therefore,  finds  the  two  signatures  to  be 
similar and having been made by the same person. 
67.  This course of action has been approved by the 
superior  courts  in  Rehmat  Ali  Ismaila  v.  Khalid 
Mehmood  (2004  SCMR  361),  Mst.  Fatima v.  Abdul 
Razzak  (1988  SCMR  1449),  Ghulam  Rasool  and 
others  v.  Sardar  ul  Hassan  and  another  (1997 
SCMR  976)  and  Messrs  Waqas  Enterprises  and 
others v. Allied Bank of Pakistan and 2 others (1999 
SCMR  85). 
  In  the  present  proceedings,  this 
procedure  is  also  in  consonance  with  the  spirit  and 
policy  of  the  Act,  2011  which  requires  this  Court  to 
dispose  of  issues  by  the  usual  test  for  summary 
judgment. 
68.  Accordingly, I find that all requirements for the 
enforcement  of 
the  Appeal  award  have  been 
satisfied.    This  application  is,  therefore,  allowed. 
Accordingly, there will be an order as follows: 
1)  The Appeal award made on 30.09.2011 is hereby 
recognized  as  a  binding  and  enforceable  award 
and enforced through this order.   
2)  Applicant  is  granted  judgment  in  the  amount 
represented  in  the  Appeal  award,  which  shall  be 
executed as a decree of this Court. 
3)  The applicant shall have costs of this application. 
C.O No.649 of 2013 
 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Suisse S.A 
Vs 
Acro Textile Mills Ltd. 
 
 
61 
69.  To  come  up  for  further  proceedings  on 
25.06.2018. 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID KARIM) 
     
 JUDGE 
 
Announced in open Court on 08.05.2018 
Approved for reporting. 
 
     
   JUDGE 
 
 
                  * 
Rafaqat Ali` 
 
