 
 
 
1 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
JUDGMENT 
 
Case No.  R.S.A. No.42904/2017 
 
Shaukat Ali  
Versus 
Muhammad Razzaq  
 
Date of hearing:  13.06.2018. 
Appellant by: 
Mr. Muhammad Yaqoob Sidho, Advocate. 
Respondent by:  Mr. Waqar Ahmad Hanjra, Advocate. 
 
Muhammad Ameer Bhatti, J.   Through  this  second 
appeal  the  appellant  has  questioned  the  judgments  passed  by 
both the learned Courts below through which his suit and first 
appeal were dismissed. 
2. 
 
Appellant claimed to have purchased the suit land, 
owned  by  the  respondent  through  an  agreement  to  sell  dated 
07.09.2013,  for  consideration  of  Rs.6,21,936/27  out  of  which 
One  Thousand  Pounds  (Rs.1,65,000/-)  were  paid  through 
Cheque No.001049 as an earnest/advance money; agreement to 
sell  was  reduced  into  writing  and  duly  signed  by  the 
vendor/respondent  in  presence  of  the  witness  namely  Abdul 
Razzaq  and  Nazam  Ali,  son-in-law    of    the  plaintiff      also  
signed  the  document  on  his  behalf.  It  is  also  averred  in  the 
plaint  that  when  the  agreement  was  scribed,  son  of  plaintiff-
Amir  Sultan  was  also  present  and  on  account  of  its  non-
performance,  a  suit  for  specific  performance  was  brought  by 
the  present  appellant  which  was  not  contested  by  the 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
respondent and the learned trial Court after recording ex-parte 
evidence dismissed the suit, appeal whereof also met with the 
same fate; hence this second appeal. 
3. 
 
The  learned  trial  Court  while  dismissing  the  suit 
held  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  produce  second  marginal 
witness of the agreement to sell; therefore, suit of the appellant 
could not be decreed. Besides another deficiency in proving the 
agreement to sell, noted by the learned trial Court was that the 
agreement was allegedly executed in England but neither it was 
attested by the Embassy nor any other authority of the foreign 
office.  Learned  first  appellate  court  although  persuaded  from 
the second stance of the learned trial Court but did not agree on 
non-production  of  the  marginal  witness,  therefore,  learned 
counsel for the appellant contends that agreement to sell which 
was written between the parties privately was hardly required 
to  be  attested  by  the  Embassy  as  it  had  not  been  sent  or 
transposed  to  Pakistan  through  the  Embassy,  hence  there  was 
no need for its attestation.  
4. 
 
On 
the  other  hand 
learned  counsel  for 
the 
respondent  contends  that  although  he  had  not  joined  the 
proceedings  of  the  suit  as  his  service  could  not  be  effected, 
however,  he  opposed  the  appeal  of  the  respondent  before  the 
learned first appellate Court and also remained present before 
this Court in response to the notices issued by this Court while 
admitting  this  appeal  and  contends  that  on  account  of 
deficiencies of the material terms covenanted in the agreement 
to  sell  like  non-fixation  of  time  for  performance  of  contract, 
payment  of  balance  of  sale  consideration  by  vendee,  mode  of 
payment  and  delivery  of  possession  of  land  by  vendor  to  the 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
vendee,  such  instrument  could  not  be  deemed  to  have  legal 
existence  and  was  not  capable  of  enforcement.  Reliance  is 
placed  on  Fateh  Muhammad    vs    Faqir  Ullah  (2001  CLC  801) 
and  Mst.  Mumtaz  Majeed  and  4  others      vs      Muhammad 
Inayat (2016 CLC 780).   
5. 
 
I  have  heard  the  learned  counsels  for  the  parties 
and gone through record of the case. Although respondent had 
not  attended  the  proceedings  before  the  trial  court  but  on 
account of dismissal of the suit he was left no option except to 
join  proceedings  at  the  appellate  stage  when  he  acquired  the 
knowledge of pendency of appellant’s appeal and contested the 
same  on  the  basis  of  the  available  record  and  here  before  this 
Court did not opt to give any consent for remand of the case to 
decide it after providing him opportunity to cross-examine the 
witnesses  of  the  present  appellant  produced  at  trial  when  this 
offer was made by the learned counsel for the appellant; hence 
this Court is left with no option except to examine and decide 
the matter on the basis of available record.  
6. 
 
At  the  very  outset  I  would  like  to  dilate  upon 
alleged  agreement  to  sell  (Exh.P-1)  and  it  is  expedient  to 
reproduce its covenants as under:- 
 
“I Mr. Razaq son of Ghulam Nabi of Stoney Lane 
Birmingham  am  in  agreement  to  sell  the  land 
which is 7 Kanal and 5 Marla situated in Chak 474 
Pakistan to Mr. Shaukat Ali son of Godar Khan. 
 
The  agreed  price  for  the  sale  of  my  share  of  the 
land  is  621936.27    Rupees.  A  cheque  deposit  of 
£1000 has been put forward by Nazam Ali who is 
the son in law of Mr. Shaukat Ali and is acting on 
behalf of Mr. Shaukat Ali. 
 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
If  either  party  breaks  this  agreement  then  they 
will  be  liable  to  pay  £1000  with  the seller  paying 
an  additional  £1000  to  the  buyer  as  well  as 
returning the £1000 deposit paid in advance by the 
buyer. 
 
This agreement has been witnessed by Mr Nazam 
Ali  who  is  the  son  in  law  of  Mr  Shaukat  Ali  and 
has handed a cheque to Mr. Razaq on 07/09/2013. 
 
 
Signed by the Seller: 
Date:  
 
Signed by the Witness: 
Date:  
 
Abdul Razzaq 
Amir Sultan.” 
Sd. 
7/9/13 
Sd. 
07/9/13. 
 
 
 
 
It  is  clear  and  obvious  from  the  body  of  the  alleged  contract 
that  this  agreement  was  witnessed  by  one  Nazam  Ali,  son-in-
law of the plaintiff Shaukat Ali and no other witness was cited 
in  this  alleged  agreement  to  sell  and  against  the  column  of 
‘singed  by  witness’  only  Nazam  Ali  had  signed  it.  After  that 
date  has  been  mentioned  as  07.09.2013  which  reflects  that  at 
this  point  the  agreement  was  closed  and  then  signatures  of 
Abdul  Razzaq  and  Amir  Sultan  were  tooled.  Although  Abdul 
Razzaq  and  Amir  Sultan  were  produced  as  witnesses  along 
with  Nazam  Ali  as  P.Ws.  who  claimed  in  their  testimony  that 
they witnessed execution of the agreement to sell and put their 
signatures as witnesses but from bare reading of contents of the 
agreement  to  sell  their  stand  falsified,  hence  they  cannot  be 
considered as marginal witnesses.  
7. 
 
On the other hand the plaintiff/appellant has set-up 
another  case  in  plaint  averring  that  Amir  Sultan  son  of  the 
plaintiff and Nazam Ali son-in-law of the plaintiff executed the 
agreement  to  sell  on  behalf  of  the  plaintiff  and  Abdul  Razzaq 
was  cited  as attesting  witness which  besides  being  contrary  to 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
the  contents  of  the  agreement  to  sell  is  enough  to  falsify  the 
stand  of  the  plaintiff/appellant,  even  if  is  presumed  to  be 
correct,  it  too  says  the  attestation  of  the  document  by  one 
witness  i.e.  Abdul  Razzaq  whereas  the  others  viz  Nazam  Ali 
and Amir Sultan were alleged to have performed the duties on 
behalf of the vendor-plaintiff, hence could not be presumed to 
be  attesting  witnesses  in  view  of  the  dictum  laid  down  by 
Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  a  case  reported  as  Hafiz  Tassaduq 
Hussain  vs.  Muhammad  Din  through  Legal  Heirs  and  others 
(PLD 2011 Supreme Court 241) wherein while placing reliance 
on  Nazir  Ahmad  and  another  vs.  M.  Muzaffar  Hussain  (2008 
SCMR 1639) and Qasim Ali vs. Khadim Hussain through legal 
representatives and others (PLD 2005 Lahore 654), it was held 
that, 
“a  scribe  of  a  document  can  only  be  a  competent 
witness in terms of Articles 17 and 79 of the Qanun-
e-Shahadat Order, 1984 if he has fixed his signature 
as  an  attesting  witness  of  the  document  and  not 
otherwise; his signing the document in the capacity 
of  a writer  does  not  fulfil and  meet  the  mandatory 
requirement  of  attestation  by  him  separately, 
however,  he  may  be  examined  by  the  concerned 
party  for  the  corroboration  of  the  evidence  of  the 
marginal  witnesses,  or  in  the  eventuality  those  are 
conceived by Article 79 itself not as a substitute.” 
 
 It  is  also  settled  law  that  no  one  can  be  allowed  to  prove  his 
case  beyond  the  scope  of  pleadings  as  enunciated  by 
honourable  Supreme  Court  in  a  case  reported  as  Muhammad 
Wali Khan and another vs. Gul Sarwar Khan and another (PLD 
2010 Supreme Court 965).   
8. 
 
In addition to the above, form of agreement to 
sell  stipulates  one  marginal  witness,  whereas  Article  17  of 
Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  requires  the  attestation  of  the 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
agreement to sell by two witnesses and to prove it, Article 79 of 
the  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  forces  their  production  in 
order  to  prove  the  existence  and  contents  of  the  agreement  to 
sell.  Said  Article,  derived  from  verse  282  of  Sura  Al-Baqra  of 
Holy Quran, mandates as under:- 
“(1) 
The competence of a person to testify, and the 
number  of  witnesses  required  in  any  case  shall  be 
determined in accordance with the injunctions of Islam 
as laid down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah. 
(2)  
Unless otherwise provided in any law relating 
to  the  enforcement  of  Hudood  or  any  other  special 
law, 
(a)      in  matters  pertaining  to  financial  or  future    
if 
reduced 
to  writing, 
the 
obligations, 
instrument  shall  be  attested  by  two  men,  or 
one  man  and  two  women,  so  that  one  may 
remind  the  other,  if  necessary  and  evidence 
shall be led accordingly; and 
(b)      in  all  other  matters,  the Court  may  accept,  or 
act  on,  the  testimony  of  one  man  or  one 
woman  or  such  other  evidence  as 
the 
circumstances of the case may warrant.” 
 
As stated, the provision contained in Article 17(2)(a) 
are  based  on  verse  282  of  Sura  Al-Baqra.  English 
translation of the same is reproduced below:- 
“O ye who believe! When ye deal with each other, 
in  transactions  involving  future  obligations  in  a 
fixed period of time, reduce them to writing. Let a 
scribe write down faithfully as between the parties. 
Let  not  the  scribe  refuse  to  write:  as  Allah  has 
taught  him,  so  let  him  who  incurs  the  liability 
dictate.  But  let  him  fear  his  Lord  Allah,  and  not 
diminish aught of what he owes. If the party liable 
is mentally deficient, or weak, or unable himself to 
dictate, let his guardian dictate faithfully. And get 
two  witnesses,  out  of  your  own  men,  and  if  there 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
are not two men, then a man and two women, such 
as  ye  choose,  for  witnesses,  so  that  if  one  of  them 
errs,  the  other  can  remind  her.  The  witnesses 
should  not  refuse  when  they  are  called  on  (for 
evidence).  Disdain  not  to  reduce  to  writing  (your 
contract) for a future period, whether it be small or 
big: it is justice in the sight of Allah, more suitable 
as  evidence,  and  more  convenient  to  prevent 
doubts among yourselves, but if it be a transaction 
which ye carry out on the spot among yourselves, 
here  is  no  blame  on  you  if  ye  reduce  it  not  to 
writing.  But  take  witnesses  whenever  ye  make  a 
commercial  contract:  and  let  neither  scribe  nor 
witnesses  suffer  harm.  If  ye  do  (such  harm),  it 
would be wickedness in you. So fear Allah: for it is 
Allah  that  teaches  you.  And  Allah  is  well-
acquainted with all things.”  
The  prerequisite  of  law  is  that  the  matter  creating  financial 
liability  or  obligation  requires  to  be  attested  by  at  least  two 
witnesses and accordingly to prove such document party has to 
lead the testimony of at least two attesting witnesses otherwise 
exclusion  from  consideration  is  obvious.  In  the  present  case 
except  Nazam  Ali,  the  other  witnesses,  who  although  were 
produced by the plaintiff but could not be termed as a marginal 
witness because the document is silent about their signatures as 
attesting  witnesses.  Mere  signature  of  a  person  who  has  not 
signed  the document in the capacity of  attesting witness, shall 
not  be  deemed  to  have  fulfilled  the  required  compliance  of 
Articles  17  &  79  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order,  1984,  therefore, 
said  evidence  is  excluded  to  determine  the  validity  of  the 
agreement  to  sell.  Consequently,  it  is  declared  that  non-
attestation of the purported agreement to sell by two marginal 
witnesses, which is a  sine qua  non, exclude it from the term of 
‘document’  defined  in  Article  17  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order, 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
1984 and for its proof another condition of production of its two 
marginal  witnesses  under  Article  79  of  Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order,  1984  is  also  mandatory,  therefore,  the  suit  of  the 
appellant on the basis of the purported agreement to sell which 
contained  attestation  of  one  witness  was  not  maintainable, 
therefore,  it  is  held  that  the  document  which  does  not  contain 
the  attestation  of  two  witnesses  and  if  a  suit  for  specific 
performance  on  the  basis  of  said  deficient  document  is  filed, 
plaint shall be rejected in its inception as still born suit ought to 
be  buried  at  its  very  inception  and  no  time  be  consumed  on 
fruitless  litigation  and  that  plaintiff  would  have  a  chance  to 
retrace  steps  at  the  earlier  possible  time.  Guidance  in  this 
context  is  sought  from  case-law  reported  in  Farzand  Ali  and 
another  vs.  Khuda  Bakhsh  and  others  (PLD  2015  Supreme 
Court 187), wherein it has been held: 
 
“Considering  the  proposition  if  the  agreement  of 
the  appellants  was  required  to  be  proved  by  the 
examination of  two attesting witnesses, it is  settled 
law  that  an  agreement  to  sell  an  immovable 
property  squarely  falls  within  the  purview  of  the 
provisions of Article 17(2) of the Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order, 1984, and has to be compulsorily attested by 
the  two  witnesses  and  this  is  sine  qua  non  for  the 
validity of the agreement. For the purposes of proof 
of such agreement it is mandatory that two attesting 
witnesses must be examined by the party to the lis 
as per Article 79 of the Order ibid.” 
 
Besides  it  is  also  settled  law  that  when  law  has  provided  a 
particular thing to be done in a specific manner then it shall be 
done  in  that  manner  or  it  shall  not  be  done  at  all.  Reliance  is 
placed  on  Raja  Hamayun  Sarfraz  Khan  and  others  vs.  Noor 
Muhammad (2007 SCMR 307). 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
9. 
 
A  cursory  glance  over  the  purported  agreement  to 
sell  renders  it  crystal  clear  that  mandatory/necessary  terms  of 
the  agreement  i.e.  non-fixation  of  the  time  for  performance  of 
contract,  payment  of  balance  of  sale  consideration  by  vendee, 
mode of payment and delivery of possession of land by vendor 
to  the  vendee  have  not  been  fulfilled;  so  much  so  the  most 
important feature i.e. description of the land is also missing and 
this  Court  deprecated  such  deficit  agreement  to  sell  in 
numerous  reported  judgments  by  declaring  it  fatal.  It  is  clear 
and obvious that on account of non-incorporation of necessary 
ingredients,  the  purported  agreement  to  sell  could  not  be 
termed to have any legal existence or capable for enforcement. 
Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  on  the  case-law,  referred  to 
above,  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent,  i.e.  Fateh 
Muhammad  vs  Faqir Ullah (2001 CLC 801) and Mst. Mumtaz 
Majeed and 4 others   vs   Muhammad Inayat (2016 CLC 780). 
In  the  former  reported  case,  the  relevant  para  is  reproduced 
here-under for ready reference: 
 
“Apart  from  the  fact  that  the  land  is  described  in 
this  agreement  quantitatively  only,  without  there 
being  detailed  description,  the  agreement  does  not 
provide  for  the  time  for  its  completion  and  the 
payment of sale consideration by the respondent. It 
does not recite that any consideration passed on at 
the time of execution of this agreement. The learned 
counsel for the respondent has rightly relied on the 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
completion  of 
sale,  payment  of 
case of Shajar Ali Hoti (supra). In the said case time 
for 
sale 
consideration,  mode  of  payment  and  delivery  of 
possession  were  found  to  be  missing  from  the 
agreement. It was, accordingly, held that it was not 
capable  of  being  enforced.  I  find  that  even  if  this 
agreement to sell was liberally construed it did not 
contain the material terms within the contemplation 
of  section  21(c)  of  the  Specific  Relief  Act  and  was, 
thus, not capable of enforcement.” 
 
Likewise, in the latter pronouncement, it was held that: 
 
“According  to  section  21(c)  of  the  Act,  1877,  a 
contract,  the  terms  of  which,  the  court  cannot  find 
with  reasonable  certainty,  cannot  be  specifically 
enforced.  Once  again,  the  courts  below  have  not 
had  their  attention  drawn  to  this  aspect  of  the 
matter. It is anybody’s guess as to which land forms 
the  subject  of  sale  agreement  when  no  description, 
at  all,  was  given  in  the  agreement  to  sell  Ex.P.1. 
Merely stating the name of the village in which the 
land  is  situated  does  not  satisfy  the  requirements 
regarding 
the 
description  of  property  which  was  sought  to  be 
alienated.  This  would  bring  the  case  within  the 
mischief  of  section  21(c)  of  the  Act,  1877.The 
observations  made  in  Fida  Hussain  v.  Jalal  Khan 
(2002 CLC 1339) shed some light on the proposition 
in hand and are to the following effect: 
exactitude  of 
certainty 
and 
 
“It is difficult to lay down any general rule as to 
what  is  sufficient  certainty  in  a  contract  but  it 
can  be  safely  stated  that  the  certainty  required 
must be responsible one being regard to subject 
matter  of  the  contract.  The  principle  is  that 
description must be such as to enable the court 
to  determine  with  certainty  the  subject  matter 
of  the  contract.  In  the  instant  case  in  the 
absence  of  any  particular  of  Killa  number  or 
any  other  definable  particulars,  it  was  not 
possible for the court to determine that what 8 
Kanals  of  land  out  of  86  Kanals  8  Marlas  was 
subject  matter  of  the  agreement  to  sell.  I 
R.S.A.42904/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
therefore,  uphold  the  finding  of  the  first 
appellate court on this score.”  
10. 
 
 
For  what  has  been  discussed  above,  I  do  not  find 
any merit in this second appeal, hence dismissed. No order as 
to costs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Azhar/Gull 
 
 
(Muhammad Ameer Bhatti)
 
     Judge. 
 
Announced in open Court on 21.06.2018. 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE. 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE. 
