IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
 
ORDER SHEET. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
FAO No.30971 of 2019 
Sajjad Ahmad      Versus    HBL, etc.  
 
S. No. of 
order/ 
Proceedings 
  Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
       Parties of counsel, where necessary.  
Date of 
order/ 
Proceedings 
 
21.05.2019  Mr. Sakhawat Ali, Advocate.  
 
This  appeal  is  directed  against  order  dated  14.03.2019 
(‘impugned  order’)  by  learned  Judge  Banking  Court  No-II, 
Gujranwala,  whereby  application  filed  by  the  appellant  under 
section 476 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (“the Code”) 
was dismissed.  
2. 
Brief facts, necessary for adjudication of this appeal, are 
that  respondent  No.1  filed  a  suit  for  recovery  against  the 
appellant  and  respondent  No.2,  which  was  decreed  vide 
judgment and decree dated 02.03.2016. The present appellant 
filed an application under Section 12 of the Financial Institutions 
(Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance,  2001  (“FIO”)  read  with 
section 12(2) of Code of Civil Procedure 1908 for seeking setting 
aside of ex-parte judgment and decree which application was 
dismissed  on  26.11.2016.  Thereafter,  the  appellant  filed 
application  under  section  22-A/22-B  of  the  Code  for  seeking 
direction  for  initiating  appropriate  action  against  alleged 
forgery  committed  by  respondents  collusively,  whereby 
allegedly the signatures of the appellant were forged on various 
FAO # 30971-19 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
documents, the application was disposed with an observation 
that Banking Court has the jurisdiction to entertain grievance of 
the  appellant.  Thereafter,  appellant  filed  application  under 
section 476 of the Code which too was dismissed vide impugned 
order. Hence, this appeal.  
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submits  that  learned 
Judge  Banking  Court  had  dismissed  the  application  without 
adopting  the  procedure  provided  under  Chapter  XXII  of  the 
Code whereby the Court was required to take cognizance and 
proceed  accordingly,  in  wake  of  the  allegation  of  forgery 
committed by the respondents regarding the documents sued 
upon.  Per  learned  counsel,  filling  of  application  was  an 
appropriate remedy and learned Judge Banking Court has the 
jurisdiction  to  take  cognizance  of  the  matter  raised.  Learned 
counsel for the appellant placed reliance on “ZAFAR IQBAL and 
another v. ASGHAR ALI and another” (2006 MLD 1739) and “H. 
MUNAWAR ALI v Mst. SARWAR BANO” (1989 MLD 4654).  
4. 
In  essence,  the  appellant  is  seeking  declaration  qua 
certain  documents,  which  formed  basis  of  the  judgment  and 
decree  dated  02.03.2016.  When  confronted,  learned  counsel 
for  the  appellant  admitted  that  order  dated  26.11.2016 
whereby application under Section 12 of FIO read with section 
12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 was dismissed, was 
not assailed, which has attained finality. The elemental question 
is  that  whether  application  under  Section  476  of  the  Code  is 
FAO # 30971-19 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
maintainable in view of the facts and circumstances and if so, 
whether  finality  earned  by  the  judgment  and  decree  can  be 
disturbed by the executing court, while taking cognizance of the 
allegations 
in 
the  application.  Admittedly,  appellant’s 
application for seeking ex-parte judgment and decree set-aside 
was  dismissed  on  26.11.2016  -  application  was  not  placed  on 
record  –  and  failure  to  assail  said  order  is  fatal.  Once  the 
appellant has accepted the order, as a consequence whereof, finality 
was extended to the judgment and decree, including the documents, 
forming  basis  of  the  judgment  and  decree.  Appellant  cannot  be 
allowed  to  make  a  collateral  attack  to  a  conclusive  judgment 
and decree, when application under section 12 of the FIO read 
with  section  12(2)  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  1908,was 
dismissed  earlier.  In  these  circumstances,  the  appellant  is 
estopped  to  question  the  legality  of  the  documents,  forming 
part  of  the  decree.  Any  determination  thereof  is  otherwise 
barred in terms of the principle of res-judicata.  
5.   We are inclined to determine the issue of maintainability 
of the application under section 476 of the Code. It is expedient 
to  reproduce  sub-section  (1)  of  section  476  of  the  Code  and 
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 195 of the Code, which 
read as; 
“476.  Procedure  in  cases  mentioned  in  section  195.  (1) 
When any offence referred to in section 195, sub-section 
(1) clause (b) or clause (c), has been committed in, or in 
relation to a proceeding in any Civil, Revenue or Criminal 
Court, the Court may take cognizance of the offence and 
FAO # 30971-19 
 
 
 
 
4 
try the same in accordance with the procedure prescribed 
for summary trials in Chapter XII.” 
 
“195 (1) No Court shall take cognizance: 
(a)---- 
(b)---- 
(c) Prosecution for certain offence relating to documents 
given in evidence; of any offence described in section 463 
or  punishable  under  section  471,  section  475  or  section 
476  of  the  same  Code,  when  such  offence  is  alleged  to 
have been committed by a party to any proceeding in any 
Court  in  respect  of  a  document  produced  or  given  in 
evidence in such proceeding, except on the complaint in 
writing  of  such  Court,  or  of  some  other  Court  to  which 
such Court is subordinate.” 
 
 
6.  
The  documents  alleged  to  have  been  forged  were  not 
tempered  while  on  the  record  of  the  Court  during  the 
proceedings. In order to constitute an offence under section 195 
(1) (c) of the Code there should be a close nexus between the 
offence  and  the  proceedings,  which  is  lacking  in  this  case.  In 
view of the conclusive nature of the judgment and decree, no 
declaration  of  forgery  of  documents  can  be  made,  unless  the 
judgment and decree is set-aside / reversed. And additionally, 
no  offence is  made  out under section  195 (1)  (c) of the  Code 
provided  it  is  established  that  previously  forged  documents 
were  used  as  genuine  in  the  proceedings  under  reference, 
which is a legal impossibility unless the judgment and decree is 
set-aside.  Reference 
is  made  to 
judgment  reported  as 
MUHAMMAD  SHAFI  v.  DEPUTY  SUPERINTENDENT  OF  POLICE 
(Malik  Gul  Nawaz)  Narowal  and  5  others  (PLD  1992  LAHORE 
178), relevant portion whereof is reproduced as; 
FAO # 30971-19 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
23. It seems to follow inexorably that clause (c) 
of section 195 (1) will fail in its object if the literal 
construction  contended  for  by  the  petitioners' 
Counsel 
is  adopted.  The  adoption  of  that 
construction  will  inevitably  result  in  extending 
the application of clause (c) to cases to which it 
was  not,  and  could  not,  be  intended  to  apply. 
The purposive approach to the interpretation of 
clause (c) of section 195 (1) on the other hand 
leads, and leads ineluctably, to the construction 
that  that  clause  applies  to  only  those  offences 
that  have  a  "close  nexus  between  the,  offence 
and  the  proceeding"; 
it 
"contemplates  cases  of  tampering  with  the 
documents on the record of a Court' or cases of 
previously  forged  documents  being  used  as 
genuine in certain proceedings".  
in  other  words, 
 
7.  
In view of the ratio laid down in above-noted judgment, 
it is evident that neither there is any nexus between an offence 
and  the  proceedings  and  nor  case  of  previously  forged 
documents being used as genuine is made out – in wake of the 
conclusive  judgment  and  decree,  passed  on  the  basis  of  the 
documents  claimed  to  have  been  forged  [also  see  judgment 
reported as ABDUL WAHAB KHAN v. MUHAMMAD NAWAZ and 
7 others (2000 SCMR 1904)]  
8.  
The documents allegedly branded as forged documents 
also contained promissory note, to which document protection 
was extended under the provisions of Negotiable Instruments 
Act 1881. Even otherwise, the documents are neither produced 
nor  taken  in  evidence  during  the  proceedings.  The  suit  for 
recovery  filed  by  the  respondent  No.1  bank  was  decreed 
without grant of leave to defend the suit. And the appellant, in 
lieu of its conduct – whereby it had acquiesced to the judgment 
FAO # 30971-19 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
and decree, otherwise conclusive, and not assailed the order of 
dismissal  of  application  under  section  12  of  FIO  and  section 
12(2) of Code of Civil Procedure 1908 – is estopped to question 
the validity of the documents. 
9.   We have perused the order passed by the learned Judge 
Banking  Court,  wherein  facts  and  law  was  appreciated  and 
correctly applied. The documents alleged to have been forged 
were held enforceable and genuine in terms of judgment and 
decree, which judgment had attained finality for all intent and 
purposes.  The  judgments  referred  by  learned  counsel  are 
distinguishable and not applicable to the facts of the case. No 
case is made out to show indulgence. No illegality was pointed 
in the order impugned.  
10.  
In these circumstances, the learned Judge Banking Court 
has  rightly  declined  to  take  cognizance  of  the  matter  when 
neither  the  application  was  maintainable  nor  the  facts, 
prevalent,  necessitates  initiation  of  any  action  under  chapter 
XXII of the Code.  
11.  
In view of the above, this appeal is without any merit and 
the same is, therefore, dismissed.  
 
(Muzamil Akhtar Shabir)   
 
Judge. 
 
      (Asim Hafeez)                   
               Judge. 
 
 
Approved for reporting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
FAO # 30971-19 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
A.D. Mian* 
  
 
