JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE,  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
CR. No.1593 of 2012 
Mehmood Alam   
 
vs.  
 
Mushtaq Ahmed, etc  
JUDGEMENT  
Date of hearing: 
30.01.2017 
Petitioner by: 
Mr. Muqtedir Akhtar Shabir, Advocate  
Respondents by: 
Mr. Muhammad Yaqoob Sidhu and Mr. Ihsan 
Ahmad Bhinder, Advocates 
 
SHAHID WAHEED,J.  Undaunted    by  failure  in  two  Courts 
below the pre-emptor has filed this petition under Section 115 CPC to 
seek  revision  of  the  decrees  whereby  his  suit  for  possession  through 
pre-emption was dismissed.  
2. 
Dispute  in  this  case  related  to  land  measuring  16-kanals 
comprising  khewat  No.53  khatuni  No.149  to  159  situated  at  Mauza 
Boray Outhi, Tehsil Ferozewala, which was owned by one Riasat Ali. 
The suit property was sold to the respondents vide registered sale deed 
No.6822  dated  28.11.1998  for  a  consideration  of  Rs.160,000/-.  The 
sale  was  sought  to  be  pre-empted  by  the  petitioner  on  the  ground  of 
his superior right with the assertion that he had made requisite  Talbs 
in  accordance  with  law.  The  claim  set  up  in  the  plaint  was 
controverted by the respondents-vendees through a written statement. 
It was maintained in the written statement that since the petitioner had 
failed  to  make  requisite  Talb  in  accordance  with  law,  he  was  not 
entitled to the decree as prayed for in the plaint.  
3. 
On  pleadings  issues  were  framed  and  parties  were  directed  to 
adduce  evidence  in  support  of  their  respective  claims.  Evidence  was 
 
2 
CR. No.1593-12 
accordingly  led  before  the  learned  Trial  Court.  Pivotal  issue  in  the 
instant  case  was  additional  issue  No.2,  that  is,  “whether  the  plaintiff 
has  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  Talbs  in  accordance  with  law”.  On 
consideration  of  the  matter,  the  learned  Trial  Court  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  petitioner  after  getting  knowledge  of  the  sale  of 
the  suit  property  had  not  made  his  immediate  demand  declaring 
intention  to  exercise  the  right  of  pre-emption  in  accordance  with 
Section 13 of the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991.  On the basis of said 
conclusion learned Trial Court decided the said additional issue No.2 
against  the  petitioner;  and,  as  a  result  thereof  the  suit  was  dismissed 
vide  decree  dated  25.04.2011  through  judgment  of  even  date.  The 
petitioner  appealed  against  the  decree  of  the  learned  Trial  Court, 
which  met  the  same  fate.  The  learned  first  Appellate  Court  while 
concurring with the findings of the learned Trial Court dismissed the 
appeal vide decree dated 24.01.2012. 
4. 
The  ground  to  challenge  the  decrees  of  the  learned  Courts 
below is that the petitioner/pre-emptor after getting knowledge of the 
sale of the suit property had made immediate demand, that is, Talb-i- 
Muwathibat,  by  declaring  his  intention  to  exercise  his  right  of  pre-
emption and this fact stands established from his statement which he 
made  before  the  learned  Trial  Court  while  appearing  as  PW-5;  and, 
that since the statement of the petitioner and other witnesses was mis-
read and non-read, the decrees of the Court below are not sustainable 
in law. 
5. 
The  above  stated  ground  raises  a  mixed  question  of  law  and 
facts. The law on the subject is that a person who intends to advance a 
claim  based  on  the  right  of  pre-emption  qua  the  property  which  has 
 
3 
CR. No.1593-12 
been  sold  to  another,  must  immediately  on  receiving  information  of 
the sale, express in explicit terms his intention to claim the property. 
The  intention  must  be  formulated  in  the  shape  of  a  demand.  Though 
no express formula is necessary yet the assertion of the right (or what 
is called a demand) must be expressed in unequivocal language. Now 
in the light of above stated principle of law, the statement which was 
made  by  the  petitioner/pre-emptor  in  his  examination-in-chief  is 
evaluated.  The  petitioner  while  appearing  before  the  learned  Trial 
Court  as  PW-5  stated  that  he  got  knowledge  of  the  sale  of  the  suit 
property on 07.03.1999  at 4:00 p.m. at his Dera through Karamat Ali, 
(PW-1) in the presence of Nisar Ahmad (PW-4) and Asghar Ali (PW-
2);  that  after  getting  information  he  declared  that  he  had  a  superior 
right of pre-emption; and, that he was in need of the land. The exact 
words  uttered  by  the  petitioner  in  his  examination-in-chief  are  as 
follows:  
“
۔ہے بھی تروضر مجھے کہ کہا نے میں
 ہے 
ئقفا ع
ش
ف
 حق امیر کہ کہا ںہاو نے میں
” 
The  above  statement  does  not  evince  any  desire  on  the  part  of  the 
petitioner to avail himself of his right. Since the right to pre-emption 
is  strictissimi  juris,  failure  to  perform  first  demand,  that  is,  Talb-i-
Muwathibat  by  the  petitioner  declaring  his  intention  to  exercise  the 
right of pre-emption in accordance with requirement of the law would 
defeat the claim. 
6. 
There is another aspect of the matter. In the present case the suit 
property  was  sold  to  the  respondents  vide  registered  sale  deed 
No.6822 dated 28.11.1998 for a consideration of Rs.160,000/-. It was 
the  claim  of  the  petitioner  that  he  got  knowledge  of  the  said  sale  on 
 
 
4 
CR. No.1593-12 
07.03.1999 through Karamat Ali (PW-1) at his Dera. In order to prove 
this assertion the petitioner got examined Karamat Ali. This witness in 
his cross examination admitted that after 2/ 2 ½ months of sale he got 
information about the sale of the suit property through his sister; and, 
that on the same date he informed the petitioner about the sale of  suit 
property. The afore said statement suggests that Karamat Ali (PW-1), 
computing  the  period  from  the  date  of  registration  of  sale  deed,    got 
knowledge of the sale somewhere in mid-February 1999; and, that the 
petitioner  also  got  knowledge  of  the  sale  of  the  suit  property  on  the 
same  date.  This  date  did  not  tally  with  the  date  (i.e  07.03.1999)  on 
which  allegedly  the  petitioner  got  knowledge  of  the  sale  of  the  suit 
property.  This  creates  doubt  in  respect  of  making  of  Talb-i-
Muwathibat in accordance with law and, thus, benefit thereof must go 
to the vendees-respondents.  
7. 
The  second  Talb  which  was  required  to  be  proved  by  the 
petitioner  was  Talb-i-Ishhad.  It  was  maintained  in  the  plaint  that  on 
15.03.1999  notices  of  Talb-i-Ishhad  duly  attested  by  two  truthful 
witnesses  under  registered  cover  acknowledgement  due  were  sent  to 
the  respondents.  It  is  now  well-settled  that  it  is  imperative  for  the 
plaintiff/pre-emptor, in  order  to  succeed  in  a  suit  for  pre-emption,  to 
produce  evidence,  including  concerned  postman  to  prove  that  in  fact 
notices  of  Talb-i-Ishhad  were  served  upon  the  vendees  or  that  they 
refused  to  accept  the  notices,  which  were  sent  at  their  correct 
addresses. In this regard reference may be made to the cases of Bashir 
Ahmad  v  Ghulam  Rasool  (2011  SCMR  762)  and  Allah  Ditta 
through his LRs and other v Muhammad Anar (2013 SCMR 866) 
and  KHAN  AFSAR  v.  AFSAR  KHAN  and  others  (2015  SCMR 
 
5 
CR. No.1593-12 
311).  The  petitioner  being  conscious  of  the  said  requirement  of  law 
produced  Abdul  Hameed,  postman,  post  office  Shahdara  (PW-3) 
before the learned Trial Court. The said witness in his examination-in-
chief  stated  that  postal  receipts  bearing  Nos.813  to  818  were  issued 
from  his  post  office.  The  said  witness,  however,  did  not  produce 
record  as  the  same  had  allegedly  been  destroyed.  Thus  statement  of 
this  witness  was  inconsequential.  The  petitioner  was  required  to 
produce  concerned  postman  to  prove  service  of  notice  of  Talb-i-
Ishhad  which  was  not  done.  This  omission  indicates  that  notices  of 
Talb-i-Ishhad  were  not  served  upon  the  respondents-vendees  and, 
therefore, making of second Talb is not proved. 
8. 
Since the petitioner had failed to make Talbs in accordance with 
Section 13 of the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1991, he was not entitled to 
the  decree  for  possession  of  the  suit  property  as  prayed  for  in  the 
plaint.  The  decrees  of  the  Courts  below  do  not  suffer  from  any 
jurisdictional  defect  or  procedural 
irregularity  and, 
thus,  no 
interference therewith is called for.  
9. 
In  the  sequel,  this  petition  is  dismissed  with  no  order  as  to 
costs.        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID WAHEED) 
 
JUDGE 
Approved for reporting. 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arshad* 
 
 
