JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, 
MULTAN  
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Revision No. 206 of 2018 
(Noor Ahmad v. The State & another) 
JUDGMENT 
 
18.12.2018 
Mr. Khalid Ibni Aziz, Advocate  
Mr. Muhammad Ahsan-ul-Haq, Deputy 
District Public Prosecutor  
Mian Abdul Rehman Khan Joiya, Advocate 
 
DATE OF 
HEARING 
Petitioner 
by: 
State by: 
Complainant 
by: 
 
 
 
TARIQ  SALEEM  SHEIKH,  J.  –  This  revision  petition 
under  Sections  435/439  Cr.P.C.  is  directed  against  judgment  dated 
4.5.2018  passed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Sahiwal, 
whereby  conviction  and  sentence  awarded  to  the  Petitioner  by  the 
learned  Magistrate  Section  30,  Sahiwal,  in  case  FIR  No.190/2012 
dated  18.5.2012  registered  at  Police  Station  Yousafwala,  District 
Sahiwal, was upheld.   
2.  
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  on  18.5.2012  Complainant 
Mukhtiar  Ahmad  (PW-1)  made  a  statement  (Exh.PA)  before  Zawar 
Ahmad/SI (PW-8) to the effect that at about 1:00 a.m.  he along with 
Allah Rakha, Khalid Mehmood and other family members were going 
on  Suzuki  APV  van  No.LEA-885  driven  by  Sajid  Aleem  from 
Sahiwal  to  the  Lahore  Airport  to  drop  Ali  Sher,  Hafiz  Shameer 
Ahmad, Mst. Paris Bibi, Mst. Bhirawan Bibi who were proceeding for 
Umrah.  When  they  reached  Bridge  55/5-L  one  of  its  rear  tyres  got 
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
2 
 
 
punctured. All the passengers alighted and the driver started changing 
the  tyre.  Suddenly  a  tractor-trolley  bearing  registration  No.  TS-5804 
loaded with chaff rashly and negligently driven by an unknown driver 
came and hit the van from behind due to which it was badly damaged. 
As  a  result  of  the  accident,  the  persons  busy  in  changing  the  tyre, 
namely, driver Sajid Aleem, Ali Sher and Hafiz Zawar Hussain, were 
killed  on the spot  while  Shameer  Ahmad (PW-2)  and  Bhirawan  Bibi 
(PW-3)  were  seriously  injured.  The  driver  of  the  tractor-trolley  fled 
from the scene. Mukhtiar Ahmad went to the police station to make a 
report  about  the  incident  when  he  came  across  Zawar  Ahmad/SI  
(PW-8)  at  Adda  Qadir-Abad  who  recorded  his  statement  (Exh.PA) 
and  sent  it  to  the  police  station  through  Mazhar  Hussain  55/C  for 
registration  of  case.  Khalid  Mehmood  788/HC  (PW-4)  received  the 
said complaint and drew up FIR No.190/2012 (Exh.PA/2) on the same 
night at 2:30 a.m.  
3.  
The  investigation  of  the  case  was  also  entrusted  to  Zawar 
Ahmad/SI  (PW-8).  He  reached  the  place  of  occurrence,  prepared 
Injury Statements and Inquest Reports of the deceased and despatched 
the dead bodies for autopsy under the escort of Mazhar Hussain 55/C. 
Then  he  prepared  rough  site  plan  of  the  place  of  occurrence  Exh.PK 
and  inquired  about  the  witnesses  to  record  their  statements  under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. He was told that they were busy in the funeral of 
the  deceased  and  would  be  available  after  their  burial.  None  of  the 
witnesses  appeared  before  Zawar  Ahmad/SI  (PW-8)  until  21.5.2012 
when he was transferred. After him the investigation of the case was 
entrusted  to  Noor-ul-Hassan/ASI  (PW-5).  On  24.5.2012,  PWs  Allah 
Rakha  and  Khalid  Mehmood  (given  up)  nominated  the  Petitioner, 
Noor  Ahmad.  During  the  investigation  Noor-ul-Hassan/ASI  found 
that he had committed the offence. Report under Section 173  Cr.P.C. 
was submitted accordingly.  
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
 
 
4.  
The  learned  Magistrate  summoned  the  Petitioner  to  face 
3 
trial and indicted him under Sections 320, 427, 337-G and 279 PPC on 
25-11-2013. The Petitioner denied the charge and claimed trial.  
5.  
The  prosecution  examined  eight  witnesses  to  prove  its 
case. Complainant Mukhtiar Ahmad (PW-1), Shameer Ahmad (PW-2) 
and Bhirawan Bibi (PW-3) furnished ocular account of the occurrence 
while  Dr.  Shahid  Rasool  (PW-6)  provided  medical  evidence.  Rehan 
Saeed 
(PW-7),  Senior  Technician,  Emergency  Medico-legal 
Department,  DHQ  Teaching  Hospital,  Sahiwal,  adduced  Injury 
Statement of Hafiz Zawar Hussain (Exh.PF), Inquest Report of Sajid 
Aleem  (Exh.PG/1-4)  and  Inquest  Report  (Exh.PH)  and  Postmortem 
Report  No.11/SR/2012  dated  18.5.2012  (Exh.PJ)  of  Ali  Sher.  The 
Investigating  Officer,  Noor-ul-Hassan/ASI 
(PW-5)  and  Zawar 
Ahmad/SI  (PW-8),  gave  the  details  of  their  investigation.  The 
remaining witnesses were formal in nature.  It is pertinent to mention 
here that the police had mentioned Allah Rakha and Khalid Mehmood 
as  private  witnesses  in  the  calendar  of  witnesses  but  during  the  trial 
the  prosecution  moved  an  application  seeking  permission  to  produce 
Shameer Ahmad and Bhirawan Bibi who were allegedly injured in the 
accident.  The  learned  Magistrate  accepted  the  said  application  vide 
order dated 25.11.2015 whereupon they were examined as PW-2 and 
PW-3 
respectively.  Subsequently,  on  13.3.2018, 
the 
learned 
prosecutor  gave  up  Allah  Rakha  and  Khalid  Mehmood  being 
unnecessary and closed the prosecution evidence.  
6.  
After  the  prosecution  was  through  with  its  evidence  the 
learned  trial  Court  recorded  the  statement  of  the  Petitioner  under 
Section  342  Cr.P.C. He  denied  the  allegations  and  stated  that  he  has 
been  involved  in  this  case  due  to  suspicion.  He  neither  got  his 
statement recorded on oath under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C. nor produced 
any evidence in his defence.  
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
 
 
7.  
On  the  conclusion  of  the  trial,  vide  judgment  dated 
4 
29.3.2018,  the  learned  Magistrate  convicted  the  Petitioner  under 
Section 320 PPC on three counts for committing Qatl-i-Khata of Sajid 
Aleem,  Ali  Sher  and  Hafiz  Zawar  Hussain  by  rash  and  negligent 
driving  and  sentenced  him  to  simple  imprisonment  for  one  year  on 
each count and to pay Diyat in the sum of Rs.31,55,542/- to the legal 
heirs of each deceased and to remain in jail till it is paid. However, he 
acquitted him of the charge under Sections 427, 337-G and 279 PPC. 
All  the  sentences  of  imprisonment  were  ordered  to  run  concurrently 
and  benefit  of  Section  382-B  Cr.P.C.  was  extended  to  him.  The 
Petitioner preferred appeal against his conviction and sentence which 
was  dismissed  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Sahiwal, 
vide judgment dated 4.5.2018. Hence, this revision petition.  
8.  
The learned counsel for the Petitioner contended that the 
prosecution  had  failed  to  prove  the  charge  under  Section  320  PPC 
against  the  Petitioner  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  The  learned  Courts 
below  had  not  appraised  the  evidence  properly  which  had  caused 
serious  miscarriage  of  justice.  He  argued  that,  firstly,  FIR  No. 
190/2012 (Exh. PA/2) was registered against an unknown person and 
there  was  not  an  iota  of  evidence  which  could  show  that  it  was  the 
Petitioner  who  was  driving  the  tractor-trolley  which  killed  Sajid 
Aleem,  Ali  Sher  and  Hafiz  Zawar  Hussain.  Secondly,  Complainant 
Mukhtiar  Ahmad  (PW-1),  Shameer  Ahmad  (PW-2)  and  Bhirawan 
Bibi  (PW-3)  were  not  the  eyewitnesses  of  the  accident  and  the 
prosecution had  planted  them. Lastly, there  was no  evidence  that  the 
tractor-trolley  was  being  driven  rashly  and  negligently.  To  run  a 
vehicle at high speed was not an offence by itself. He prayed that the 
Petitioner’s  revision  be  accepted  and  he  may  be  acquitted  of  the 
charge.  
9.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  learned  Deputy  District  Public 
Prosecutor  assisted  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Complainant 
controverted  the  above  contentions.  He  contended  that  the  Petitioner 
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
5 
 
 
rashly  and  negligently  drove  the  tractor-trolley  and  killed  three 
persons and injured two others which was duly proved at the trial. The 
prosecution  witnesses  had  no  enmity  or  ill-will against the  Petitioner 
to  falsely  implicate  him  in  this  case.  They  were  trustworthy  and 
despite  his  best  efforts  the  Petitioner  could  not  impeach  their 
credibility  during  cross-examination.  He  prayed  that  this  revision 
petition  be  dismissed  and  conviction  and  sentence  awarded  to  the 
Petitioner be upheld.  
10. 
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have 
examined the record with their able assistance.  
11.  
The  accident  took  place  near  Bridge  55/5-L  on  the  G.T. 
Road in the wee hours on 18.5.2012. Mukhtiar Ahmad (PW-1) lodged 
FIR  No.190/2012  (Exh.PA/2)  at  Police  Station  Yousafwala,  District 
Sahiwal,  against  an  unknown  person.  In  his  complaint  Exh.PA  and 
FIR  Exh.PA/2  Mukhtiar  Ahmad  (PW-1)  specifically  stated  that  he 
was  accompanying  his  family  members  in  the  ill-fated  APV  van  but 
during  the  trial  he  conceded  that  he  was  not  with  them  and  was 
informed  at  his  house  on  his  phone.  In  this  view  of  the  matter,  his 
testimony may be relevant to the extent of reporting the matter to the 
police. Rest is all hearsay and inadmissible.  
12.  
The  Petitioner  was  implicated  in  this  case  six  days  after 
the occurrence (i.e. on 24.5.2012) at the instance of Allah Rakha and 
Khalid Mehmood who were allegedly among those going to drop the 
pilgrims at the Lahore Airport and were eyewitnesses of the accident. 
The police mentioned their names in the calendar of witnesses but the 
learned  prosecutor  did  not  examine  them  during  the  trial  and  gave 
them  up  being  unnecessary.  Consequently,  the  record  is  completely 
silent  as to how  his name  surfaced in  this  case  and  on  what basis he 
was accused of the commission of the offence. Even the Investigating 
Officer, Noor-ul-Hassan/ASI (PW-5), did not speak a word about it in 
his  deposition  at  the  trial.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  Complainant 
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
6 
 
 
argued that the tractor was owned by Haji Ijaz Ali son of Muhammad 
Fazil and the Petitioner was his driver who was driving it at the fateful 
time.  According  to  him,  the  prosecution  learnt  about  the  Petitioner’s 
involvement  from  him  when  he  made  an  application  before  the 
learned  Magistrate  for  superdari  of  the  tractor  on  24.5.2012.    I  have 
gone through the said application and observed that it does not contain 
any such information. Be that as it may, Haji Ijaz Ali was a material 
prosecution witness but he was not produced at the trial.  
13.  
According  to  the  prosecution,  Shameer  Ahmad  (PW-2) 
and Bhirawan Bibi (PW-3) were injured in the accident so it produced 
them  for  the  ocular  account.  Although  their  names  were  not 
mentioned  in  the  calendar  of  witnesses  on  the  application  of  the 
prosecution  the  learned  Magistrate  summoned  them  vide  order  dated 
25.11.2015.  Both  these  witnesses  deposed  that  on  the  fateful  night 
they  were  travelling  to  Lahore  in  the  APV  along  with  their  family 
members,  including  the  aforementioned  deceased,  when  they  had  to 
stop  to  replace  a  punctured  tyre.  Suddenly  the  Petitioner  while 
negligently  driving  tractor-trolley  bearing  registration  No.TS-5804 
loaded  with  chaff  rammed  into  the  van.  He  knocked  down  Sajid 
Aleem,  Ali  Sher  and  Hafiz  Zawar  Hussain  who  were  changing  the 
tyre  and  they  were  instantaneously  killed.  They  maintained  that  they 
were  also  seriously  injured.  However,  perusal  of  the  record  reveals 
that these witnesses made only a general statement that they sustained 
injuries  in  the  occurrence  but  did  not  specify  any  of  them.  The 
prosecution did not produce their medico-legal certificates either. All 
this was of vital importance to confirm their presence at the spot. It is 
noteworthy  that  owing  to  lack  of  evidence  the  learned  trial  Court 
acquitted  the  Petitioner  of  the  charge  under  Section  337-G  PPC. 
Neither the State nor the Complainant has filed appeal thereagainst.  
14.  
Admittedly,  PWs  Shameer  Ahmad  and  Bhirawan  Bibi 
did  not  know  the  Petitioner  prior  to  the  accident  yet  they  positively 
nominated him for driving the tractor-trolley. One wonders how they 
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
7 
 
 
implicated him. Since the driver fled from the scene immediately after 
the occurrence it is doubtful whether they even had his glimpse in the 
darkness of the night. More importantly,  no identification test parade 
was  ever  held.  The  learned  counsel  for  the  Complainant  vehemently 
contended that the PWs pointed their accusing fingers at the Petitioner 
while deposing before the learned trial Court which was sufficient to 
bring  home  guilt  to  him.  I  am  afraid,  the  argument  is  misconceived. 
The  Courts  in  our  country  are  always  skeptical  about  such 
identification. In Javed Khan alias Bachha and another v. The State 
and  another  (2017  SCMR  524),  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan reasoned: 
 
“As  regards  the  identification  of  the  appellants  before  the  trial 
court by Nasir Mehboob (PW-5), Subedar Mehmood Ahmed Khan 
(PW-6) and Idrees Muhammad (PW-7) that too will not assist the 
prosecution because these witnesses had a number of opportunities 
to  see  them  before  their  statements  were  recorded.  In  State  v. 
Farman  (PLD  1995  SC  1),  the  majority  judgment  of  which  was 
authored  by  Ajmal  Mian  J,  the  learned  judge  had  held  that  an 
identification  parade  was  necessary  when  the  witness  only  had  a 
fleeting glimpse of an accused who was a stranger as compared to 
an accused who the witness had previously met a number of times. 
The  same  principle  was  followed  in  the  unanimous  judgment  of 
this  Court,  delivered  by  Nasir  Aslam  Zahid  J,  in  the  case  of 
Muneer  Ahmad  v.  State  (1998  SCMR  752),  in  which  case  the 
abductee  had  remained  with  the  abductors  for  some  time  and  on 
several  occasions had seen their faces.  In the present  type of case 
the  culprits  were  required  to  be  identified  through  proper 
identification  proceedings,  however,  the  manner  in  which  the 
identification proceedings were conducted raise serious doubts (as 
noted above) on the credibility of the process. The identification of 
the  appellants  in  court  by  eyewitnesses  who  had  seen  the  culprits 
fleetingly once would be inconsequential.” 
In  the  instant  case,  so  far  as  Bhirawan  Bibi  is  concerned,  her 
identification  of  the  Petitioner  in  Court  is  particularly  of  no  value 
because  she  admitted  in  her  cross-examination  that  at  the  time  of 
accident she suffered an acute trauma and his name was disclosed to 
her by Mukhtiar Ahmad (PW-1).  
15.  
As  already  discussed,  “rash  or  negligent  driving”  is  an 
essential ingredient of the offence under Section 320 PPC. The words 
“rash”  and  “negligent”  in  the  context  of  driving  a  vehicle  were 
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
8 
 
 
interpreted  by  this  Court  in  State  through  Advocate  General, 
N.W.F.P. v. Mohib Gul [PLJ 1974 Cr.C. (Pesh) 586] as under: 
 
“The  legal  principles  in  regard  to  cases  of  rash  and  negligent 
driving  are  more  or  less  well-established.  The  mere  fact  that  a 
vehicle  is  driven  at  fast  speed  would  not  prove  rashness  and 
negligence  unless,  of  course,  all  the  attending  circumstances  are 
taken  into  consideration.  A  person  driving  a  motor-vehicle  at  the 
speed of say 20 miles an hour on a road on which children of small 
ages are running about would be rash and negligent. But the same 
would not be true in the case of a highway even if he was to drive 
at  the  speed  of  70  miles  an  hour.  The  criterion,  in  nutshell  in  all 
such cases, is whether upon the evidence on record a person can be 
said  to  have  been  driving  with  due  care  and  caution  or  else  had 
been negligent i.e. had omitted to do something which a reasonable 
man,  guided  by  the  considerations  which  ordinarily  regulate  the 
conduct  of  human  affairs  would  do,  or  done  something  which  a 
prudent and reasonable man would not do.” 
In  other  words,  mere  speed  of  a  vehicle  does  not  by  itself  establish 
that 
the  vehicle  was  being  driven  rashly  or  negligently.  In 
Muhammad Sarwar v. The State (1995 PCr.LJ 1152) it was held: 
 
“The most important ingredient to establish a charge under Section 
320  PPC  is  ‘rash  or  negligent  driving’.  The  factum  of  rash  and 
negligent  driving  is  not  proved  by  expression  or  these  words  or 
expression of ‘high speed’ alone. The prosecution has to show that 
at that particular time when the accident took place, the condition 
of  the  traffic  or  the  road  was  such  which  necessitated  a  slower 
speed  and that the tractor was  being driven in  an excessive speed 
keeping in view the quantum of traffic on the road. Moreover, it is 
nowhere in evidence that the tractor was being driven in violation 
of  the  traffic  rules  which  led  to  the  accident  in  question  and, 
therefore,  could  be  equated  with  rashness  or  negligence.  The 
approximate speed at which the tractor was being allegedly driven 
by  the  appellant  Muhammad  Sarwar  has  not  been  fixed  by  any 
prosecution  witness  to  lead  to  a  reasonable  conclusion  that  the 
same was on the higher side in view of the quantum of traffic and 
the nature of the road in question.” 
The  Supreme  Court  of  India  also  had  the  occasion  to  consider  the 
above-mentioned  terms  in  the  case  of  Ravi  Kapur  v.  State  of 
Rajasthan (AIR 2012 SC 2986 = 2013 SCMR 480). It said: 
 
“Rash and negligent driving has to be examined in light of the facts 
and  circumstances  of  a  given  case.  It  is  a  fact  incapable  of  being 
construed or seen in isolation.  It must be examined in light of the 
attendant circumstances. A person who drives a vehicle on the road 
is liable to be held responsible for the act as well as for the result. 
It  may  not  be  always  possible  to  determine  with  reference  to  the 
speed  of  a  vehicle  whether  a  person  was  driving  rashly  and 
negligently. Both these acts presuppose an abnormal conduct. Even 
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
 
 
9 
when  one  is  driving  a  vehicle  at  a  slow  speed  but  recklessly  and 
negligently, it would amount to ‘rash and negligent driving’…”  
16.  
In 
the 
instant  case,  apart  from 
the  question  of 
identification  of  the  Petitioner  as  the  driver  of  the  tractor-trolley,  the 
prosecution  was  obligated  to  prove  that  he  was  driving  it  rashly  or 
negligently.  PWs  Shameer  Ahmad  and  Bhirawan  Bibi  deposed  that 
they had parked their vehicle on the yellow shoulder of the road and 
had  switched  on  its  parking  lights  and  indicators  yet  the  Petitioner 
collided with it. The Investigating Officer, Zawar Ahmad/SI (PW-8), 
did not verify this fact in his deposition. Even site plan (Exh.PK) is of 
no  avail  to  the  prosecution  because  it  only  indicates  the  place  of  the 
incident.  It  neither  shows  whether  the  road  had  any  yellow  shoulder 
nor  specifies  the  location  of  the  two  vehicles.  More  importantly,  the 
APV  van  was  not  produced  during  the  trial.  Rash  and  negligent 
driving is a question of fact which must be proved by the prosecution 
in  accordance  with  law  and  the  settled  principles  of  criminal 
jurisprudence.  In  Muzaffar  Ali  alias  Nannah  v.  The  State  (1999 
MLD  567),  the  Court  held  that  “rash  and  negligent  driving  by  the 
accused must be conclusively established by the prosecution in order 
to secure conviction against him.” Similarly, in another case reported 
as Ghulam Mustafa v. The State (2004 PCr.LJ 1869) it was ruled that 
“independent  evidence 
regarding 
the  aforementioned  essential 
ingredient  was  a  must.”  The  mere  fact  that  some  witnesses  had 
verbally  asserted  before  the  learned  trial  Court  that  the  truck  was 
being driven carelessly and negligently or that it was being driven at a 
fast  speed  does  not  by  itself  suffice  to  establish  rash  or  negligent 
driving.  In  the  case  in  hand  the  prosecution  has  failed  to  bring  any 
independent  evidence  on  record  to  prove  that  the  tractor-trolley  was 
being driven in a manner which could be termed as rash or negligent. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  Complainant  vehemently  argued  that  it 
was  common  knowledge  that  people  recklessly  drive  heavily  loaded 
tractor-trolleys on the highways which endanger other road users and 
frequently  cause  accidents. He  contended  that  the  Petitioner  was  one 
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
10 
 
 
such  driver  who  took  the  lives  of  three  innocent  persons  and  injured 
two others. I am afraid, an accused cannot be convicted on the basis of 
suppositions. Reliance is placed on Muhammad Luqman v. The State 
(PLD  1970  SC  10)  and  Muhammad  Jamshaid  and  another  v.  The 
State and others (2016 SCMR 1019).  
17.  
The  prosecution  could  not  prove  that  Shameer  Ahmad 
(PW-2) and Bhirawan Bibi (PW-3) were injured but there is no doubt 
that  three  men  were  killed  in  the  accident  –  a  fact  which  also  finds 
support  from  evidence  furnished  by  Dr.  Shahid  Rasool  (PW-6).  The 
prosecution  has  failed  to  connect  the  Petitioner  with  the  offence  and 
the offender (whoever he was) has gone unpunished. This is a classic 
example of defective investigation and inefficiency on the part of the 
investigating agency.  Qatl-i-Khata by rash and negligent  driving is a 
distinct category of offences for which the investigating agency needs 
to  have  a  special  approach.  This  distinction  arises  because  it  is 
difficult  to  find  witnesses  who  are  in  a  position  to  depose  about  the 
sequence  of  vital  events  during  the  few  moments  immediately 
preceding the actual accident which could help in ascertaining its true 
cause.  This  difficulty  is  sometimes  compounded  when  the  driver 
manages  to  flee  from  the  scene  after  the  crash  (as  happened  in  the 
instant  case)  and  there  is  problem  in  tracing/identifying  him.  The 
Supreme  Court  of  India  highlighted  this  dilemma  in  Nageshwar  Sh. 
Krishna  Ghobe  v.  State  of  Maharashtra  (AIR  1973  SC  165).  It 
observed that “when accidents take place on the road, people using the 
road  or  who  may  happen  to  be  in  close  vicinity  would  normally  be 
busy  in  their  own  pre-occupations  and  in  the  normal  course  their 
attention  would  be  attracted  only  by  the  noise  or  the  disturbance 
caused  by  the  actual  impact  resulting  from  the  accident  itself.  It  is 
only then that they would look towards the direction of the noise and 
see  what  had  happened.  It  is  seldom  –  and  it  is  only  a  matter  of  co-
incidence  –  that  a  person  may  already  be  looking  in  the  direction  of 
the accident and may for that reason be in a position to see and later 
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
11 
 
 
describe  the  sequence  of  events  in  which  the  accident  occurred.  At 
times it may also happen that after casually witnessing the occurrence 
those  persons  may  feel  disinclined  to  take  any  further  interest  in  the 
matter,  whatever  be  the  reason  for  this  disinclination.  If,  however, 
they do feel interested in going to the spot in their curiosity to know 
something more, then what they may  happen to see there would lead 
them to form some opinion or impression as to what in all likelihood 
must  have  led  to  the  accident.”  In  view  of  the  above,  the  following 
guidelines for the investigating agencies are suggested:  
 
  
 
 
lane  changes, 
indifference  as 
i)  The  Investigating  Officer  should  carry  out  a  thorough 
survey  of  the  place  of  occurrence  to  ascertain  the  cause 
of the accident. “Rashness is doing a dangerous act with 
the  knowledge  that  it  may  cause  injury.  The  criminality 
lies  in  running  the  risk  of  doing  such  act  with 
recklessness  or 
to  consequences.” 
Common  reckless  driving  behaviours  include  speedy, 
drugged  driving,  quick 
swerving, 
disobeying  traffic  signals  and  other  traffic  violations. 
Similarly,  the  collision  may  occur  due  to  distracted 
driving, including texting and GPS distractions, improper 
loading  and  securing  of  cargo,  lack  of  vehicle  fitness 
(particularly  tyre  failure  and  defective  brakes).  On  the 
other  hand,  criminal  negligence  may  be  occasioned  by 
failure  to  exercise  proper  care  and  caution.  There  is  an 
abundance  of  physical  evidence  at  the  crash  scene  – 
evidence that is unique to that incident – which can help 
the investigator. This would inter alia consist of damage 
evidence,  skid  mark  evidence,  tyre  evidence,  marks  on 
the roadways.  
ii)  The  Investigating  Officer  must  ascertain  as  to  whether 
there  is  any  CCTV  cameras  which  cover  the  collision 
scene  and  if  there  is  one  he  should  secure  the  footage. 
Besides, he should obtain photographs of the site and the 
vehicles.  
iii) Where  the  driver  has  managed  to  run  away  from  the 
crime scene, finger prints and forensic evidence from the 
vehicle must be collected. 
iv) The ownership of the vehicle must be investigated and it 
should  be  determined  as  to  who  was  driving  the  vehicle 
at the relevant time.  
Crl.Rev.No.206/2018 
12 
 
 
 
 
v)  Statements  of  all  the  eyewitnesses  and  other  relevant 
witnesses should be recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C.  
vi) The  District Public  Prosecutor  must  thoroughly  examine 
the case before it is submitted to the Court for trial.  
18. 
For what has been discussed above, I am inclined to hold 
that the prosecution has failed to prove its case against the  Petitioner 
beyond reasonable doubt. The judgments passed by the learned Courts 
below suffer from gross misreading/non-reading of evidence. As such, 
this revision petition is accepted. His conviction and sentence are set 
aside  and  he  is  acquitted  of  the  charge.  He  is  in  jail.  He  shall  be 
released forthwith if not required to be detained in any other case.   
 
 
      *M.Khalid* 
 
 
      
(TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH) 
      JUDGE  
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
