    Stereo. H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH 
MULTAN 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No.525 of 2016 
Muhammad Amir   
versus  
The State etc. 
 
 
Date of hearing 
 
The Appellant by    
The State by  
 
======= 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.04.2018 
M/s Makhdoom Syed Najam-us- 
Saqib and Sohail Tahir, 
Advocates 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Adnan Latif, Deputy District 
Public Prosecutor. 
 
 
Asjad Javaid Ghural, J.      Through  the  afore-titled  criminal  appeal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
under  Section  410  Cr.P.C.,  appellant  Muhammad  Amir  has  challenged  the 
vires  of  judgment  dated  28.05.2016  passed  by  the  learned  Additional 
Sessions  Judge,  Muzaffargarh  in  case  FIR  No.45  dated  02.02.2012,  in 
respect of an offence under Section 376(1) PPC, registered at Police Station, 
Rohilanwali District Muzaffargarh whereby he was convicted and sentenced 
as under:- 
Under Section 376(1) PPC  
Rigorous  imprisonment  for  eleven  (11)  years  with  the  fine  of 
Rs.200,000/-  and  in  default  thereof,  to  further  undergo  simple 
imprisonment for six months. 
The  benefit  of  Section  382-B  Cr.P.C.  was  extended  to  the 
appellant.  
 
2. 
The  prosecution  story  unfolded  in  the  crime  report  (Ex.PD) 
registered on the complaint of Mst. Mumtaz Bibi (PW-1), is that she was a 
house-wife having been married with one Bakht Ali 4/5 years back and out 
of the wedlock, one female child was born.  In the noon of 23.01.2012, she 
went to the cotton crop of Babu Muhajir to ease herself.  When she sat in 
the cotton crop, Amir (appellant) and Arshad (since acquitted) armed with 
pistol,  who  had  already  hidden,  came  there.  Amir  started  forcibly 
committing sexual intercourse with her.  She raised hue and cry whereupon 
Arshad  made  him  silent  by  showing  the  pistol  whereas  Amir  went  on 
committing sexual intercourse with her.  On getting opportunity, she again 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
2 
raised  hue  and  cry  whereupon  Ijaz  Hussain  (PW-2)  and  Ghulam  Yasin 
(PW-3)  attracted  and  witnessed  the  occurrence.  On  seeing  them,  the 
accused  persons  succeeded  to  flee  away  towards  their  house  in  North.  
Thereafter,  the  accused  persons  remained  seeking  pardon.  She  made  an 
application  to  the  learned  Area  Magistrate  whereupon  her  medical 
examination  was  conducted  and  after  getting  medico-legal  report,  she 
reported the mater to the police on 02.02.2012 and this case was registered.  
3. 
Talib  Hussain,  SI  (PW-8)  had  drafted  the  complaint  (Ex.PA)  on 
02.02.2012 when he was present at Chowk Aludey Wali and sent the same 
to the police station for the registration of case.  On 03.02.2012, he visited 
the  place  of  occurrence,  prepared  unscaled  site  plan  Ex.PE  and  recorded 
the  statements  of  witnesses  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.  On  the  same  day 
Muhammad Ramzan 1343/C (PW-5) had handed over to him photocopy of 
the  medico-legal  certificate,  copy  of  court-order  and  two  sealed  phial 
containing  swabs,  which  were  taken  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo 
Ex.PF.    He  recorded  the  statements  of  witnesses  under  Section  161 
Cr.P.C.,  transmitted  the  sealed  phial  to  the  office  of  Chemical  Examiner.  
He got prepared interim report under Section 173 Cr.P.C.  
 
Khadim  Hussain,  SI  (PW-9)  had  arrested  the  appellant  on 
24.01.2013  and  co-accused  Muhammad  Arshad  on  14.02.2013,  got 
prepared respective incomplete reports under Section 173 Cr.P.C.  
4. 
Dr.  Shabana  Abid 
(PW-4)  had  conducted  medico-legal 
examination  of  victim  Mumtaz  Mai  on  30.01.2012  and  observed  the 
following injury:- 
No.1  A  contusion  mark  of  4  cm  x  1  ½  cm  below  right  eye  on  right 
cheek.  
No.2  Multiple  scratched  marks  on  both  right  and 
left  elbow 
posteriorly.    Breast  well  developed.    Black  areola  and  everted 
black nipple pubic and axillary hair preset.   
 
The  hymen  was  absent,  vagina  was  admitting  two  fingers  easily,  two 
external  and  two  internal  vaginal  swabs  were  taken  and  sent  to  the 
Chemical  Examiner  for  detection  of  semen.  On  receiving  the  report  of 
Chemical Examiner (Ex.PC), the swabs were found stained with semen.   
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
3 
5. 
At  the  commencement  of  the  trial,  the  learned  trial  Court  had 
framed  a  charge  against  the  appellant  and  his  co-accused  to  which  they 
had pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.  
6. 
The prosecution had produced 09-witnesses besides the photocopy 
of  report  of  Chemical  Examiner  (Ex.PC).  The  appellant  and  his                
co-accused,  in  their  statements  recorded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  had 
denied  and  controverted  all  the  allegations  of  fact  leveled  against  them, 
they neither opted to make their statements under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C., 
nor had they produced any evidence in their defence.  
7. 
Learned  trial  Court,  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial  had  acquitted     
co-accused  Muhammad  Arshad  whereas  convicted  and  sentenced  the 
appellant as stated above, hence the aforementioned criminal appeal.  
8. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submits  that  the  appellant  is 
quite innocent and has nothing to do with the alleged occurrence; that the 
matter had been reported to the police with an inordinate delay of 10-days, 
which  shows  it  was  registered  with  due  deliberation,  consultation  and 
fabrication;  that  the  statement  of  the  victim  is  contrary  to  her  own 
statement  recorded  earlier  under  Section  154  Cr.P.C.;  that  she  had  made 
self-contradictory statement with regard to the time and also her conduct 
during the occurrence; that admittedly the victim was a married lady and 
her  medical  examination  was  conducted  after  7-days  of  the  occurrence 
and,  thus,  the  report  of  positive  report  of  the  Chemical  Examiner  with 
regard to the swabs being stained with semen, provides no corroboration 
to  the ocular  accounts  especially  when  no  DNA  analysis  conducted;  that 
Ijaz  Hussain  (PW-2),  maternal  uncle  and  Ghulam  Hussain  (PW-3)  a 
cousin of the victim, were not eye witnesses, who had seen the appellant 
and his co-accused while running away from far distance on seeing them, 
which  is  otherwise  impossible;  that  co-accused  Arshad,  having  provided 
facilitation to the appellant by show of fire arm weapon to the victim, had 
already  been  acquitted  of  the  charge  by  the  learned  trial  Court  by 
disbelieving  the  prosecution  evidence  to  their  extent,  and  no  appeal 
against his acquittal has been filed and, thus, the appellant deserves for the 
same  treatment;  that  the  prosecution  has  miserably  failed  to  prove  the 
charge  against the  appellant  beyond  shadow  of  reasonable  doubt  and the 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
4 
learned  trial  court,  while  passing  the  impugned  judgment  of  the 
appellant’s  conviction,  has  erred  in  law  and  facts  of  the  case,  which 
warrants interference by this court.   
9. 
Conversely,  learned  Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor  appearing 
for the State submits that it was a day light heinous offence and exploited 
the  victim’s  future  by  the  appellant  at  the  expense  of  his  lust;  that  the 
victim  was  a  married  lady  and  it  cannot be  expected  from  her  to put her 
future  at  stake  for  the  purpose  to  falsely  implicate  the  appellant  in  this 
case  for  nothing;  that  the  defence  had  itself  admitted  the  commission  of 
sexual intercourse with the victim by the appellant with some variation by 
suggesting  that  the  complainant  was  a  consenting  party  to  the  sexual 
intercourse,  which  was  denied  by  her;  that  putting  such  suggestion 
amounts  to  admission;  that  the  medical  examination  of  the  victim  was 
conducted after seven days of the occurrence and, thus, delay in reporting 
the  matter  to  the  police  has  no  adverse  affect  on  fate  of  the  prosecution 
case  because  in  the  cases  where  family  honour  is  involved,  immediate 
rushing  to  the  police  station  for  lodging  the  crime  report  and  put  the 
honour at stake, is always difficult for anybody and to cross social norms 
and  customs;  that  the  report  of  Chemical  Examiner  (Ex.PC)  regarding 
swabs  being  stained  with  semen  has  been  received  with  positive  result, 
which  lends  further  corroboration  to  the  ocular  account;  that  the  victim 
was  a  married  lady  but  it  cannot  advance  license  to  anybody  to  commit 
Zina with her taking the advantage of her marriage; that the eye witnesses 
had  made  consistent  statement  inter-se  and  the  victim;  that  the  medical 
evidence  provides  further  corroboration  to  the  ocular  account;  that  there 
was  no  occasion  for  the  prosecution  to  falsely  implicate  the  appellant  in 
the  alleged  occurrence;  that  the  impugned  judgment  entailing  the 
conviction and sentence of the appellant does not warrant interference by 
this court.     
10. 
I  have  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant,  learned  Deputy 
District  Public  Prosecutor  appearing  for  the  State  and  have  perused  the 
record with their able assistance. 
11. 
This  occurrence  had  taken  place  on  23.12.2012  at  about  noon  as 
mentioned  in  the  crime  report  (Ex.PD),  the  medico-legal  examination  of 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
5 
the  victim  was  conducted  after  seven  days  of  the  occurrence  on 
30.01.2012  but  it  was  reported  to  the  police  on  02.02.2012  without  any 
plausible explanation, which shows the real possibility that the matter was 
reported to the police with due consultation, deliberation and fabrication.  
The complainant/victim was a married lady, her medical examination was 
conducted after seven days and during interregnum, she remained with her 
husband, therefore, delay of ten days in reporting the matter to the police 
creates serious doubt with regard to the  veracity of positive report of the 
Chemical Examiner (Ex.PC) as well as the victim herself.  
12.  Mst. Mumtaz Bibi (PW-1)/victim had appeared before the learned 
trial  court  and  made  statement  contrary  to  her  statement  recorded  under 
Section 154 Cr.P.C. wherein she had stated that ten years before she was 
married  with one  Bakht  Ali, on the  fateful  day  at  1:00 p.m.,  she  went to 
the  fields  for  easement  at  a  distance  of  three  Bigas  from  her  house,  the 
appellant  alongwith  his  co-accused  Arshad  (since  acquitted)  had  already 
hidden  themselves,  appellant  caught  hold  of  her,  she  raised  hue  and  cry 
whereupon Arshad pointed his pistol, she turned to silence due to the fear 
of threat to life, appellant committed sexual intercourse with her forcibly, 
she again made hue and cry whereupon Ijaz Hussain (PW-2) and Ghulam 
Yasin  (PW-3)  attracted  there  and  the  accused  persons,  on  seeing  them, 
succeeded to flee away.  In her statement before the learned trial court, the 
complainant had  stated  that  on  the  fateful  day, she  went to the  fields  for 
the  purpose  to  ease  herself  where  the  appellant  alongwith  one  Arshad 
came there, the appellant put a pistol on her forehead, co-accused Arshad 
remained  sitting  near  the  water-course,  she  raised  hue  and  cry,  appellant 
inflicted  butt  blow  of  his  pistol  and  made  her  to  be  silent,  and  appellant 
forcibly committed sexual intercourse with her, she again raised hue and 
cry whereupon the aforesaid witnesses attracted there and on seeing them, 
the  appellant  and  his  co-accused  succeeded  to  run  away,  the  witnesses 
took her to the house and then approached the police station but the police 
did  not  record  her  statement,  she  filed  an  application  before  the  learned 
Magistrate  for  her  medical  examination,  which  was  conducted  on 
30.01.2012  and  thereafter  the  case  was  registered  on  02.02.2012  on  her 
statement  (Ex.PA).    In  her  deposition  before  the  learned  trial  court,  the 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
6 
victim had made a story contrary to her statement recorded under Section 
154 Cr.P.C. (Ex.PA) on major aspects of the case stating that the appellant 
had pointed his pistol at her forehead and gave its blow on her right eye 
whereas  co-accused  Arshad  remained  sitting  near  the  watercourse,  she 
further  stated  that  she  had  made  an  application  for  her  medical 
examination  on  02.02.2012  before  the  learned  Area  Magistrate  wherein 
she  had  mentioned  the  time  of  occurrence  as  4/5:00  p.m.,  the  police 
recorded her statement in the police station, her brother and brother-in-law 
Muhammad  Ijaz  were  present  at  the  time  of  registration  of  the  case,  the 
police  got  her  thumb  impression  on  blank  papers,  her  clothes  were  torn 
during  the  occurrence, the  occurrence  had  taken place  in  the cotton  crop 
with  the height of 4/5  feet, none had  attracted  at the  place of occurrence 
except Ijaz Hussain and Ghulam Yasin from a distance of one Bigha from 
the  side  of  her  house.    She  had  denied  the  suggestions  that  it  was  the 
season  of  wheat  cultivation  instead  of  the  cotton  crop.    In  such  state  of 
affairs, her  testimony  requires  scrutiny  with  some  extra  care  and  caution 
having narrower scope to be believed.  She had stated that the occurrence 
had taken in the cotton crop with the height of 4/5 feet but in fact it was 
the  season  of  cultivation  of  the  wheat  crop.    The  unscaled  site  plan 
(Ex.PE)  shows  that  the  place  of  occurrence  was  surrounded  with  wheat 
crop  where  the  dry  sticks  of  cotton  were  lying.  The  place  of  occurrence 
was at a distance of 1 ¼ kilometers from the victim’s house.  The question 
arises  what  constrained  the  victim  to  cover  such  a  long  distance  for  the 
purpose  to  ease  herself  when  there  was  the  crop  of  same  height  in  the 
intervening  distance.    She  got  herself  medically  examined  after  7/8  days 
of  the  occurrence, she  proceeded to the police  station  in  the  company  of 
her  brother  and  brother-in-law,  the  police  got  her  thumb  impression  on 
blank  paper  and  the  FIR  was  lodged  after  ten  days  of  the  occurrence.  
Furthermore,  she  had  completely  exonerated  co-accused  Arshad  for  the 
reasons best known to her by stating that said co-accused remained sitting 
on  the  watercourse  whereas  in  her  earlier  statement  (Ex.PA),  it  was 
alleged that he made her to keep silent by showing his pistol whereas the 
appellant  went  on  committing  sexual  intercourse  with  her.    It  is  quite 
astonishing that how both the accused persons were aware of the fact that 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
7 
the  victim  would  come  exactly  at  the  place  where  they  had  hidden 
themselves after covering the long distance of 1 ¼ kilometer (as stated in 
scaled site plan Ex.PE).  All these pointed facts and circumstances of the 
case  indicates  that  the  mode  and  manner  of  the  occurrence  had  not  been 
ascribed  by  the  victim  as  what  actually  happened  on  the  day  of 
occurrence. According to the prosecution’s own case, it was a cotton crop, 
the  complainant  was  forcibly  subjected  to  sexual  intercourse  by  the 
appellant  but  no  relevant  mark  of  violence  was  observed  on  any  part  of 
her  body.    The  injuries/scratches,  as  mentioned  above,  on  the  person  of 
the victim, have specifically been mentioned by the medical officer being 
not the result or connectivity with the rape.        
13.  No doubt the sole statement of the victim can be taken into account 
to maintain the conviction and sentence of the appellant under the charge 
of  rape  but  only  when  the  same  is  found  to  be  confidence  inspiring  and 
trustworthy  having  corroboration  from  other  independent  source  of 
evidence  like  the  medical  evidence.  The  self-contradictory  statement  of 
the  victim  is  neither  trustworthy  nor  confidence  inspiring  and,  thus,  the 
same is not worth reliance.  
14. 
The other two material witnesses namely Ijaz Hussain (PW-2) and 
Ghulam  Yasin  (PW-3)  had  reached  at  the  place  of  occurrence  after 
hearing hue and cry of the victim from a distance of 3/4 Bigas and in their 
view  the  appellant  alongwith  Arshad  succeeded  to  flee  away  from  the 
place  of  occurrence.  It  is  strange  enough  to  observe  that  only  aforesaid 
two persons from the locality had attracted at the place of occurrence and 
that too from a far distance of 3/4 Bigas.  The claim of said witnesses of 
hearing  hue  and  cry  of  the  victim  from  such  a  long  distance  does  not 
appeal to ordinary prudence.  Even otherwise, they had seen the appellant 
and  his  co-accused  when  they  were  fleeing  away  from  the  place  of 
occurrence  and  they  had  not  witnessed  the  appellant  committing  sexual 
intercourse with the victim.   
15.  Dr.  Shabana  Abid  (PW-4)  had  conducted  the  medico-legal 
examination of victim Mst. Mumtaz Mai and observed a contusion on her 
right cheek under the right eye and multiple scratched marks on both right 
and  left  elbows  posteriorly.  The  hymen  was  absent  and  the  vagina  was 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
8 
admitting two fingers easily.  She had deferred her opinion with regard to 
the  act  of  sexual  intercourse  till  the  receipt  of  report  of  Chemical 
Examiner on the internal and external vaginal swabs.  On receipt of report 
from  the  said  office  (Ex.PC),  the  swabs  were  found  stained  with  semen. 
Admittedly,  no  material  was  sent  for  DNA  analysis  for  the  purpose  of 
semen  grouping,  which  was  essentially  required  to  prove  the  charge  of 
rape  against  the  appellant  when  the  victim  was  a  married  lady,  her 
medico-legal examination was conducted after 07-days of the occurrence 
and  during  the  interregnum  she  remained  living  with  her  husband.  In 
absence  of  DNA  analysis,  the  photocopy  of  positive  report  of  Chemical 
Examiner  (Ex.PC)  cannot  be  connected  against  the  appellant  with  any 
degree of certainty, which is otherwise against the mandate of Section 510 
Cr.P.C. as the prosecution had neither examined subscriber nor signatory 
thereof. 
  Furthermore, 
the  medical  officer  had  stated 
in  his                  
cross-examination  that  the  injuries  on  her  person  might  have  been  the 
result of friendly hand or fabricated and that the sexual intercourse might 
have been done with the victim by her husband because she was a married 
lady.    In  such  state  of  affairs,  the  medical  evidence  provides  no 
corroboration to the ocular account.  
16.  Now  adverting  to  the  legal  proposition,  it  was  suggested  by  the 
defence during cross-examination to the victim that she was a consenting 
party  to  the  occurrence,  which  was  specifically  denied  by  her.    Learned 
Law  Officer  contends 
that 
the 
said 
suggestion  amounts 
to 
admission/confession  on  part  of  the  appellant.    No  doubt  any  suggestion 
put  and  then  denied  by  the  witnesses  is  always  taken  to  be  the  defence 
plea  on  behalf  of  the  accused  but  the  question  whether  such  suggestion 
alone  can  be  taken  as  an  admission  on  part  of  the  accused  or  not.    The 
answer  is  a  big  “NOT”.    An  accused  may  take  several  contradictory 
defences  but  it  cannot  minimize  the  responsibility  of  the  prosecution  to 
prove its case through cogent, reliable and confidence inspiring evidence 
beyond 
even 
slightest 
doubt.  The 
suggestions 
put 
during                     
cross-examination  and  the  answers  given  in  the  statement  of  an  accused 
under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.,  may  be  at  variance.  The  evidence  includes 
examination-in-chief, cross-examination and re-examination and the same 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
9 
shall be taken into consideration as a whole for deciding the matter.  The 
law  is  settled  by  now  that  in  criminal  cases,  any  fact  mentioned  in  the 
examination-in-chief,  if  not  cross-examined,  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be 
admitted  one.  In  broader  prospect,  in  the  criminal  administration  of 
justice, if a suggestion is put by the defence, the same shall not be taken as 
an admission or confession on part of the defence and there should not be 
pick  and  choose  from  the  suggestions  put  by  the  defence  to  a  witness 
during  cross-examination.  The  accused  has  every  right  to  take  many 
defences and if he does not opt to prove any of his defence, he cannot be 
burdened for taking such plea.  Suffice is to say that the criminal case is to 
be  decided  on  the  basis  of  totality  and  not  on  the  narrow  ground  of      
cross-examination  or  otherwise  of  a  witness  on  a  particular  fact.  A 
reference  may  be  made  to  case  titled  “NADEEM  RAMZAN  versus  The 
STATE” (2018 SCMR 149) wherein it has been held as under:- 
 
“While discussing the motive part of the case the High Court had observed 
that both the eye-witnesses had stated about the alleged motive and they had 
not been cross-examined by the defence on that aspect of the case and, thus, 
the alleged motive stood proved. This approach adopted by the High Court 
has been found by us to be fallacious inasmuch as it had been clarified by 
this Court in the case of  S. Mahmood Alam Shah v.  The State (PLD 1987 
250) that the principle that a fact would be deem to be proved if the witness 
stating  such  fact  had  not  been  cross-examined  regarding  the  same  was  a 
principle applicable to civil cases and not to criminal cases.  It was held that 
a  criminal  case  is  to  be  decided  on  the  basis  of  totality  of  impressions 
gathered from the circumstances of the case and  not on the narrow ground 
of cross-examination or otherwise of a witness on a particular fact stated by 
him.  A similar view had already been expressed by this Court in the case of 
State  v.  Rab  Nawaz  and  another  (PLD  1974  SC  87)  wherein  it  had  been 
observed  that  a  criminal  case  is  to  be  decided  on  the  basis  of  totality  of 
circumstances and not on the basis of a single element.”  
 
17. 
The  aforesaid  suggestion  put  by  the  defence  that  the  complainant 
was a consenting party, may be given some weight when the prosecution 
succeeds  to prove its  case  but  in  case the prosecution  fails, the  appellant 
cannot  be  held  responsible  for  taking  the  said  defence.  Any  such 
suggestion  may  be  equated  with  the  plea  taken  by  the  accused  in  his 
statement under Section 342 Cr.P.C.  Though no such plea had been taken 
by the appellant in his statement under Section 342 Cr.P.C. yet the same 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
10 
cannot  be  read  in  isolation.    At  present,  it  is  the  settled-principle  of  law 
that if the prosecution succeeds to prove the guilt of an accused then the 
inculpatory part of his statement recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C. shall 
be read in support of the prosecution and if the prosecution evidence is not 
worth  reliance, the statement  of  accused  under  Section 342  Cr.P.C.  shall 
be  taken  in  toto.    A  reference  may  be  made  to  case  titled  “AZHAR 
IQBAL Versus The STATE (2013 SCMR 383)” wherein it has been held 
as under:- 
“if the prosecution fails to prove its case against an accused person then the 
accused  person  is  to  be  acquitted  even  if  he  had  taken  a  plea  and  had 
thereby admitted killing the deceased.  A reference in this respect may be 
made to the case of Waqar Ahmed v. Shaukat Ali and others (2006 SCMR 
1139).  The law is equally settled that the statement of an accused person 
recorded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  is  to  be  accepted  or  rejected  in  its 
entirety  and  where  the  prosecution’s  evidence  is  found  to  be  reliable  and 
the exculpatory part of the accused person’s statement is established to be 
false and is to be excluded from consideration then the inculpatory part of 
the accused person’s statement  may be read in support of the evidence of 
the prosecution.”  
18. 
From the facts and circumstances of the case, the unavoidable and 
irresistible conclusion is that a single doubt is always considered sufficient 
to  tilt  the  scale  of  justice  in  favour  of  the  accused  but  a  single  instance 
favouring  the  prosecution,  without  corroboration,  is  not  sufficient  to 
maintain the conviction and sentence.    
19. 
The  nutshell  of  above  discussion  is  that  the  appeal  in  hand  is 
allowed,  the  conviction  and  sentence  of  appellant  Muhammad  Amir 
awarded by the learned trial court vide judgment dated 28.05.2016 are set 
aside  and  he  is  acquitted  of  the  charge  by  giving  the  benefit  of  doubt  to 
him.  He is directed to be released from jail forthwith, if not required to be 
detained in connection with any other case. 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
      
 
 
 
 
 
        (Asjad Javaid Ghural) 
 
 Judge 
  
 
                                                            
 
 
JUDGE 
 
Asif* 
Crl. Appeals No.525 of 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
