Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.1775 of 2017 
 
Muhammad Junaid Alam 
Versus 
Federation of Pakistan through its Secretary, Islamabad & 
others 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
Date of hearing:      
Petitioners by: 
Respondents by: 
19.07.2018. 
M/s  Hasham  Ahmad  Khan,  Shehryar 
Gondal,  Mian  Waqas  Akhtar  and 
Rehan Ahmad Maan, Advocates.  
M/s  Noshab  A.  Khan  and  Ch. 
Muhammad Umar, Advocates and Mr. 
Zahid  Hussain  Malik,  Assistant 
Attorney General of Pakistan. 
 
MUHAMMAD  SAJID  MEHMOOD  SETHI,  J.-  This 
consolidated  judgment  shall  dispose  of  instant  writ  petition  along 
with  following  connected  writ  petitions  as  common  questions  of 
law and facts are involved in these cases:- 
1.  W.P.  No.1776  of  2017  titled  Kiran  Shehzadi  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
2.  W.P.  No.1777  of  2017  titled  Imran  Khan  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
3.  W.P.  No.1778  of  2017  titled  Rizwan  Ali  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
4.  W.P.  No.1779  of  2017  titled  Ansar  Aslam  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
2 
5.  W.P.  No.1780  of  2017  titled  Usman  Shahid  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
6.  W.P.  No.1781  of  2017  titled  Atta  ur  Rehman  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
7.  W.P.  No.1782  of  2017  titled  Hassan  Javed  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
8.  W.P.  No.1783  of  2017  titled  Waseem  Akram  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
9.  W.P.  No.1784  of  2017  titled  Irfan  Ellahi  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
10. W.P.  No.1785  of  2017  titled  Inaam  Rasool  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
11. W.P.  No.1786  of  2017  titled  Atif  Rashid  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
12. W.P.  No.1787  of  2017  titled  Abdul  Manaan  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
13. W.P.  No.1788  of  2017  titled  Wasiq Bashir  Khan 
v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
14. W.P.  No.1789  of  2017  titled  Muhammad  Qamar 
Ikram  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
15. W.P.  No.1790  of  2017  titled  Mohsin  Ali  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
16. W.P.  No.1792  of  2017  titled  Muhammad  Ahsan 
Abbas  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
17. W.P.  No.1793  of  2017  titled  Umer  Farooq  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
18. W.P.  No.1794  of  2017  titled  Umer  Sharif  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its  Secretary, 
Islamabad & others 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
3 
19. W.P.  No.8662  of  2017  titled  Tauqeer-ul-Hassan 
&  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
20. W.P.  No.98315  of  2017  titled  Rizwan  Mansoor 
Bajwa & others v. Federation of Pakistan through 
its Secretary, Islamabad & others 
21. W.P.  No.151535  of  2018  titled  Ifnan  Azeem  & 
others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
22. W.P.  No.151537  of  2018  titled  Mehwish  Riaz  & 
others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
23. W.P.  No.151541  of  2018  titled  Maham  Asif  & 
others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
24. W.P.  No.160203  of  2018  titled  Muhammad  Abu 
Bakar  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
25. W.P. No.201076 of 2018 titled Sana Ullah Khan 
&  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
26. W.P.  No.215588  of  2018  titled  Sheher  Bano  & 
others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  its 
Secretary, Islamabad & others 
 
2. 
Through  instant  as  well  as  connected  petitions,  petitioners 
have  challenged  the  vires  of  the  Regulations  No.48  &  60  of  the 
Pakistan  Registration  of  Medical  and  Dental  Practitioners 
Regulations, 2008 (“the Practitioners Regulations”), being ultra 
vires the Section 15 of the Medical and Dental Council Ordinance, 
1962  (“the  PMDC  Ordinance”)  as  amended  in  the  year  2012 
through  the  Medical  and  Dental  Council  (Amendment)  Act,  2012 
(“the Amendment Act”) and Articles 9 & 25 of the Constitution 
of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (“the  Constitution”), 
with the following prayer:- 
the  above, 
―In  view  of 
therefore,  most 
respectfully prayed that the Regulations 48 and 60 of 
the  Regulations,  2008  are  illegal,  unlawful  and  ultra 
vires  the  Section  15  of  the  Ordinance,  1962  and 
is, 
it 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
4 
Articles  9  and  25  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  
It  is  further  prayed  that  pending  disposal  of  this 
petition,  the  respondents  No.3  and  4  may  kindly  be 
directed to do what they are by law required to do i.e. 
to  allow 
the  national 
examination  board  and  forward  the  name  of  the 
petitioner  to  the  Federal  Government,  if  found  in 
possession  of  sufficient  knowledge  in  the  area  of 
medicine, as per the criteria in field.‖   
the  petitioner 
to  sit 
in 
 
3. 
A major development in reorganization and reconstitution of 
body  of  Pakistan  Medical  and  Dental  Council  (interchangeably 
referred  to  as  “PMDC”  or  „the  Council‟  where  appropriate)  was 
brought  about  by  the  PMDC  Ordinance,  after  which  gradual 
changes owing to growing needs were introduced through various 
amendments. Deriving authority from different provisions (mainly 
Section  33),  the  PMDC  time  and  again  made  different  Rules  / 
Regulations  /  Decisions  to  achieve  the  purposes  of  the  PMDC 
Ordinance.  The  main  outcome  of  exercise  of  rule-making  power 
delegated  to  PMDC  appeared  in  shape  of  promulgation  of  the 
Practitioners  Regulations.  A  large  number  of  amendments  / 
substitutions / additions were brought in the PMDC Ordinance by 
way  of  enactment  of  the  Amendment  Act  of  2012.  Now,  the 
Practitioners Regulations and the Amendment Act of 2012 are the 
basis  of  litigation  involving  interpretation  and  reconciliation  of 
their  various  provisions, scope  and  extent  of  delegated  legislation 
and exercise of discretion etc. In present petitions, petitioners have 
completed their medical degrees from different foreign universities 
and  thereafter  applied  to  appear  in  the  examination  conducted  by 
National  Examination  Board  (“NEB  Examination”)  to  procure 
practice licenses, under Section 15 of the PMDC Ordinance. They 
were  declined  to  appear  in  NEB  Examination  on  the  strength  of 
Regulations  No.  48  &  60,  which  provided  that  requisite  No 
Objection  Certificate  (“NOC”)  before  getting  admission  in  a 
foreign institution and minimum 60% marks in F.Sc. / Intermediate 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
5 
examination were required in order to appear in NEB Examination. 
This  controversy  between  petitioners  and  respondent-PMDC 
constrained petitioners to file present petitions. 
4. 
Learned  counsel  for  petitioners  submit  that  petitioners 
completed  their  M.B.B.S.  Degrees  from  foreign  institutions  and 
approached  the  PMDC  for  seeking  permission  to  sit  in  the 
examination  to  be  conducted  by  the  NEB  for  registration  as 
medical  practitioners,  but  they  are  not  being  permitted  on  the 
premise that  their marks in F.Sc. are less than 60% and no NOCs 
were  obtained  by  them  from  PMDC  before  getting  admission  in 
foreign universities. They further submit that according to Section 
15  of  the  Ordinance  of  1962,  the  only  condition  for  registration 
with PMDC is the clearance of examination to be conducted by the 
NEB, thus, the condition of minimum 60% marks in F.Sc. / NOC 
is against the provisions of the parent statute. They add that when 
regulations offend against clear cut provisions of the parent statute, 
same  do  not  carry  any  legal  sanctity.  In  support  of  their  last 
contention,  learned  counsel  have  referred  to  Muhammad  Amin 
Muhammad  Bashir  Limited  v.  Government  of  Pakistan  through 
Secretary Ministry of Finance, Central Secretariat, Islamabad and 
others  (2015  SCMR  630),  National  Electric  Power  Regulatory 
Authority  v.  Faisalabad  Electric  Supply  Company  Limited  (2016 
SCMR 550), Francis Coralie Mullin v. The Administrator, Union 
Territory  of  Delhi  and  others  (AIR  1981  Supreme  Court  746). 
They  add  that  if  foreign  degree  holders  are  not  allowed  to  sit  in 
examinations to be conducted by NEB, they would be deprived of 
their  right  to  earn  bread  and  butter  which  is  against  the  spirit  of 
Article 9 of the Constitution. In support of their submissions, they 
have relied upon The Collector of Sales Tax and others v. Superior 
Textile  Mills  Ltd.  and  others  (PTCL  2001  CL.  237),  Khawaja 
Ahmad  Hassaan  v.  Government  of  Punjab  and  others  (2005 
SCMR 186), Suo Motu Case No.11 of 2011 (PLD 2014 Supreme 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
6 
Court  389),  Messrs  Mustafa  Impex,  Karachi  and  others  v.  The 
Government  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary  Finance,  Islamabad 
and  others  (PLD  2016  Supreme  Court  808),  Basit  Ali  v. 
Additional  Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  the  Punjab,  Civil 
Secretariat,  Lahore  and  3  ‘others  (2005  MLD  599),  Sheikh 
Muhammad  Yousaf  and  another  v.  District  Collector  /  District 
Registrar  (DOR),  Okara  and  4  others  (PLD  2010  Lahore  123), 
Messrs  D.S.  Textile  Mills  Limited  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and 
others  (PLD  2016  Lahore  355),  Ahmad  Daniyal  v.  Islamia 
College,  Peshawar  through  Registrar  and  10  others  (PLD  2017 
Peshawar  193),  Independent  Newspapers Corporation  (Pvt.)  Ltd. 
and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (PLD  2017 
Lahore  289),  New  Allied  Electronics  Industries  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary,  Revenue  Division  and 
another (2017 PTD 130), Muhammad Khalid Qureshi v. Province 
of  Punjab  through  Secretary,  Excise  and  Taxation  Department, 
Lahore and  another  (2017  PTD  805),  Abdul  Ghaffar  Mallah and 
others  v.  Province  of  Sindh  through  Chief  Secretary  and  others 
[2018 PLC (C.S.) Note 26], Waqas Aslam and 2 others v. Lahore 
Electric Supply Company (LESCO) through Chief Executive and 4 
others [2018  PLC  (C.S.)  243]  and  Moazzam Habib and others v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others (2018 YLR 222). 
5. 
Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  respondent-PMDC  assisted 
by Assistant Attorney General in response to notice of Order 27-A 
of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908,  submit  that  at  the  time  of 
admission of petitioners in the foreign institutions, the Practitioners 
Regulations  were  in  field,  therefore  the  petitioners  were  bound  to 
fulfill the criteria laid therein. They add that in a number of cases, 
the Superior Courts have already declared that Regulations framed 
by  PMDC  enjoy 
legal  status  and  eligibility  criteria  fixed 
thereunder  is  sine  qua  non.  They  further  contend  that  as  the 
petitioners did not obtain requisite NOC prior to their admission in 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
7 
foreign institutions and some of them even did not clear F.Sc. with 
60%  marks,  hence,  they  are  not  entitled  for  registration  under 
PMDC.  They  add  that  as  the  medical  practitioners  have  to  deal 
with issues relating to health of the general public, thus, quality of 
medical  education  may  not  be  allowed  to  be  compromised.  To 
fortify  this  contention,  learned  counsel  have  relied  upon  Aqib 
Rasheed  and  3  others  v.  Government  of  the  Punjab  through 
Secretary  Health  and  4  others  (PLD  2011  Lahore  1)  and 
judgment dated 29.10.2014, passed by the Hon’ble Islamabad High 
Court,  Islamabad  in  W.P.  No.3944  of  2013  titled  Omer  Ismail 
Khalid etc. v. Pakistan Medical & Dental Council etc. They submit 
that  Section  15  of  the  Ordinance  of  1962  does  not  relate  to 
eligibility  criteria,  thus,  the  same  does  not  come  to  rescue  the 
petitioners,  rather  PMDC  enjoys  power  to  determine  eligibility 
criteria in terms of Section 33 of the PMDC Ordinance and unless 
a  person  fulfills  the  eligibility  criteria,  he  cannot  be  allowed  to 
appear in the examination to be conducted by NEB. In support  of 
their contentions, learned counsel have referred to Nadir Khan and 
others v. Principal, Khyber Medical College, Peshawar and others 
(1995 SCMR 421) and Dr. Muhammad Zaheer Babar v. Pakistan 
Medical and Dental Council through Chairman, Islamabad and 4 
others  (PLJ  2013  Islamabad  130).  They  argue  that  PMDC  is  a 
body to regulate the matters relating to admission and registration 
of  medical  practitioners,  therefore,  any  Regulation  made  by  it 
cannot  be  declared  illegal  and  unlawful  on  the  whims  of  any 
individual.  They  further  argue  that  in  view  of  low  standard  of 
education in medical field provided by foreign institutions, firstly, 
it  is  incumbent  upon  an  applicant  to  get  requisite  NOC  from 
PMDC  prior  to  getting  admission  and  secondly,  after  completion 
of degree, has to pass the examination to be held by NEB to prove 
his  eligibility  as  a  practitioner  but  the  petitioners  did  not  obtain 
requisite  NOC,  therefore  they  are  not  eligible  for  registration  as 
medical practitioners with PMDC. In support of their contentions, 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
8 
learned  counsel  have  referred  to  Pakistan  Medical  and  Dental 
Council  v.  Dr.  Raza  Muhammad  Khan  (1992  SCMR  1621), 
Pakistan  Medical  and  Dental  Council  v.  Ziauddin  Medical 
University  and  others  (PLD  2007  Supreme  Court  323),  Salim 
Javed  Baig  and  others  v.  Federal  Ombudsman  and  others  (PLD 
2016  Lahore  433),  All  Pakistan  Paramedical  Staff  Federation 
Unit,  SZPMI,  Lahore  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (PLD 
2017  Lahore  640),  Pakistan  College  of  Law  v.  University  of 
Punjab  and  others  (PLD  2017  Lahore  830)  and  Muhammad 
Fahad  Malik  v.  Pakistan  Medical  and  Dental  Council  and  others 
(PLD 2018 Lahore 75).  
6. 
Arguments heard. Available record perused. 
7. 
The very purpose of promulgation of the  PMDC Ordinance 
is duly reflected in its preamble, which is reproduced hereunder:- 
―Whereas it is expedient to consolidate the law relating to the 
registration  of  medical  practitioners  and  dentists  and 
reconstitute  the  Medical  and  Dental  Council  in  Pakistan  in 
order to establish a uniform minimum standard of basic and 
higher qualifications in medicine and dentistry.‖  
 
It  is  evident  from  the  bare  reading  of  preamble  that  the 
PMDC  was  reconstituted  to  set  up  uniform  minimum  standard  of 
basic  and  higher  qualifications  in  medicine  and  dentistry.  In  the 
year  2012  major  changes  have  been  brought  in  the  PMDC 
Ordinance  by  promulgating  the  Amendment  Act,  therefore  it  is 
important to examine the scheme of the  PMDC Ordinance, before 
and after the amendments through the Amendment Act.     
 
Before  the  Amendment  Act,  there  were  five  Schedules  of 
the  Ordinance.  The  recognized  medical  qualifications  granted  by 
medical institutions in Pakistan and outside Pakistan were notified 
under  the  First  and  Second  Schedule,  respectively.  The  Third 
Schedule 
related 
to 
the 
recognized 
additional  medical 
qualifications;  the  Fourth  Schedule  was  for  registrable  medical 
 
 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
9 
licences  and  diplomas,  while  the  Fifth  Schedule  dealt  with  the 
recognized dental qualifications. 
Section  11  of 
the  PMDC  Ordinance  governed 
the 
recognition  of  medical  institutions  and  the  medical  qualifications 
granted  by  medical  institutions  in  Pakistan,  while  sections  12,  13 
and 14 dealt with recognition of medical qualifications granted by 
institutions outside Pakistan. Section 15 provided for the powers of 
the Council, and the Federal Government, in case of qualifications 
granted  by  medical  institutions  outside  Pakistan,  other  than  those 
notified  in  the  Second  Schedule.  Section  23  provided  for  the 
qualifications, conditions and procedure for registration of medical 
practitioners  possessing  qualifications  which  were  recognised 
medical qualifications for the purposes of the Ordinance. The three 
provisos  to  section  23  laid  down  the  conditions  for  registration. 
The  registration  was  envisaged  in  two  stages;  initially,  a  person 
holding  qualifications  from  a  recognised  medical  institution  was 
granted 
'provisional  registration',  and  after  fulfilling  certain 
conditions,  was  entitled  to  get  'full  registration'.  Section  2(i) 
defined  "recognized  medical  qualification"  as  meaning  any  of  the 
medical  qualifications  included  in  the  First  and  Second  Schedule 
or  recognized  under  sections  14  or  15,  while  section  2(I)  defined 
"registered medical practitioner" as meaning a medical practitioner 
registered or provisionally registered under the Ordinance.  
 
Pursuant  to  its  powers, particularly  under  Section  33  of  the 
PMDC  Ordinance,  the  PMDC  framed  Practitioners  Regulations 
which were notified in the official gazette on 26-1-2009. Part VII 
of  the  Practitioners  Regulations  deals  with  foreign  qualifications 
and  the  National  Examination  Board.  The  NEB  Examination  is 
prescribed to determine the professional competence, or otherwise, 
of a Pakistani citizen, holding basic medical qualifications from a 
foreign  medical  institution.  The  NEB  examination  was, therefore, 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
10 
introduced for the first time through the Practitioners Regulations. 
The  Practitioners  Regulations  provided 
that  every  student 
obtaining  admission  in  a  foreign  medical  institution  was  required 
to  get  an  NOC  before  joining  the  medical  institution  outside 
Pakistan. The object and purpose of the NEB Examination was to 
determine  the  competence,  or  otherwise,  of  a  candidate  for 
registration  and  equivalence  of  the  foreign  basic  or  postgraduate 
medical or dental qualification, as defined in Regulations 2(iv) and 
(xvii) respectively. Sub-Regulation 1, of Regulation 59, related to 
those persons  who had  acquired  a foreign  basic  medical or dental 
qualification from such medical institutions as were included in the 
Second  Schedule  or  Fifth  Schedule  of  the  Ordinance.  The  said 
Regulation  provided  that  they  were  not  required  to  qualify  the 
NEB examination for being provisionally registered under section 
23 of the Ordinance.  
 
A  combined  reading  of  the  provisions  of  the  Ordinance,  as 
they  existed  prior  to  the  Amendment  Act,  read  with  the 
Practitioners Regulations, makes it obvious that the requirement to 
qualify  the  NEB  Examination,  so  as  to  be  entitled  to  full 
registration  under  the  Ordinance  was  mandatory,  for  those  who 
held medical qualifications from a foreign medical institution other 
than those notified under the Second Schedule.  
 
8. 
The Amendment Act of 2012 made fundamental changes in 
the law. Section 15 of the PMDC Ordinance  was substituted with 
new  provision,  which  incorporated  in  the  statute  the  concept  and 
procedure  for  registration  of  students  qualifying  from  educational 
institutions  outside  Pakistan,  previously  provided 
in 
the 
Practitioners  Regulations.  The  Second  Schedule  of  the  PMDC 
Ordinance  was  omitted  and  instead  Section  15  has  been  inserted, 
which deals with the registration and recognition of qualifications 
granted  by  medical  institutions  outside  Pakistan.  Section  15,  as 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
11 
inserted through the Amendment Act, is as follows:- 
institution  outside  Pakistan, 
Power  of  the  Council  to  certify  certain 
―15. 
persons  to  be  possessed  of  sufficient  medical 
qualifications.—  (1)  If,  after  an  examination  by  a 
board  constituted  by  the  Council,  the  Council  is 
satisfied that a person holding a qualification granted 
by  a  medical 
is 
possessed  of  sufficient  knowledge  and  skill  to  be 
registered  as  a  practitioner  for  the  purpose  of  this 
Ordinance, 
the  Federal 
Government  to issue a notification  in favour  of  such 
person  to  register  him  and  his  qualification.  Upon 
such  notification,  the  Council  shall  register  the 
qualification possessed by the person without it being 
entered in any of the Schedules of this Ordinance.  
it  may  recommend 
to 
(2). 
The  Council  shall  register  the  qualification 
granted  by  a  medical  institution  outside  Pakistan, 
Possessed by the person by maintaining a separate 
list in the Register.‖  
 
Section  15,  as  amended  through  Amendment  Act  of  2012, 
has restricted the powers of respondents to the extent of assessing 
medical  knowledge  of  the  students  qualifying  from  educational 
institutions  outside  Pakistan  by  taking  an  examination.  After 
having taken the examination, if the respondents are satisfied that 
candidates  holding  foreign  degrees  are  possessed  with  sufficient 
knowledge  and  skill,  then  the  names  of  all  those  qualified 
candidates  are  to  be  recommended  to  the  Federal  Government  to 
issue  a  notification  in  their  favour  to  be  registered  as  medical 
practitioners in Pakistan.  
 
9. 
The  Practitioners  Regulations  of  2008  were  made  prior  to 
the substitution of Section 15  of the PMDC Ordinance brought in 
the  year  2012.  The  impugned  Regulation  No.  48  imposes  a 
condition  upon  candidates  who  intend  to  get  admission  in  a 
medical  institution  outside  Pakistan  to  obtain  NOC  from  the 
Council. The said Regulation reads as under:- 
―48.  On  the  commencement  of  these regulations, 
a  person  who  gets  admission  in  any  medical  or 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
12 
dental  course  in  a  foreign  country  without  being  in 
possession  of  a  valid  no  objection  certificate  issued 
by  the  Council  to  him  prior  to  joining  the  course 
abroad  shall  not  be  eligible 
for  processing  of 
registration  of  his  qualification  if  it  is  not  included  in 
the  Second,  Third,  or  Fifth Schedule  to the PM&DC 
Ordinance  1962.  No  person  shall  be  allowed  to 
appear 
the  National  Examination  Board 
examination without the eligibility certificate issued by 
the Council. Persons admitted in medical and dental 
courses  on  or  before 
these 
regulations  shall  be  issued  eligibility  without  the  no 
objection  certificate  by  the  Council  provided  they 
fulfill all other requirements.‖  
the  approval  of 
in 
 
 
Whereas the impugned Regulation No. 60 debars the foreign 
qualified candidates with less than 60% marks in F.Sc. from taking 
NEB  Examination.  The  said  Regulation  is  reproduced  herein 
below:- 
 
the  year  of  commencement  of 
A candidate who acquires admission after the 
―60. 
end  of 
these 
regulations  into  a  foreign  medical  school  with  less 
than  60%  marks  in  F.Sc.  premedical  or  equivalent 
qualification  shall  not  be  entertained 
for  NEB 
Examination under any circumstances.‖  
The  Practitioners  Regulations  to  the  extent  of  dealing  with 
foreign  qualified  students  appear  to  be  in  conflict  with  the 
substituted  Section  15  of  the  PMDC  Ordinance.  The  newly 
substituted Section 15 now only empowers the respondents to take 
examination  and  after  having  taken  the  same,  if  the  Council  is  of 
the opinion that a candidate does not possess sufficient knowledge 
and  skill  to  practice,  then  it  may  decline  to  recommend  such 
candidate’s name to the Federal Government to be registered as a 
medical practitioner in Pakistan.  
 
By  virtue of Regulations  No.48  &  60 of the  Regulations of 
2008,  medical  students  having  foreign  degrees  have  been 
restrained  not  only  from  seeking  knowledge  of  medicine  from 
foreign  country  but  have  also  been  denied  an  opportunity  to 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
13 
demonstrate  that  they  possess  sufficient  knowledge  and  skill  to 
practice in Pakistan, whereas no such restriction has been placed in 
Section 15 of the Ordinance of 1962, reproduced supra.  
 
10.  The  Practitioners Regulations  have  been framed  in exercise 
of  powers  conferred  upon  PMDC  under  Section  33  of  the 
Ordinance  of  1962  but  a  careful  appraisal  of  Section  33  makes  it 
clear  that  said  provision  of  law  is  silent  about  powers  to  make 
Regulations  regarding  candidates  intending  to  get  admission  in 
foreign  medical  institutions,  students  getting  medical  education 
abroad  and  candidates  who  completed  medical  education  from 
medical  institutions  outside  Pakistan.  For  ease  of  reference, 
Section 33 is reproduced hereunder:- 
33. Power to make Regulations.– (1)The Council may, with 
the  previous  sanction  of  the  Federal  Government,  make 
Regulation  generally  to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  this 
Ordinance,  and,  without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  this 
power, such Regulations may provide for– 
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
(e)  
(f)  
(g)  
the  management  of  the  property  of  the  Council  and 
the maintenance and audit of its accounts;  
the  summoning  and  holding  of  meetings  of  the 
Council,  the  times  and  places  where  such  meetings 
are  to  be  held,  the  conduct  of  business  thereat  and 
the  number  of  members  necessary  to  constitute  a 
quorum;  
the  powers  and  duties  of  the  President  and  Vice 
President;  
the mode of appointment of the Executive Committee 
and  other  Committees,  the  summoning  and  holding 
of  meetings,  and  the  conduct  of  business  of  such 
Committees;  
code  of  practice  and  ethics  for  the  medical  and 
dental practitioners;   
the  appointment,  powers,  duties  and  procedures  of 
medical and dental inspectors;   
for  maintenance, 
the  conditions  and  procedure 
compilation  and  publication  of 
the  Register  of 
medical  and  dental  practitioners  and  of  health  care 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
14 
providing  facilities  and  their  minimum  requirements 
and  the  fees  to  be  charged  for  registration  and,  if 
necessary, for opening of sub-offices or branches for 
this purpose;  
the procedure for any inquiry under sub-section (1) of 
section 31; and  
any matter  for  which  under  this  Ordinance provision 
may be made by regulations. 
(h)  
(i)  
(2) 
Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-section 
(1)  the  Council  shall  make  Regulations  which  may  provide 
for— 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
prescribing  a  uniform  minimum  standard  of  courses 
of  training  for  obtaining  graduate  and  post-graduate 
medical  and  dental  qualifications  to  be  included  or 
included  respectively  in  the  First,  Third  and  Fifth 
Schedules; 
prescribing  minimum  requirements  for  the  content 
and duration of courses of study as aforesaid; 
prescribing the conditions for admission to courses of 
training as aforesaid; 
prescribing  minimum  qualifications  and  experience 
required  of  teachers for  appointment  in medical  and 
dental institutions; 
conducting 
prescribing  the  standards  of  examinations,  methods 
of 
the  examinations  and  other 
requirements  to  be  satisfied  for  securing recognition 
of  medical  and  dental  qualifications  under 
this 
Ordinance; 
prescribing  the  qualifications,  experience  and  other 
conditions  required  for  examiners  for  professional 
examinations in medicine and dentistry antecedent to 
the  granting  of  recognized  medical  and  dental  and 
additional medical and dental qualifications; 
registration  of  medical  or  dental  students  at  any 
medical or dental college or school or any university 
and the fees payable in respect of such registration; 
laying  down  criteria  including  university  affiliation, 
conditions  and  requirements  for  recognition  and 
continuation of recognition and for grant of status of a 
teaching  institution  of  institutions  and  organizations 
under this Ordinance and on all connected matters of 
inspection  of  medical  and  dental  institutions  for 
recognition  and  continuation  of  recognition  and 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
15 
(i) 
(j) 
(k) 
inspection  of  examinations  in  these  institutions  and 
fee for such inspections;  
terms  and  conditions  of  service  for  all  employees 
appointed under section 9;  
election of members of the Council; and 
prescribing  a  uniform  minimum  standard 
for 
continuous  professional  development  for  registered 
graduate  and  post-graduate  medical  and  dental 
practitioners.‖  
 
It  is  clear  from  above  provisions  of  Section  33  of  the 
Ordinance that power of the Council to make Rules / Regulations 
is  clearly  defined.  Methodology  and  guidelines  have  been 
provided.  Discretion  has  been  structured.  Power  of  PMDC  has 
been  regulated  through  a  statutory  provision  leaving  no  scope  of 
unfettered and arbitrary powers to make Regulations. Imposition of 
conditions  on  candidates  intending  to  get  admission  in  foreign 
medical  institutions  through  impugned  Regulations  is  not  in  line 
with  the  express  provisions  of  substituted  Section  15  of  the 
Ordinance,  which 
tantamount 
to  enhancement  of  powers 
overriding  the  statutory  provision  and  is  not  permissible.  It  is 
settled that power is controlled and regulated by the parent statute 
and  rule-making  authority  cannot  enhance  it.  It  has  to  remain 
within the scope of delegated legislative power given by the parent 
statute.  In  the  instant  case,  impugned  Regulations  are  not  at  the 
same pedestal as its parent statute. The efficacy of provisions of a 
statute  cannot  be  left  to  the  kind  mercy  of  rule-making  power  of 
the Council. The command of legislature cannot be overridden by 
the fiat of the Council. Complete, absolute, unclear, unguided and 
uncontrolled  rule-making  power  has  not been  given  by  the  parent 
statute.  For  the  sake  of  arguments  even  if  the  impugned 
Regulations are considered to be made within the purview / scope 
of Section 33 of the Ordinance and given effect thereto, then it will 
make the Section 15 of the Ordinance redundant whereas under the 
principles of interpretation, statutory provision must be interpreted 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
16 
within  the  meaning  that  was  attributed  to  it  by  the  language  and 
specific  words  used  by  the  Legislature.  Redundancy  cannot  be 
attributed to any word used therein and while interpreting the law, 
a specific provision of any statute, which is independent in nature, 
cannot  and  should  not  ordinarily  be  held  to  be  redundant, 
especially  on  the  touchstone  of  another  independent  provision  of 
the same statute. All possible efforts should be made to apply and 
adhere  to  the  rules  of  purposive  and  harmonious  construction,  so 
that  the  allegedly  conflicting  provisions  should  be  reconciled  and 
saved. Hence, impugned Regulations are ultra vires the provisions 
of  Section  15  read  with  33  of  the  Ordinance  of  1962.  Reference 
can  be  made  to  Waqar  Zafar  Bakhtawari  and  6  others  v.  Haji 
Mazhar Hussain Shah and others (PLD 2018 Supreme Court 81), 
Searle IV Solution (Pvt.) Ltd. and others v. Federation of Pakistan 
and  others  (2018  SCMR  1444),  Aman  Ullah  Khan  and  others  v. 
The  Federal  Government of  Pakistan  through  Secretary,  Ministry 
of  Finance,  Islamabad  and  others  (PLD  1990  Supreme  Court 
1092),  Director  Food,  N.-W.F.P.  and  another  v.  Messrs  Madina 
Flour  and  General  Mills  (Pvt.)  Ltd.  and  18  others  (PLD  2001 
Supreme  Court  1),  Khawaja  Ahmad  Hassaan’s  case  supra,  Dr. 
Mobashir Hassan and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others 
(PLD 2010 Supreme Court 265), Messrs S.M. Ilyas and Sons Ltd. 
v.  Monopoly  Control  Authority,  Islamabad  and  another  (PLD 
1976  Lahore  834),  Muhammad  Aslam  and  others  v.  Punjab 
Government  and  others  (1996  MLD  685)  and  Shaukat  Ali  Mian 
and another v. The Federation of Pakistan (1999 CLC 607). 
11. 
It  is  equally  well-settled  that  rules  /  regulations  can  neither 
go  beyond  the  scope  of  the  parent  statute  nor  can  they,  by 
themselves, enlarge the scope of statutory provisions. They cannot 
also  militate  against  the  provisions  under  which  they  were  made. 
Rule-making  power  is  an  incidental  power  that  must  follow  and 
not  run  parallel to  the  parent statute. They  are  meant  to deal with 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
17 
details  and  can neither  be  a  substitute  for  the  fundamentals of  the 
parent  statue  nor  can  add  to  them.  There  are  two  main  checks  on 
the power of the legislature to delegate, these being its good sense 
and  the  principle  that  it  should  not  cross  the  line  beyond  which 
delegation  amounts  to  abdication  and  self-effacement.  The  only 
requirement  of  law  in  such  situations  is  to  insist  that  the 
subordinate  body  charged  with  the  duty  of  making  rules  / 
regulations  must  strictly  confine  itself  within  the  sphere  of  its 
authority  for  the  exercise  of  its  subordinate  legislative  power  and 
in each case, it is the duty of the Courts in appropriate proceedings 
to be satisfied that the rules / regulations so made are: 
(a)  by the authority mentioned in the Act and 
(b)  within the scope of the power delegated therein. 
 
12.  A  rule-making  body  cannot  frame  rules  /  regulations  in 
conflict  with  or  gating  from  the  substantive  provisions  of  the  law 
or statute  under  which  the  rules  /  regulations  are  framed.  A  rule / 
regulation, which the rule-making authority has power to make, is 
liable to be declared invalid on the following grounds:- 
(1)  Powers entrusted  for  one purpose  are deliberately  used 
with the design of achieving another, itself unauthorized 
or actually forbidden. 
(2)  It  shows  on  its  face  a  misconstruction  of  the  enabling 
law  or  a  failure  to  comply  with  the  conditions 
prescribed  under  the  parent  statute  for  the  exercise  of 
the powers. 
(3)  It is not capable of being related to any of the purposes 
mentioned in the parent statute. 
 
The  initial  difference  between  subordinate  legislation  and 
statute  law  lies  in  the  fact  that  a  subordinate  law-making  body  is 
bound by  the  terms  of  its  delegated  or  derived  authority, and  that 
Courts  of  law,  as  a  general  rule,  do  not  give  effect  to  the  rules  / 
regulations, etc. thus  made, unless satisfied  that  all the  conditions 
precedent to the validity of the rules / regulations are fulfilled. The 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
18 
Courts, therefore, will require due proof that the rules / regulations 
have been made and promulgated in accordance with the statutory 
authority.  In  the  absence  of  express  statutory  provision  to  the 
contrary,  the  Courts  may  inquire  whether  the  rule-making  power 
has been exercised in accordance with the provisions of statute by 
which it is created either with respect to the procedure adopted, the 
form  or  substance  of  the  regulation,  or  the  sanction,  if  any, 
attached to the regulation. It follows that the Courts may declare as 
invalid and ultra vires a regulation which fails to comply with the 
statutory essentials. 
13. 
It  is  also  relevant  to  observe  here  that  when  the  legislature 
confers  power  on  authority  to  frame  rules  /  regulations  it  is 
expected  that  such  powers  will  be  used  only  bona  fidely,  in  a 
responsible  spirit  and  in  the  true  interest  of  the  public  and  in 
furtherance of the object for the attainment of which such powers 
were  conferred.  It  cannot  be  said  that  an  unlimited  right  of 
delegation  is  inherent  in  the  legislative  power  itself.  This  is  not 
warranted  by  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution.  Legitimacy  of 
delegation  depends  entirely  upon  its  being  used  as  an  ancillary 
measure  which  the  legislature  considers  to  be  necessary  for  the 
purpose  of  exercising  its  legislative  powers  effectively  and 
completely.  The  legislature  must  retain  in  its  own  hands  the 
essential  legislative  functions  which  consist  in  declaring  the 
legislative  policy  and  laying  down  the  standard  which  is  to  be 
enacted into a rule of law, and what can be delegated is the task of 
subordinate legislation which by its very  nature is ancillary to the 
statute  which  delegates  the  power  to  make  it.  Rules  /  regulations 
continue  to  be  rules  subordinate  to  the  parent  statute,  and  though 
for  certain  purposes,  including  the  purpose  of  construction,  they 
are  to be treated as if  contained in  the  statute, their  true nature  as 
subordinate  legislation  is  not  lost.  Rule  of  interpretation  is  that  if 
subordinate legislation is directly repugnant to the general purpose 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
19 
of  the  statute  which  authorizes  it,  or  indeed  is  repugnant  to  any 
well  established  principle  of  statute,  it  is  either  ultra  vires 
altogether, or must, if possible, be so interpreted as not to create an 
anomaly. If reconciliation was found to be impossible between the 
provision of statute and the rules / regulations made thereunder and 
the latter is found to be in excess of the statutory power authorizing 
them,  the  subordinate  provision,  the  rules  /  regulations  so  made, 
must give way and such rules / regulations shall be held to be ultra 
vires the parent statute. But before going to that length, the Courts 
will  have  to  struggle  against  such  a  construction  and  will  have  to 
make  an  effort  within  the  bounds  of  reason  to  bring  them  within 
the ambit of the rule-making power if that can be possibly so done.  
Analyzing  Regulations  No.48  &  60  on  the  touchstone  of  rules  of 
interpretation,  discussed  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs,  Regulations 
No.48 & 60 are in gross contradiction to the provisions of Section 
15 of the Ordinance of 1962 as well as against the spirit of Section 
33 of the Ordinance ibid, reproduced supra, which do not provide 
any  parameters  /  guidelines  for  rule-making  viz  a  viz  foreign 
qualified students. Resultantly, impugned Regulations, being  ultra 
vires  the  Section  15,  are  illegal  and  without  lawful  authority. 
Reference can be made to Khawaja Ahmad Hassan v. Government 
of Punjab and others (PLD 2004 Supreme Court 694), Suo Motu 
Case  No.13  of 2009 (PLD  2011  Supreme  Court 619), Suo Motu 
Case  No.11  of  2011  (PLD  2014  Supreme  Court  389)  and 
Independent  Newspapers  Corporation  (Pvt)  Ltd  and  others  v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD 2017 Lahore 289). 
14.  Even  otherwise,  the  respondents  on  many  occasions  have 
allowed  private  medical  colleges  to  give  admission  to  candidates 
who have obtained less than 60% marks in their F.Sc. examination 
in the year when some of the petitioners were also undergoing their 
medical  degree  outside  Pakistan.  In  this  regard,  petitioners  have 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
20 
referred  to  letter  dated  16.01.2017,  issued  by  the  respondent-
PMDC, which is reproduced hereunder:- 
RESERVATIONS  ON  CRITERIA 
FOR ADMISSION IN MBBS / BDS IN 
BALOCHISTAN.  
―Subject: 
Dear Sir,  
 
   
Your  request  regarding  the  subject 
matter  was  considered  by  the  Council  in  its  149th 
Session  held  on  14th  January,  2017.  The  Council 
deliberated  over  the  need  of  facilitation  for  such 
regions  as  being  done  worldwide.  The  Council  felt 
that  there  is  dire  need  of  provision  of  education 
facilities 
these  regions  and  hence  relaxed 
eligibility criteria thereof.  
to 
 
   
After having deliberate discussion the 
Council unanimously decided that applicants having 
acquired  equivalent  to  or  more  than  50%  marks  in 
FSc / HSSC / Intermediate level shall be allowed to 
take admission in MBBS / BDS courses, for a period 
of  five  years,  only  for  public  sector  colleges  and 
students  having  physically  studied  in  Balochistan 
from the same regions.  
 
   
However  a  proposed  mechanism  of 
development  alongwith  details  of  affected  regions 
for which facilitation is required will be submitted by 
the Provincial Government.  
 
   
Competent Authority.‖  
This  issued  with  the  approval  of  the 
 
Learned  counsel 
for 
respondent-PMDC  argued 
that 
concession  given  to  candidates  belonging  to  the  Province  of 
Baluchistan  is  justified  as  the  same  was  done  with  intent  to 
facilitate and develop such regions where literacy rate is very low 
and  PMDC  Management  Committee  took  a  decision  to  facilitate 
students from said province, thus, dissimilar treatment in dissimilar 
circumstances  is  permissible.    There  is  no  cavil  to  this  argument, 
however, at the same time, learned counsel for respondent-PMDC 
is  not  extending  this  concession  to  the  foreign  qualified  students 
rather submits that foreign qualified students will discriminate the 
students in Pakistan who could not obtain 60% marks in F.Sc. and 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
21 
could  not  get  admission  in  medical  colleges  whereas  regarding 
students hailing from the Province of Baluchistan, he contends that 
dissimilar treatment in dissimilar circumstances is justified. 
  
Needless  to  observe  here  that  dissimilar  treatment  is 
permissible  on  the  touchstone  of  reasonable  classification  and 
intelligible  differentia.  Reasonable  classification  is  permissible 
under  Article  25  of  the  Constitution.  It  does  not  offend  against 
equal  protection  principle.  The  State  may  classify  persons  for 
purpose of legislation and pass laws applicable only to persons and 
objects  within  designated  class  according  to  the  intended  public 
object.  However,  class  legislation  against  some  and  favouring 
others  within  a  particular  class  is  prohibited.    Reliance  is  placed 
upon  Muhammad  Khalid  Qureshi  v.  Province  of  Punjab  through 
Secretary,  Excise  and  Taxation  Department,  Lahore  and  another 
(2017  PTD  805),  Moazzam  Habib  and  others  v.  Federation  of 
Pakistan  and  others  (2018  YLR  222),  Abdul  Ghaffar  Mallah and 
others  v.  Province  of  Sindh  through  Chief  Secretary  and  others 
[2018  PLC  (C.S.)  Note  26]  and  Waqas  Aslam  and  2  others  v. 
Lahore  Electric  Supply  Company  (LESCO) 
through  Chief 
Executive and 4 others [2018 PLC (C.S.) 243]. 
15.  Learned  counsel  for  PMDC  has  also  argued  that  this  Court 
cannot  sit  as  a  Court  of  appeal  over  the  decisions  of  statutory 
bodies.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  as  per  Articles  4  &  5  of  the 
Constitution,  every  citizen  is  entitled  to  be  treated  in  accordance 
with  law  whereas  respondents  are  under  legal  duty  to  obey  the 
command of law and the Constitution. Section 15 of the Ordinance 
has  placed  no  restriction  on  the  foreign  qualified  candidates  from 
sitting  in  NEB  examination,  after  clearing  which  they  can  be 
recommended  for  registration  as  practitioner  in  Pakistan.  The 
manifest  provisions  of  Section  15  have  to  be  given  effect  against 
any  decision  /  Rules  /  Regulations  made  by  respondent-PMDC 
contradicting  the  statutory  provisions.    Furthermore,  Article  18  of 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
22 
the  Constitution  safeguards  fundamental  right  of  the  citizens  / 
petitioners  of  freedom  of 
trade,  business  and  profession. 
Respondent-PMDC  is  under  statutory  obligation  to  secure  equal 
protection of law to all citizens. Reliance is placed on Tariq Khan 
Mazari  and  3  others  v.  Government  f  Punjab  through  Secretary 
Industries  and  3  others  (PLD  2016  Supreme  Court  778)  and 
Dossani Travels (Pvt.) Ltd and others v. Messrs Travels Shop (Pvt) 
Ltd. and others (PLD 2014 Supreme Court 1) 
16.  As  far  as  argument  of  learned  counsel  for  respondent-
PMDC, that impugned Regulations have been introduced in order 
to ensure quality medical education, is concerned, suffice it to say 
that  even  candidates  having  foreign  medical  qualification  have 
been required under Section 15 to undergo examination for the test 
of their professional ability and skill. The said Section clearly lays 
down 
that  after  clearing  NEB  examination, 
they  may  be 
recommended for registration as Practitioners in Pakistan. The case 
law, relied upon  by  learned  counsel  for  respondent-PMDC,  is  not 
relevant for the reasons that none of the said cases pertains to the 
issue  of  vires  of  impugned  Regulations  with  reference  to  Section 
15 of the PMDC Ordinance as amended in the year 2012 through 
the Amendment Act.   
 
17. 
I have also examined the recent judgment dated 12.01.2018, 
passed by the Hon’ble Apex Court in Civil Appeals No.3 and 4 of 
2018  etc  titled  Pakistan  Medical  and  Dental  Council  through  its 
President  v.  Muhammad  Fahad  Malik  etc.  In  the  said  esteemed 
judgment  of  the  august  Court  of  the  country  has  answered  the 
following questions mentioned in its Para No. 5: 
 
(a)  Whether  after 
the  18th  constitutional  amendment, 
whereby the medical profession was included in Part II of the 
Federal  Legislative  List,  the  laws,  especially,  the  Medical 
and  Dental  Council  (Amendment)  Ordinance,  2013  (the 
Ordinance  of  2013)  and  the  Ordinances  of  2014  and  2015 
(collectively  referred  to  as  the  ‘Amendment  Ordinances’), 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
23 
amending  the  Ordinance  of  1962,  were  validly  enacted  or 
the approval of the Council of Common Interests  (CCI) was 
necessary before promulgating those laws;  
 
(b)  Whether  the  approval  of  CCI  was  necessary  before 
making the Regulations of 2016;  
 
(c)  Whether  after  the  lapse/repeal  of  the  Amendment 
Ordinances,  the  amendments/substitution  made  thereby 
would survive or be gone with them; 
 
(d)  Whether  the  actions/activities  undertaken  by  PMDC 
during the period when the Amendment Ordinances were in 
the field and those undertaken after the lapse/repeal thereof, 
were protected/saved, and if yes, to what extent; 
and 
 
(e) 
the 
Amendment  Ordinances  have  gone  with  their  lapse/repeal, 
whether the members/President of the PMDC, existing prior 
to that, stood revived or not? 
the  amendments/substitutions  made  by 
If 
Although,  in  the  afore-referred  case,  the  Hon’ble  Supreme 
Court  has  held  that  the  Parliament  has  conferred  rule-making 
powers  to  the  PMDC  and  has  authorized  to  monitor  the  whole 
process  of  admission,  but  in  the  afore-referred  judgment,  vires  of 
the  Regulations  No.48  &  60  of  the  Regulations  of  2008  have  not 
been  examined  with  reference  to  the  amended  provisions  of 
Section  15  of  the  PMDC  Ordinance,  therefore,  this  Court  can 
safely  examine  the  vires  of  the  impugned  Regulations  viz  a  viz 
Section 15 ibid.  
18.  Furthermore,  right  to  life  /  livelihood  of  petitioners  and 
many  other  foreign  qualified  candidates  is  involved,  which  could 
not hang on  to  fancies of  individuals in  authority  and includes  all 
those  aspects  of  life  which  go  to  make  a  man’s  life  meaningful, 
complete and worth-living. By disallowing the petitioners to sit in 
NEB  Examination  in  violation  of  amended  Section  15,  the 
respondents  have  deprived  the  petitioners  to  earn  their  livelihood 
and  to  sustain  their  life  and  to  thrive  in  the  field  of  medicine. 
Prohibition  placed  on  the  petitioners  and  similarly  placed  foreign 
qualified  doctors  has  far  reaching  implications  and  amounts  to 
W. P. No.1775 of 2017 & connected cases 
 
24 
depriving  the  petitioners  of  their  right  of  livelihood,  guaranteed 
and protected under Section 15 of the Ordinance of 1962 read with 
Article  9  of  the  Constitution.  Reliance  is  placed  on  National 
Engineering Services Pakistan [Nespak] (Pvt.) Limited and others 
v.  Kamil  Khan  Mumtaz and  others  (2018  SCMR  211),  Suo  Moto 
Case No. 19 OF 2016 (2017 SCMR 683) and Pir Imran Sajid and 
others  v.  Managing  Director/General  Manager 
(Manager 
Finance)  Telephone  Industries  Of  Pakistan  and  others  (2015 
SCMR 1257) 
19. 
In  view  of  the  above  discussion,  impugned  Regulations  48 
and  60  of  the  Practitioners  Regulations  are  declared  illegal, 
unlawful and ultra vires the Section 15 read with Section 33 of the 
PMDC  Ordinance.  The  respondents  No.3  and  4  are  directed  to 
allow the petitioners to sit in the forthcoming NEB Examination (if 
not possible within three months from today) and if they are found 
in possession of sufficient knowledge and skill to be registered as 
practitioners for the purpose of the PMDC Ordinance, they shall be 
recommended to the Federal Government to issue a notification in 
their favour to register them and their qualification.  
20.  This and connected petitions are allowed in the above terms. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Announced in open Court on 09.10.2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Muhammad Sajid Mehmood Sethi) 
     
                Judge 
 
 
 
Judge        
      
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
*A.H.S./Sultan* 
   Judge  
 
