Stereo H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
Amjad Ali Khan 
Versus 
Ministry of Energy (Power Division,) Islamabad etc. 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
Date of hearing:             13.06.2018 & 14.06.2018  
 
 
Petitioner by: 
Respondents  by: 
Mr.  Waqar  A.  Sheikh,  Advocate 
assisted by  Mr. Babar  Suhail  and  Syed 
Faisal G. Meeran Advocates. 
 
Mian  Irfan  Akram,  Deputy  Attorney 
General assisted by Muhammad Nawaz 
Shah,  Assistant  Attorney  General  and 
Ch.  Imtiaz  Elahi,  Standing  Counsel 
with  Dr.  Aamer  Ahmed,  Additional 
Secretary,  Power  Division,  Govt.  of 
Pakistan, Mr. Ahmad Hussain Soomro, 
Section  Officer  (Law),  Ministry  of 
Energy, Power Division, Islamabad, for 
respondents No.1 & 2. 
 
for 
Mr.  Saad  Rasool  Advocate 
respondents  No.3  &  4  assisted  by  Mr. 
M.  Ali  Saleemi  and  Mr.  Shan  Saeed 
Ghuman  Advocates  with  Mr.  Tahir 
Mahmood  Hayat  Acting  M.D. 
NESPAK  and  Mr.  Faisal  Majeed, 
Company Secretary, NESPAK.  
 
 
 
 
Shujaat  Ali  Khan,  J:  -  Unnecessary  details  apart,  the 
facts, forming factual canvas of the instant petition, are that the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--2-- 
petitioner  joined  National  Engineering  Services  Pakistan  (Pvt.) 
Limited  (NESPAK),  as  Engineer  in  the  year  1979.  He  was 
appointed  as  Managing  Director  (M.D.)/Chief  Executive 
Officer  (C.E.O.)  NESPAK,  on  15.08.2013,  for  three  years. 
Before  expiry  of  his  first  term  of  three  years,  he  was  again 
appointed  as  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  for  second  term  of  three 
years  pursuant  to  recommendations  of  the  Board  of  Directors 
(hereinafter  to  be  referred  as  the  Board)  vide  letter,  dated 
28.06.2016.  Later  on,  Section  Officer  (Admn.)  Government  of 
Pakistan,  Ministry  of  Water  and  Power,  through  Office  Order, 
dated  10.04.2017  (the  impugned  Office  Order),  notified  the 
retirement  of  the  petitioner  w.e.f.  09.04.2017,  on  attaining  the 
age  of  superannuation.  Aggrieved  by  the  impugned  Office 
Order the petitioner has filed the instant petition. 
2. 
The  arguments  advanced  by  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  can  be  summed  up 
in 
the  words 
that  after 
appointment  as  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  for  second  term  for 
three years, the petitioner could not be terminated from the said 
post  on  account  of  superannuation;  that  according  to  the 
relevant  rules  the  Board  was  the  competent  authority  to  take 
action against the petitioner but the impugned Office Order was 
issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Energy  thus  the  same  was  not 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--3-- 
sustainable;  that  the  impugned  Office  Order  was  purportedly 
issued upon the approval of the Chairman of the Board but the 
said  authority  could  not  approve  any  action  against  the 
petitioner  as  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  singly  could  not  be 
considered  as  substitute  of  the  Board;  that  according  to  the 
policy  of  the  Federal  Government  the  M.D./C.E.O.  of  a  State 
owned company can be appointed till the age of 65 years; that 
as law permits appointment of a person as M.D. for second term 
the  petitioner  could  not  be  terminated  before  expiry  of  said 
term;  that  retention  of  shares  of  M.D./C.E.O  NESPAK  by  the 
petitioner  till  date  is  proof  positive  of  the  fact  that  he  was  not 
removed  under  due  course  of 
law; 
that 
in 
the  past, 
M.Ds/C.E.Os.  were  allowed  to  serve  the  company  beyond  60 
years of age; that as there was no mention of superannuation in 
the recommendations of the Board regarding appointment of the 
petitioner for second term, he could not be terminated from the 
office  of  the  M.D./C.E.O  on  account  of  superannuation;  that 
admittedly  salary  of  the  petitioner  was  revised  on  20.07.2017 
and  if  he  superannuated  on  09.04.2017  there  was  no  necessity 
for the competent authority to revise his salary package; that as 
the  impugned  Office  Order  has  been  issued by  the  Ministry  of 
Energy the real contest is between the petitioner and respondent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--4-- 
No.1 but while filing report and parawise comments respondent 
No.1  has  copied  those  submitted  by  respondents  No.3  &  4 
which speaks volumes about collusion of respondent No.1 with 
NESPAK  authorities  against  the  interest  of  the  petitioner;  that 
according  to  section  198  of  the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984, 
which  was  applicable  at  the  time  of  appointment  of  the 
petitioner as M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK, for second time, statutory 
period  of  C.E.O.  of  a  company  is  three  years,  thus,  the 
petitioner  could  not  be  removed  from  his  office  before 
completion  of  his  term;  that  criteria  to  remove  C.E.O.  of  a 
company  has  been  provided  under  section  202  of 
the 
Companies  Ordinance,  1984  but  the  same  was  not  followed  at 
the  time  of  issuance  of  the  impugned  Office  Order;  that  as  a 
matter of fact the petitioner was politically victimized inasmuch 
as  the  impugned  Office  Order  was  issued  by  the  Ministry  of 
Energy  on  the  directions  of  the  then  Prime  Minister  of  the 
country  who  otherwise  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  affairs  of 
NESPAK; 
that  as 
the  M.Ds./C.E.Os.  of  various  other 
companies  have  been  allowed  to  serve  beyond  the  age  of 
superannuation  it  is  clear  case  of  discrimination;  that  the 
impugned  Office  Order  also  offends  against  judgment,  dated 
30.07.2013, rendered by the Apex Court of the country in Civil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--5-- 
Petition  No.937/2013;  that  the  impugned  Office  Order  cannot 
sustain  in  view  of  section  202  of  the  Companies  Ordinance, 
1984  read  with  Article  45  of  the  Memorandum  of  Association 
of  NESPAK;  that  the  impugned  Office  Order  was  purportedly 
issued  by  the  Section  Officer  at  the  behest  of  Ministry  of 
Energy  but  the  said  authority  being  alien  to  the  hierarchy  of 
NESPAK had no authority to issue impugned Office Order; that 
mala-fide on the part of the respondents is also established from 
the  fact 
that 
they  have 
issued  fresh  advertisement  for 
appointment  against  the  post  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  just  to 
accommodate one  consultant  of  M/s  Habib  Rafiq  Construction 
Company  which  is  owned  by  a  person  having  close  relation 
with  the  persons  at  the  helm  of  affairs  in  the  previous  regime; 
that the impugned Office Order also offends against the spirit of 
decision,  dated  21.05.2013,  passed  by  the  august  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan,  rendered  in  C.M.A.  No.2386  of  2013  in 
CMA No.1564 of 2013; that the members of the present Board 
are  being  used  for  preparation  of  anti-dated  documents  to 
malign  the  petitioner;  that  if  the  termination  of  the  petitioner 
was  ratified  by  the  Board  on  the  grounds  other  than  that 
mentioned  in  the  impugned  Office  Order  it  could  have 
incorporated  those  grounds  in  the  minutes  of  the  relevant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--6-- 
meeting  but  as  the  respondents  could  not  bring  on  record 
anything  adverse  against  the  petitioner,  the  Board  purportedly 
simply  ratified  the  decision  due  to  the  pressure  exerted  by  the 
then  Prime  Minister;  that  inconsistent  attitude  of  respondents 
No.3  &  4  is  manifest  from  the  fact  that  on  the  one  hand  they 
have taken the objection that this petition is not maintainable in 
view of the bar contained under Article 212 of the Constitution 
of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  but  on  the  other  have 
dubbed NESPAK as a private limited company; that according 
to  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Apex  Court  of  the  country  in  the 
case  reported  as  Muhammad  Hanif  Abbasi  v.  Jahangir  Khan 
Tareen and others (PLD 2018 SC 114) when the foundation of 
an  act  is  void  ab  initio  the  superstructure  raised  on  the  basis 
thereof cannot sustain; that on the one hand respondents No.3 & 
4  are  of  the  view  that  terms  &  conditions  of  service  of  the 
petitioner  were  governed  under  NESPAK  Employees  Service 
Rules,  1973  but  on  the  other,  in  the  report  and  parawise 
comments, they have relied upon various policies of the Federal 
Government;  that  admittedly  penal  order  against  the  petitioner 
was  passed  on  the  initiative  of  the  then  Chief  Minister  Punjab 
despite  the  fact  that  NESPAK  being  a  federal  entity,  the 
provincial  authorities  had  no  role  in  its  functioning;  that  on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--7-- 
number  of  occasions  the  Apex  Court  of  the  country  has  held 
that the government, either Provincial or Federal, has no role in 
the  affairs  of  NESPAK  but  the  impugned  Office  Order  speaks 
volumes about the fact that respondents have scant regard to the 
verdicts  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan despite the 
fact that they have binding force upon all the organs of the State 
including  the  respondents  in  terms  of  Article  189  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973;  that  the 
impugned  Office  Order  also  offends  against  the  provisions  of 
Article  8  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973 read with section 199 of the Companies Ordinance, 1984 
and  Article  45  of  the  Memorandum  of  Association  of 
NESPAK;  that  case  of  the  petitioner  is  also  covered  under  the 
principles of locus poenitentiae and legitimate expectancy; that 
had the petitioner been aware about the fact that he was to serve 
till  his  age  of  superannuation  perhaps  he  might  have  not 
accepted his appointment as M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK for second 
term as he, being a technocrat, could join any other institution. 
Relies  on  Punjab  Cooperative  Board  of  Liquidation  through 
Chairman  v.  Muhammad  Ilyas  (PLD  2014  SC  471)  and 
Crescent  Sugar  Mills  &  Distillery  Ltd.,  Faisalabad  v.  central 
Board of Revenue, Islamabad and 2 others (PLD 1982 LHR 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--8-- 
Further,  in  support  of  his  stance  that  impugned  Office  Order 
was  issued  as  a  result  of  political  motivation,  learned  counsel 
has  produced  copy  of  communication,  dated  22.03.2017, 
addressed  by  Mr.  Fawad  Hassan  Fawad,  the  then  Secretary  to 
the Prime Minister to the Secretary Water & Power etc. 
3.  Mr.  Saad  Rasool  Advocate,  representing  respondents 
No.3  &  4,  while  defending  the  impugned  Office  Order,  states 
that  after  ratification  of  the  impugned  Office  Order  by  the 
Board  respondents  No.3  &  4  are  the  real  contestants,  thus,  the 
petitioner  cannot  take  any  premium  on  the  ground  that  the 
report  and  parawise  comments  filed  by  respondent  No.1  are 
copy  of  those  filed  by  respondents  No.3  &  4;  that  the  query 
raised  by  this  Court  in  order,  dated  14.12.2017,  has  not  been 
responded by the petitioner till date; that, as a matter of fact, the 
petitioner being favourite child of the previous government was 
appointed as M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK upon recommendations of 
the  then  Speaker,  National  Assembly,  namely,  Mr.  Ayyaz 
Sadiq,  thus,  he  has  no  cheeks  to  plead  that  his  removal  was 
politically  motivated;  that  as  the  petitioner  was  appointed 
M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  in  utter  disregard  to  the  law  on  the 
subject,  the  same  was  rightly  revoked  by  the  Board;  that  bona 
fide  of  NESPAK  authorities  is  apparent  from  the  fact  that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--9-- 
proceedings  have  already  been  initiated  against  the  persons 
involved in illegal appointment of the petitioner as M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK  without  publication  of  advertisement  in  the  national 
press;  that  as  the  petitioner  has  approached  this  Court  with 
unclean hands he is not entitled to equitable relief under Article 
199 of  the  Constitution of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 1973; 
that as the impugned Office Order was ratified by the Board, no 
exception  can  be  taken  against  the  respondents  on  the  ground 
that  the  termination  order  was  issued  by  an  incompetent 
authority;  that  as  the  petitioner  has  not  incorporated  even  a 
single  ground  in  this  petition  regarding  political  victimization, 
his  oral  assertion  cannot  be  entertained  at  this  stage;  that  the 
Board  enjoys  unfettered  powers  to  terminate  the  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK  as  per  criteria  laid  down  under  section  202  of  the 
Companies  Ordinance,  1984;  that  as  per  NESPAK  Employees 
Service  Rules,  1973  superannuation  age  for  all  employees, 
including the M.D./C.E.O, is 60 years, the petitioner could not 
be allowed to claim retention as M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK despite 
attaining  the  age  of  superannuation;  that  untoward  conduct  of 
the petitioner is apparent from the fact that he removed various 
items from M.D. House, DHA Lahore to his own house without 
knowledge/permission  of  the  Board,  proof  positive  whereof  is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--10-- 
that after unearthing of his illegal act he showed his readiness to 
purchase  the  articles  according  to  their  book  value;  that  as  the 
petitioner,  in  connivance  with  the  members  of  the  previous 
Board,  committed  grave  illegalities  resulting  into  colossal  loss 
to  NESPAK,  respondent  No.2  committed  no  illegality  while 
issuing  the  impugned  Office  Order;  that  with  a  view  to  save 
personal prestige of the petitioner, as per his request, the Board 
instead of terminating his services  with promptitude waited till 
the age of his superannuation, thus, the petitioner was estopped 
to challenge the impugned Office Order; that after repeal of the 
Companies  Ordinance,  1984,  future  events  in  NESPAK  are  to 
be  governed  under  the  Companies  Act,  2017  and  according  to 
section  187(4)  of  the  said  Act  government  has  the  power  to 
appoint/remove M.D./C.E.O. of a company, thus, the petitioner, 
even  in  case  of  his  success  in  this  petition,  would  not  be  in  a 
position  to  rejoin  as  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  against  wishes  of 
the  government;  that  mala-fide  on  the  part  of  the  petitioner  is 
manifest  from  the  fact  that  he  instead  of  promptly  challenging 
the impugned Office Order waited for five months before filing 
this  petition;  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  after  withholding  of  his 
terminal  benefits  by  NESPAK,  due  to  pendency  of  different 
inquiries  against  him,  the  petitioner  opted  to  file  this  petition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--11-- 
just to  use  it  as  a  pressurizing  leverage;  that  after  applying  for 
payment of terminal benefits the petitioner was estopped to file 
this  petition;  that  as  the  petitioner  was  serving  in  NESPAK  as 
Engineer  for  the  last  three  decades  he  could  not  claim  himself 
to be  a  technocrat; that  as the  Ministry  only  recommended  the 
removal  of  the  petitioner  from  the  post  of  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK  no  exception  can  be  taken  against  the  impugned 
Office  Order  especially  when  the  same  was  ratified  by  the 
Board;  that  members  of  the  present  Board,  after  coming  to 
know about the illegalities committed by the petitioner towards 
awarding of contracts at lower rates as compared to market, has 
already  initiated  criminal  as  well  as  departmental  proceedings 
against him; that upon having knowledge about misconduct on 
the  part  of  the  petitioner  as  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK,  the  then 
Chief  Minister,  Punjab  referred  the  matter  to  the  then  Prime 
Minister  of  the  country  and  as  a  result  of  the  said  move  the 
petitioner  was  removed  from 
the  post  of  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK; that it is of common knowledge that the subsequent 
decision of the Board approves/rescinds its earlier decision and 
the  simply  ratification  of  the  impugned  Office  Order  by  the 
Board  in  its  143rd  Meeting  was  supplemented  with  additional 
grounds  in  subsequent  Meetings  thus  the  termination  of  the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--12-- 
petitioner  on  account  of  superannuation  stood  merged  in  the 
subsequent  decisions  of  the  Board;  that  if  for  the  sake  of 
academic discussion and without conceding it in any manner it 
is presumed that respondent No.2 could not retire the petitioner 
on  account  of  superannuation,  the  Board  could  ratify  the 
Impugned Office Order in subsequent meeting as has been done 
in the case of the petitioner; that while removing the petitioner, 
procedure  laid  down  under  section  202  of  the  Companies 
Ordinance, 1984 was followed in letter and spirit; that as per the 
repealed Companies Ordinance, 1984 as well as the Companies 
Act,  2017,  M.D./C.E.O.  of  a  Company  can  be  removed  either 
by  3/4th  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Board  or  through 
special  resolution;  that  during  tenure  of  the  petitioner  as 
M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK,  900  appointments  were  made  by  him 
on  account  of  political  pressure  regarding  which  his  Personal 
Staff  Officer  maintained  list  containing  the  names  of  the 
appointees  and  those  who  recommended  them  and  that  since 
neither the government nor the Board is interested to retain the 
petitioner as M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK the sought for relief cannot 
be  granted.  In  support  of  his  contentions,  learned  counsel  has 
relied upon report of the In-house Inquiry Committee regarding 
regularization  of  contract  employees  by  the  petitioners,  report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--13-- 
of Fact Finding Inquiry Committee and copy of the application 
submitted  by  the  petitioner  for  payment  of  Provident  Fund, 
Gratuity and Leave Encashment.  
4.  Mian 
Irfan  Akram,  Deputy  Attorney  General, 
representing respondents No.1 & 2, in addition to adopting the 
arguments  advanced  by  the  learned  counsel  representing 
respondents  No.3  &  4,  states  that  since  before  expiry  of  his 
second  term  as  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  the  petitioner  reached 
the age of superannuation he was rightly retired by respondent 
No.2.  When  confronted  with  the  query  as  to  under  which  law 
the  Ministry  of  Energy  had  the  power  to  remove  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK, learned Law Officer has answered in negative. 
5. 
In  rebuttal,  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  while 
producing  a  statement  showing  the  dates  of  birth  of  previous 
M.Ds./C.E.Os.  NESPAK,  their  age  of  superannuation  and 
termination from the said post, argues that according to learned 
counsel representing respondents No.3 & 4 there was  only one 
exception  where  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  was  allowed  to  serve 
beyond  the  age of superannuation but the said assertion stands 
negated  from  the  fact  that  certain  other  persons  mentioned  in 
the  statement  were  allowed  to  continue  beyond  their  age  of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--14-- 
superannuation;  that  according  to  the  Companies  Ordinance, 
1984  statutory  period  of  contract  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  is 
three  years  but  the  respondents  with  a  view  to  distort  the 
interest  of  the  petitioner  are  relying  on  NESPAK  Employees 
Service Rules, 1973 which being subordinate legislation cannot 
be given precedence over  the  parent  enactment; that  according 
to  the  documents,  available  at  Page  No.65  of  the  report  and 
parawise  comments  filed  by  respondent  No.3,  the  post  of 
M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK does not figure there; that as a matter of 
fact terms & conditions of service of M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK are 
governed under NESPAK Chief Executive Service Rules, 1977, 
thus, the petitioner could not retire from  service upon attaining 
the age of superannuation; that the document available at Page 
No.61  with  the  report  and  parawise  comments  affirms  the  fact 
that 
the  petitioner  was  removed  from  service  prior 
to 
ratification  of  the  impugned  Office  Order  by  the  Board;  that  a 
glance  over  the  Minutes  of  Meeting  of  the  Board,  wherein 
termination  of  the  petitioner  was  purportedly  ratified,  shows 
that  the  total  number  of  members  did  not  participate  in  the 
meeting only for the reason that they were not ready to support 
the  impugned  Office  Order  illegally  issued  by  the  Ministry  of 
Energy; that as the petitioner was appointed for second term as 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--15-- 
M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK, under the provisions of the Companies 
Ordinance, 1984, the Companies Act, 2017 having prospective 
effect cannot be applied retrospectively to the disinterest of the 
petitioner;  that  the  present  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK,  who  is 
involved in criminal cases as well as proceedings before NAB, 
is  preparing  anti-dated  documents  just  to  protect  the  illegal 
Office  Order  issued  by  the  Ministry;  that  as  the  Minutes  of 
Meeting, referred by learned counsel for respondents No.3 & 4, 
were  not  in  the  knowledge  of  the  petitioner  same  were  not 
referred  in  this  petition;  that  the  falsity  of  the  allegations 
regarding removal of certain items by the petitioner from M.D. 
House, DHA, Lahore is established from the fact that the Board 
in  its  137th  meeting,  held  in  the  month  of  December,  2013, 
decided to sell the said house as a result the items, referred by 
learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.3  &  4,  were  shifted  by 
NESPAK  authorities  to  the  house  of  the  petitioner;  that  as  the 
articles  in  question  have  already  been  received  back  by 
NESPAK  authorities,  no  adverse  inference  can  be  drawn 
against the petitioner on the said count; that as per second Note 
under rule 6 of NESPAK Chief Executive Service Rules, 1977 
the petitioner was entitled to purchase the items on the basis of 
their  book  value,  thus,  no  illegality  was  committed  by  him 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--16-- 
while submitting application in that regard; that the petitioner is 
not  denying  the  fact  that  while  serving  as  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK  he  applied  for  payment  of  Gratuity  and  Provident 
Fund just for the reason that the same stands discontinued upon 
attaining  the  age  of  superannuation  by  an  employee  of 
NESPAK,  thus,  the  same  could  not  be  equated  with  terminal 
benefits as M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK; that according to Minutes of 
144th  Meeting  of  the  Board,  certain  inquiries  were  initiated 
against  the  petitioner  on the direction  of  the  Prime  Minister of 
the  country,  thus,  political  victimization  of  the  petitioner  is 
established  from  the  record;  that  according  to own  showing of 
the respondents the inquiry committee recommended penalty of 
censure against the petitioner, thus, the findings of said inquiry 
committee  could  not  be  used  as  an  edifice  to  terminate  the 
petitioner  from  the  office  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK;  that  the 
allegation  of  illegal  appointments  by  the  petitioner  is  not 
tenable for the reason that the petitioner made all appointments 
after fulfilling  requisite  codal  formalities;  that as the petitioner 
was not associated in any of the proceedings, allegedly initiated 
against  him  by  the  present  Board,  no  exception  can  be  taken 
against him on said score and that mala-fide on the part of the 
respondents is manifest from the fact that the persons inferior in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--17-- 
rank  to  the  petitioner  have  been  appointed  as  inquiry  officers 
regarding  which 
the  petitioner  came 
to  know  during 
proceedings in this petition and that as the petitioner has already 
been  given  clean  chit  by  National  Accountability  Bureau 
(NAB) no adverse opinion can be formed against him mere on 
account  of  initiation  of  proceedings  by  the  NAB.  Further,  in 
support of his contentions, learned counsel has placed on record 
copy  of  application,  dated  29.03.2017,  submitted  by  the 
petitioner  for  payment  of  Provident  Fund  and  Gratuity, 
statement  showing  names  of  the  previous  M.Ds./C.E.Os. 
NESPAK  with  their  respective  dates  of  birth,  superannuation 
and  tenure  of  their  service  and  letter,  dated  03.11.2017, 
addressed  by  the  Manager  Administration  NESPAK  to  the 
petitioner. 
6. 
I  have  heard 
learned  counsel  for 
the  parties  at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 
annexed  with  this  petition  as  well  as  those  submitted  by  the 
respondents  along  with  the  report  and  parawise  comments  in 
addition to the case-law cited at the bar. 
7. 
A  perusal  of  the  impugned  Office  Order  shows  that  the 
petitioner  was  terminated  from  the  post  of  M.D./C.E.O. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--18-- 
NESPAK  on  account  of  his  superannuation.  While  defending 
the  impugned  Office  Order,  learned  counsel  for  respondents 
No.3  &  4  has  referred  to  Rules  73  &  84  of  the  NESPAK 
Employees  Service  Rules,  1973,  according  to  which  age  of 
superannuation of employees of NESPAK, is 60 years. Perhaps, 
learned  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  respondents  No.3  &  4 
have  relied  upon  said  Rules  in  utter  disregard  to  the  fact  that 
admittedly  the  terms  &  conditions  of  service  of  the  petitioner 
were governed under NESPAK Chief Executive Service Rules, 
1977 wherein there is no stipulation regarding retirement of the 
M.D./C.E.O.  on  reaching  the  age  of  superannuation,  thus,  he 
could  not  be  terminated  on  account  of  superannuation  while 
relying upon NESPAK Employees Service Rules, 1973. 
Considering  from  another  angle,  a  cursory  glance  over 
the  Minutes  of  141st  Meeting  of  the  Board  shows  that  at  the 
time  of  reappointment  of  the  petitioner  as  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK  for  second  term  the  competent  authority  viz.  the 
Board  was  well  aware  about the  fact  that at the time  of  expiry 
of  his  first  tenure  as  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  the  petitioner  was 
59  years  and 4  months of age.  Reference  in  this  regard  can be 
made to the following  portion of the Minutes of 141st Meeting 
of the Board: - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--19-- 
that 
informed 
the  case 
“The  Board  was 
for 
reappointment of present Managing Director for another 
term  of  three  years  is  being  placed  before  them  for 
consideration  which  is  in  line  with  the  provision  of 
Companies  Ordinance  as  well  as  Government  Policy 
which enables the Chief Executive to get another term or 
terms  upto  the  age  of  65  years  whichever  is  earlier. 
However,  Mr. Amjad  Ali  Khan  would attain  the  age of 
59  years  &  4 months  on  the  expiry  of  his  present term 
and  is  eligible  for  another  term  of  three  years.” 
(emphasis provided). 
If  appointment  against  the  post  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK,  for 
second  term,  was  till  the  age  of  superannuation,  the  petitioner 
could  not  be  re-appointed.  Further,  in  its  meeting  wherein  the 
petitioner  was  recommended  for  appointment  against  the  post 
of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  for  the  second  term  of  three  years, 
the  Board  specifically  referred  to  the  Companies  Ordinance, 
1984 as well as other government policies regarding the age of 
M.D./C.E.O.  of  a  government  owned  company.  Moreover, 
according  to  section  198  of  the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984, 
M.D./C.E.O.  of  a  Company  is  to  be  appointed  for  three  years, 
thus, respondent No.2 acted mala fidely while issuing impugned 
Office  Order  regarding  termination  of  the  petitioner  from  the 
post  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  on 
account  of  his 
superannuation. 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, while deciding 
C.M.A. No.2386 of 2013 in CMA No.1564 of 2013 determined 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--20-- 
the procedure to be followed for appointment against the post of 
of M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK, with specific reference to Article 45 
of the Articles of Association read with sections 198 & 199 of 
the Companies Ordinance, 1984 relevant portion whereof reads 
as under: - 
It  may  be  noted  that  NESPAK  is  a  Company 
“3. 
incorporated  under  the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984. 
Therefore,  it  has  to  be  governed  in  accordance  with  its 
Articles  of  Association  and  the  Companies  Ordinance. 
Article  45  reproduced  above  makes  it  abundantly  clear 
that  the  Chief  Executive  is  to  be  appointed  by  the 
Directors  of  the  Company  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of  Sections  198  &  199  of  the  Companies 
Ordinance.  It  may  well  be  that  the  Government  owns 
100%  of  the  shareholding  of  NESPAK.  Under  the  law 
and by virtue of its shareholding, the Government has the 
authority to appoint Directors of NESPAK. Therefore, it 
is the job of the Directors to appoint the Chief Executive 
of  the  NESPAK.  If  in  the  past  the  Ministry  of  Water  & 
Power  has  been  interfering  in  the  appointment  of  the 
Chief  Executive,  this  appears  to  be  contrary  to  the 
provisions  of  the  Articles  of  Association  as  well  as 
Section 198 & 199 of the Companies Ordinance referred 
to  hereinabove.  It  also  appears  that  the  very  object  of 
creating  a 
liability 
company was to ensure that in the internal management 
of  the  Company,  there  is  no  direct  governmental 
interference.  Nonetheless 
the 
Government  cannot  override 
the  express  statutory 
provisions or the provisions of Article 45 of the Articles 
of Association reproduced above. 
the  past  practice  of 
separate/autonomous 
limited 
4.  Mr. Arshad Mehmood, Deputy Secretary, Ministry 
of  Water  &  Power  has  appeared  and  has  placed  on 
record  a  copy  of  decision  of 
the  Cabinet  dated 
10.01.2004  for  ease  of  reference  same  is  reproduced 
herein below:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--21-- 
of 
“No  appointment  should  be  made  on  Board  of 
Directors 
organization/company/ 
corporation  under  the  administrative  control  of 
Ministries/Divisions  without 
formal 
approval of the Prime Minister” 
seeking 
any 
The Deputy Secretary stated that the appointment of the 
Chief  Executive  NESPAK  was  to  be  made  pursuant  to 
the above decision of the Cabinet. This submission does 
not  reflect  a  proper  understanding  of  the  above  noted 
legal position as per law or Articles of Association. The 
Cabinet  decision  merely  sets  out  the  process  whereby 
the  Government  as  sole  shareholder  of  NESPAK  is  to 
appoint  the  Directors  on  the  Board  of  NESPAK, 
thereafter;  it  is  for  the  Board  to  appoint  the  Chief 
Executive  terms  of  Article  45  of  the  Articles  of 
Association,  reproduced  above.  Direct  nomination/ 
appointment  of  Chief  Executive  NESPAK  by  the 
Government  amounts  to  interference  in  its  indoor 
management  and  appointment  of  Chief  Executive  of 
NESPAK. The past practice, therefore, being volative of 
the  Articles  of  Association  and  of  the  Companies 
Ordinance, cannot be condoned. 
5. 
The  Board  shall  of  course,  proceed  to  act  in 
accordance with law and make the requisite appointment 
of  Chief  Executive  in  accordance  with  the  law  and 
Articles  of  Association  of  the  Company.  The  C.M.A., 
therefore,  stand  disposed  of  in  these  terms.”  (emphasis 
provided).” 
If  the  impugned  order  is  considered  on  the  touchstone  of  the 
afore-quoted  verdict  of  the  Apex  Court  of  the  country  it 
becomes  crystal  clear  that  the  same  was  issued  in  utter 
disregard to the aforesaid decision.  
8.  While controverting the stance of the learned counsel for 
respondents  No.3  &  4  that  only  to  the  exclusion  of  one 
M.D./C.E.O  all  previous  M.Ds/C.E.Os.  stood  retired  on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--22-- 
attaining  the  age  of  superannuation,  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  has  produced  a  list  containing  the  names,  dates  of 
birth,  dates  of  superannuation  and  dates  of  their  retirement  as 
M.Ds./C.E.Os.  NESPAK  contents  whereof  are  reproduced 
herein below: - 
Name 
D.O.B 
Tenure 
Date 
of 
Superannuation 
26.07.1983 
Sr. 
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Sh. 
Irshad 
Ahmad 
Brig (R) 
I.R. 
Shariff 
Amjad 
M. Agha 
Iftikhar 
Khalil 
Asif 
Saleem 
Sabir P. 
Chohan 
Dr. 
Amjad 
Pervaiz 
Karamat 
Ullah Ch. 
Asad I.A. 
Khan 
26.07.1923  02.08.1974 – 31.12.1983  
9 Years 
9.8.1926 
1.1.1984 – 31.12.1986  
3 Years 
09.08.1986 
25.10.1936  1.1.1987 – 31.12.1994  
25.10.1996 
 
 
 
8 Years 
1.1.1995 – 19.06.1998  
2-1/2 Years 
26.11.1998 – 03.11.2001  
2 Years 11 months 
05.11.2001 – 25.06.2004  
2 Years 8 Month 
Resigned 
 
 
28.03.1945  26.06.2004 – 27.03.2005  
28.03.2005 
9 Months 
12.10.1948  06.04.2005 – 05.04.2009  
12.10.2008 
4 Years 
05.04.1954  07.04.2009 – 15.08.2013 
05.04.2014 
 4 Years 
 
From  above  statement,  it  is  abundantly  clear  that  persons 
mentioned at Sr.No.1,2 & 8 continued as M.D./C.E.O NESPAK 
even after attaining the age of superannuation. Though learned 
counsel  representing respondents  No.3  and  4  assured  the  court 
to verify the antecedents of above persons but he did not turn up 
meaning thereby that prima facie contents of the list reproduced 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--23-- 
above are correct. In this scenario, not only the assertion of the 
learned counsel for respondents No.3 and 4 that in the past only 
one M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK was allowed to continue against the 
said  post  despite  reaching  the  age  superannuation  stands 
falsified  but  also  it  stands  proved  that  respondents  No.3  and  4 
did not brief their counsel properly seemingly with the intent to 
mislead the court.  
Since  a  number  of  previous  M.Ds./C.E.Os.  NESPAK 
were  allowed  to  continue  against  the  said  post  despite  their 
reaching  the  age  of  superannuation  but  the  petitioner  was 
removed  from  the  office  of  M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK  on  account 
of his superannuation, it is a case of sheer discrimination which 
is prohibited in view of the provisions of Article 4 & 25 of the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973.  While 
highlighting 
the 
importance  of  shield  provided 
in 
the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 against any 
kind of discrimination, the apex court of the country in the case 
reported as Habibullah Energy Limited and another v. WAPDA 
through Chairman and others (PLD 2014 SC 47) has inter-alia 
observed as under: - 
“28.  An  overview  of  the  judgments  reproduced  or 
referred to herein above leaves little room for doubt that 
it  is  now  a  well-settled  principle  of  law  that  all  public 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--24-- 
functionaries  must  exercise  public  authority,  especially 
while  dealing  with  the  public  property,  public  funds  or 
assets in a fair, just, transparent and reasonable manner, 
untainted  by  mala  fide  without  discrimination  and  in 
accordance  with law, keeping in view the Constitutional 
Rights of the Citizens………….” 
 
Admittedly,  affairs  of  NESPAK,  being  company,  were 
9. 
governed  under  its  Memorandum  and  Articles  of  Association. 
As  per  Article  45  of  the  Memorandum  of  Association, 
M.D./C.E.O.  was  to  be  appointed  under  section  198  read  with 
199  of 
the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984, 
thus,  neither 
respondent No.2 nor the Board could be allowed to alter terms 
& conditions of service of the petitioner in utter disregard to the 
provisions of the Companies Ordinance, 1984.  Moreover, I am 
unable to understand that how the rules framed by the Board for 
internal functioning of the NESPAK could be preferred over the 
provisions  of  the  parent  Statute  viz.  the  repealed  Companies 
Ordinance, 1984 and other relevant enactments. 
10. 
It  is  very  strange  to  note  that  during  the  course  of 
arguments  learned  counsel  representing  respondents  No.3  &  4 
has pleaded with vehemence that terms & conditions of service 
of M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK were to be determined by  the Board 
but  the  said  assertion  stands  nullified  from  the  contents  of 
report and parawise comments wherein not only a reference has 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--25-- 
been  made  to  number  of  policies  of  the  government  towards 
appointment of M.D./C.E.O. of a government owned company 
but have also placed reliance thereon. Relevant portion from the 
report and parawise comments filed by respondents No.3 and 4 
are reproduced herein below for ready reference:- 
(hereinafter 
“12.  That  it  is  essential  to  note  that  Cabinet  Division’s 
letter  dated  9th  October  2007,  bearing 
D.O. 
No.6/12/2007/RA-1 
the  “Government 
Policy”,  copy  of  which  has  been  attached  herewith  as 
Annexure C) standardized the terms of appointment and 
age 
limits  of  chairman/members  of  government 
regulatory authorities, corporations, autonomous bodies, 
commissions  etc.,  and  directed  compliance  of  the  same. 
Pertinently,  the  Government  Policy  was  referred  to  by 
the  Board  of  Directors/BOD  of  Respondent  No.3  in  its 
141th Meeting on 27th June, 2016. 
13.  That  the  terms  of  the  Government  Policy  were 
endorsed  by  Respondent  No.3/NESPAK,  pursuant  to  the 
issuance  of  circular  dated  26th  April,  2016,  bearing 
No.F.NO.TA.10(1)/2015.Admn (hereinafter the “Circular 
dated  26.04.2016”,  copy  of  which  has  been  attached 
herewith as Annexure D), which expressly directed, inter 
alia,  to  take  “further  necessary  action”  concerning  the 
applicability of the Government Policy. 
14.  That  the  term  and  age  limit  for  the  provision  of 
services  by  a  Managing  Director/Chief  Executive  of 
Respondent  No.3  was  governed  in  accordance  with 
National  Engineering  Services  Pakistan  (Pvt.).  Limited 
Chief  Executive  Service  Rules,  1977  (hereinafter  “1977 
Rules”, a copy of which have been attached herewith as 
Annexure  E),  as  well  as  National  Engineering  Services 
Pakistan  (Pvt.)  Limited  Employees  Service  Rules,  1973 
(hereinafter  “1973  Rules”,  a  copy  of  which  have  been 
attached herewith as Annexure F). 
17.  That  furthermore,  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission of Pakistan (SECP) issued the Public Sector 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--26-- 
Companies (Appointment of Chief Executive) Guidelines, 
2015  (hereinafter the  “2015 Guidelines”, copy of which 
has  been  attached  herewith  as  Annexure-I),  which  also 
codifies  the  procedure and manner for appointment of a 
Chief  Executive  of  public  sector  company.  Specifically, 
Guideline  No.2(1)  of 
the  2015  Guidelines  allows 
companies to “appoint its chief executive” in accordance 
with  the  procedure  specified  in  Schedule-I  of  the  2015 
Guidelines,  and  Guideline  No.2(2)  of 
the  2015 
Guidelines  directs  every  company  to  “ensure  that  the 
articles of association of the company state the terms and 
conditions of appointment of its chief executive.”      
In the presence of such unequivocal references and reliance by 
respondents  No.3  and  4  on  the  policies/guidelines  issued  by 
various quarters from time to time, in their report and parawise 
comments,  oral  assertion  of  learned  counsel  representing 
respondents  No.3  &  4  that  as  the  Board  was  competent  to 
determine/alter 
the 
terms  &  conditions  of  service  of 
M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK,  including  the  age,  does  not  carry  any 
weight  especially  when  the  policies/guidelines  referred  by 
respondents No.3 & 4 permit continuation of M.D./C.E.O. of a 
State owned company till the age of 65 years. 
11.  While  highlighting  alleged  omissions  and  commissions 
on  the  part  of  the  petitioner,  learned  counsel  representing 
respondents  No.3  &  4  has  argued  that  as  the  petitioner  was 
found  involved  in  theft  of  articles  purchased  for  M.D.  House, 
DHA,  Lahore,  he  was  rightly  removed  from  the  office  of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--27-- 
M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK.  Perhaps,  learned  counsel  has  raised 
such plea in oblivion of the fact that according to second  Note 
under rule 6 of NESPAK Chief Executive Service Rules, 1977 
the  Chief  Executive  has  the  option  to  purchase  furnishings  at 
book value. The relevant part of the referred Rule is reproduced 
herein below: - 
“Note:    The  furnishings  will become the property of  the 
Chief Executive after five  years of their provision. If the 
Chie Executive leaves Company service before five years, 
he  will  be  allowed  to  purchase  the  furnishings,  at  book 
value.” 
Moreover, according to the Minutes of the 140th Meeting of the 
Board  besides  other  items  the  matter  regarding  sale  of  M.D. 
House,  DHA,  Lahore  also  came  under  discussion.  While 
dealing with the said question the Board  inter-alia observed as 
under: -        
“The  Managing  Director  informed  the  Board  that 
NESPAK had purchased a furnished residential property 
located  217,  Block-U,  Defence  Housing  Authority, 
Lahore in July, 2009 at a cost of Rs.41.50 million for the 
former Managing Director as his residence. 
During  the  137th  Meeting  of  the  Board  of  Directors 
(BOD)  held  on  December  21,  2013  the  Board  decided 
that  the  above  property  may  be  sold  out  after  adopting 
due procedures. 
As  directed  by  the  BOD  the  Management  constituted  a 
Committee of Senior Executives of NESPAK for the sale 
of  NESPAK  property  and  instructed  to  follow  PPRA 
procedure.  The  Committee  held  the  various  meetings 
wherein deliberations were made on the legal formalities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--28-- 
and it was decided to prepare a Valuation Report of the 
property and also seek legal advice from NESPAK Legal 
Advisers,  M/s  Zafar  and  Associates.  The  legal/tax 
Advisor  informed  the  Committee  that  as  per  FBR  rules, 
this  sale  would  be  considered  as  an  auction  and 
additional 10% advance income tax will be levied to the 
buyer.  The  price  as  per  Valuation  Report  was  Rs.61.5 
Million.  
The  Committee  held  series  of  meetings  whereby  it  was 
decided to advertise the sale of the above property as per 
reserve  price  quoted 
the  Valuation  Report. 
Accordingly, 
in 
newspapers  on  (i)  November  30,  2014  (ii)  January  25, 
2015 (iii) February 15, 2015 and (iv) October 04, 2015” 
(emphasis provided) 
advertisements  were 
published 
in 
From above, it is abundantly clear that the Board decided to sell 
the  M.D.  House  on  21.12.2013,  thus,  the  assertion  of  the 
petitioner  that  after  putting  the  M.D.  House  for  sale  the 
NESPAK authorities themselves shifted the furnishing items in 
question  to  his  house,  has  due  worth.  Further,  it  is  not 
believable  that  the  petitioner  shifted  the  articles  in  question 
forcibly  without  the  knowledge  of  the  competent  authority 
especially  when  different  persons  were  deputed  for  their 
maintenance and safe custody. 
12.  During  the  course  of  arguments,  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  urged  that  as  the  acclaimed  removed  articles  were 
received  back  by  the  NESPAK  authorities  the  said  fact  cannot 
be used to defend the impugned Office Order. In support of his 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--29-- 
contention,  learned  counsel  has  referred  to  communication, 
dated 03.11.2017, addressed by Mr. Nadeem Arshad, Manager 
Administration,  NESPAK  to  the  petitioner  operative  part 
whereof reads as under: - 
“Miscellaneous  items  of  MD  House  (217-U,  DHA, 
Lahore)  were returned to NESPAK on two occasions by 
your representative Mr. Sajid Baig Mirza in presence of 
our Manager General Services on the following dates: - 
1.  October 17, 2017 (copy attached as Exhibit-A) 
2.  October 25, 2017 (copy attached as Exhibit-B) 
…………………………………………” 
The afore-quoted portion from the communication addressed by 
the  Manager  Administration  to  the  petitioner  conspicuously 
clears that most of the items, which were allegedly removed by 
the  petitioner  from  MD  House,  D.H.A.  Lahore,  were  received 
back by the NESPAK authorities, thus, the petitioner could not 
be proceeded against on the basis of said fact. 
13.  Now  coming  to  the  contention  of  learned  counsel 
representing  respondents  No.3  &  4  regarding  estoppel  against 
the  petitioner  on  account  of  submission  of  application  for 
payment of terminal dues, I am of the view that as Gratuity and 
Provident  Fund  become  payable  on  reaching  the  age  of 
superannuation  by  a  public  servant  the  petitioner  submitted 
application  for  payment  of  said  dues,  thus,  it  cannot  be 
considered  as  application  for  terminal  dues  against  the  post  of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--30-- 
M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  especially  when  the  petitioner  was  not 
appointed as M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK from outside rather he was 
serving  in  NESPAK  at  the  time  of  his  appointment  as 
M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  for  the  first  time  as  well  as  for  the 
second time. 
14.  Amazingly, in the impugned Office Order a reference has 
been  made  to  the  decision  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board 
regarding 
retirement  of 
the  petitioner  on  account  of 
superannuation. According to own  showing of  the  respondents 
the  Board  had  sole  power  to  appoint/terminate  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK but issuance of impugned Office Order by respondent 
No.2  smacks  mala-fide  on  his  part.  The  malice  and  colourful 
exercise  of  powers  by  respondent  No.2,  as  a  result  of  the 
political  pressure,  is  also  apparent  from  the  contents  of  the 
communication,  dated  22.03.2017,  addressed  by  Mr.  Fawad 
Hassan  Fawad, the then  Secretary  to  the Prime  Minister to the 
Secretary,  Government  of  Pakistan,  Ministry  of  Water  & 
Power,  Islamabad  which  for  convenience  of  reference  is 
reproduced herein below:- 
“PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE 
ISLAMABAD 
     ***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--31-- 
      Subject:  FACT 
FINDING 
REPORT-
PERFORMANCE  OF  MANAGING  DIRECTOR 
NESPAK 
INQUIRY 
 
      9.  
On  the  orders  of  the  Prime  Minister  at  para  8  of 
the  summary  an  inquiry  was  conducted  by  a  two  member 
Committee comprising Mr. Shahid Ashraf Tarar, Chairman 
NHA and Dr. Aamir Ahmad, Additional Secretary, Ministry 
of Commerce. A fact finding report has now been received 
in the matter, which is placed at Annex.A. 
      10. 
The  Prime  Minister  has  seen  and  is  pleased  to  
approve  the  recommendations  of  the  Committee,  given  at 
para 7 of the instant report. Further, he is pleased to direct 
that, notwithstanding any orders, decisions or contracts to 
the  contrary  at  the  level  of  NESPAK,  its  board  or  any 
Division,  Mr.  Amjid  Ali,  MD  NESPAK  should  retire  from 
service  on  the  date  of  his  superannuation  i.e.  9th  April, 
2017. 
Further, necessary action may be taken forthwith. 
       11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After  going 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sd/- 
 
    (Fawad Hasan Fawad) 
Secretary to the Prime Minister 
 
22.03.2017” 
through 
the  contents  of 
the  above-quoted 
communication  even  a  person  of  ordinary  prudence  would 
reach the conclusion that removal of the petitioner from the post 
of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  was  politically  motivated,  thus,  the 
same was not sustainable. 
15. 
 
It is of common knowledge that NESPAK being a 
federal  entity,  the  Provincial  Government,  including  the  Chief 
Minister, has no power to interfere in its affairs but addressing 
of  communication,  dated  05.12.2016,  maligning  character  of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--32-- 
the petitioner alongwith other officers/officials of NESPAK, by 
the  then  Chief  Minister,  Punjab,  to  the  then  Prime  Minister  of 
Pakistan  stands  proof  of  the  fact  that  all  the  proceedings 
initiated  against  the  petitioner  were  result  of  political  move 
initiated by his adversaries who had an axe to grind against the 
interest  of  the  petitioner  for  the  reason  that  he  refused  to 
succumb  to  their  illegitimate  demands.  The  communication, 
under discussion, inter alia contain following averments:- 
“4.  NESPAK  management,  after  delaying  the  matter 
for  months  and  on  insistence  of  client,  initiated  an 
inquiry  in  September  2016  and  fixed  responsibility  on 
lower  level  officials.  A  number  of  people  directly 
involved  in  preparation  of  fake  construction  record  and 
payments  were  not  even  inquired.  On  coming  to  know 
that  Government  is  considering  initiating  criminal 
proceeding  against  the  contractor  and  NESPAK  staff, 
MD NESPAK has also reportedly lodged a complaint in 
police in first week of November. Such a callous attitude 
towards  a  project  of  national  importance  cannot  be 
accepted.” (emphasis provided) 
According to the highlighted portion of the afore-quoted extract 
from  the  communication  addressed  by  the  then  Chief  Minister 
to  the  Prime  Minister  it  is  evident  that  the  petitioner,  after 
coming  to  know  about  certain  omissions  and  commissions  on 
the  part  of 
the  officers/officials  of  NESPAK, 
initiated 
proceedings  against  them.  Had  the  petitioner  was  part  of  the 
group  of  officers/officials  of  NESPAK  involved  in  unethical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--33-- 
activities,  there  was  no  compulsion  for  him  to  lodge  criminal 
case against the hoodlums. 
16.  During 
the  course  of  arguments, 
learned  counsel 
representing  respondents  No.3  &  4 has took  categorical stance 
that as the petitioner was supposed to serve the company till his 
superannuation  he  had  no  cheeks  to  challenge  his  termination 
from  the  post  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK.  In  support  of  his 
contentions,  learned  counsel  has  referred  to  an  advertisement 
floated by NESPAK authorities for recruitment against different 
posts, including M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK. It is not the case of the 
respondents that the provisions of sections  198 & 199 ibid are 
not  applicable  to  the  case  of  the  petitioner  rather  their  case  is 
that  the  Board  has  decided  that  in  future  the  maximum  age  of 
M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK would be 60 years. This Court has least 
concern about the powers of the Board to change the selection 
criteria  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK,  however,  the  said  power  of 
the  Board  is  subject  to  provisions  of  the  parent  statute  viz. 
repealed  Companies  Ordinance,  1984  and  the  Companies  Act, 
2017.  As  the  petitioner  was  re-appointed  as  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK  for  second  term  under  the  provisions  of  Companies 
Ordinance, 1984 his rights and obligations were to be governed 
under the said Statute and any enactment promulgated, later on, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--34-- 
could  not  be  made  operative  retrospectively  to  his  disinterest. 
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  while  dealing  with 
somewhat similar question in the case of Badshah Gul Wazir v. 
Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  through  Chief  Secretary 
and others (2015 SCMR 43) has inter-alia held as under: - 
“11.  That  the  Act  was  enacted,  "to  provide  for  the 
establishment of the office of the Provincial Ombudsman 
for  protection  of  the  rights  of  the  people,  ensuring 
adherence  to  the  rule  of  law,  redressing  and  rectifying 
any injustice done to a person through maladministration 
to  ensure  good 
suppress  corrupt  practices  and 
governance"  (the  first  preamble  of 
the  Act).  The 
Provincial  Ombudsman  has  been  empowered 
to 
investigate  maladministration  (section  9),  therefore,  to 
ensure that the watchdog status of the Ombudsman is not 
compromised  and  he  does  not  succumb  to  pressure  the 
legislature in its wisdom provided statutory protection to 
the  person  holding  the  office  of  Provincial  Ombudsman 
and  envisaged  his/her  removal  only  if  he/she  was  guilty 
of  misconduct  or  was  physically  or  mentally 
incapacitated  to  perform  his/her  duties  as  provided  in 
sub section (2) of section 6 and its proviso. The appellant 
was  appointed  as  the  Provincial  Ombudsman  for  a 
period  of  four  years  and  no  step  for  removal  of  the 
appellant was taken pursuant to subsection (2) of section 
6,  therefore, he  must  be  allowed  to  continue  to hold  the 
office  till  the  expiry of  such term.  The amendment  made 
to  section  4  does  not  contain  any  element  whereby  the 
appointment  of 
the  appellant  as  a  Provincial 
Ombudsman  was  revoked,  repealed,  withdrawn  or 
cancelled; the silence of the legislature in this regard is 
significant.  Therefore,  in  the  absence  of  legislation,  the 
tenure of the appellant cannot be curtailed in the exercise 
of  administrative  powers,  but,  unfortunately,  the  same 
was  purported  to  be  done  by  the  first  impugned 
Notification.  The  Act  grants  security  of  tenure  to  the 
office of the Ombudsman and it cannot be undone by the 
Government as such power the legislature in its wisdom 
has  not  conferred  upon  the  Government.  Consequently, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--35-- 
the first and second impugned Notifications are declared 
to  be  in  contravention  of  the  Act,  illegal,  without 
jurisdiction  and  of  no  legal  effect.  The  appellant  will 
continue to hold the office of the Provincial Ombudsman 
for a period of four years which shall commence from the 
date  he  took  the  oath  of  office  of  the  Provincial 
Ombudsman  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa 
to 
notification dated 29th December, 2010. Resultantly, the 
purported appointment of respondent No. 4 as Provincial 
Ombudsman,  at  a  time  when  the  appellant  was  holding 
such  office,  is  also  declared  to  be  illegal,  without 
jurisdiction and of no legal effect.” 
pursuant 
The  afore-quoted  portion  of  the  judgment  of  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court answers the query raised by learned counsel for 
respondents No.3 & 4 that the petitioner has no vested right to 
complete his tenure of appointment for second term against the 
post  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  after  reaching  the  age  of 
superannuation.  
17.  During  the  course  of  arguments,  learned  counsel  for 
respondents  No.3  &  4  has  adopted  specific  plea  that  as  future 
happenings are to be governed under the Companies Act, 2017, 
in case the impugned Office Order is set aside, the government 
has the power to remove M.D./C.E.O. of a government owned 
company  in  terms  of  section  187(4)  of  the  Companies  Act, 
2017  and  the  petitioner  would  again  be  terminated.  Perhaps 
learned  counsel  for  the  respondents  has  raised  such  contention 
in oblivion of the fact that as appointment of the petitioner was 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--36-- 
made  under  the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984  his  terms  & 
conditions  regarding  second  tenure  were  to  be  governed  under 
the said  Ordinance  irrespective  of its  repeal  by  the  Companies 
Act,  2017.  Further,  section  509  of  the  Companies  Act,  2017 
deals  with  repeal  and  saving  clause  which  for  convenience  of 
reference is reproduced herein below: - 
“509.  Repeal  and  savings.—(1)  The  Companies 
Ordinance,  1984  (XLVII  of  1984),  hereinafter  called  as 
repealed  Ordinance,  shall  stand  repealed,  except  Part 
VIIIA consisting of sections 282A to 282N, from the date 
of coming into force of this Act and the provisions of the 
said  Part  VIIIA  along  with  all  related  or  connected 
provisions of the repealed Ordinance shall be applicable 
mutatis mutandis to Non-banking Finance Companies in 
a  manner  as  if  the  repealed  Ordinance  has  not  been 
repealed:  
Provided  that  repeal  of  the  repealed  Ordinance 
shall not-  
(a)  affect  the  incorporation  of  any  company 
registered or saved under repealed Ordinance; or  
(b)  revive  anything  not  in  force  at  the  time  at 
which the repeal take effect; or  
(c)  affect  the  previous  operation  of  the  repealed 
Ordinance  or  anything  duly  done  or  suffered 
thereunder; or  
(d)  affect  any  right,  privilege,  obligation  or 
liability  acquired,  accrued  or  incurred  under  the 
said repealed Ordinance; or  
(e)  affect any  penalty  imposed, forfeiture made  or 
punishment  awarded  in  respect  of  any  offence 
committed under the repealed Ordinance; or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--37-- 
any 
affect 
inspection, 
(f) 
investigation, 
prosecution, legal proceeding or remedy in respect 
of  any  obligation,  liability,  penalty,  forfeiture  or 
punishment as aforesaid, and any such inspection, 
investigation,  prosecution,  legal  proceedings  or 
remedy  may  be  made,  continued  or  enforced  and 
any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be 
imposed, as if this Act has not been passed.  
(2)  Notwithstanding 
Ordinance-  
the  repeal  of 
the  repealed 
(a) any document referring to any provision of the 
repealed  Ordinance  shall  be  construed  as 
referring,  as  far  as  may  be,  to  this  Act,  or  to  the 
corresponding provision of this Act;  
(b)  all  rules,  regulations,  notification,  guideline, 
circular,  directive,  order  (special  or  general)  or 
exemption  issued,  made  or  granted  under  the 
repealed  Ordinance  shall  have  effect  as  if  it  had 
been 
the 
corresponding  provision  of 
this  Act  unless 
repealed, amended or substituted under this Act;  
issued,  made  or  granted  under 
(c)  any  official  appointed  and  anybody  elected  or 
constituted  under 
repealed  Ordinance  shall 
continue  and  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been 
appointed, elected or constituted, as the case may 
be, under the corresponding provision of this Act;  
(d)  all 
funds  and  accounts  constituted  or 
maintained under the repealed Ordinance shall be 
deemed to be in continuation of the corresponding 
funds  and  accounts  constituted  or  maintained 
under this Act;  
(e)  every  mortgage  and  charge  recorded  in  any 
register or book maintained at any office under the 
repealed  Ordinance  shall  be  deemed  to  have  be 
recorded in the register or book maintained under 
the corresponding provisions of this Act;  
(f)  any  licence,  certificate  or  document  issued, 
made  or  granted  under  the  repealed  Ordinance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--38-- 
shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  issued,  made  or 
granted under this Act and shall, unless cancelled, 
in  pursuance  of  any  provisions  of  this  Act, 
continue to be inforce until the date specified in the 
licence, certificate or documents.  
(3) The mention of particular matters in this section or in 
any  other  section  of  this  Act  shall  not  prejudice  the 
general  application  of  section  6  of  the  General  Clauses 
Act,  1897  (X  of  1897),  with  regard  to  the  effect  of 
repeals.  
(4)  After  the  commencement  of  this  Act,  the  expression 
Companies  Ordinance,  1984(XLVII  of  1984)  and  any 
referring  sections  thereof,  used  in  any  law  for  the  time 
being in force including all administered legislation and 
rules, regulations and guidelines made thereunder, shall 
be 
read  as  Companies  Act,  2016  along  with 
corresponding provisions of Companies Act, 2016 unless 
the context requires otherwise.” (emphasis provided) 
As per clause (d) of sub section 1 of section 509 ibid any right 
privilege, obligation or liability acquired or accrued in favour of 
any  person  under  the  repealed  law  shall  not  be  affected. 
Moreover, the Apex Court of the country, while dealing with a 
right, obligation, privilege or right of a person accrued under a 
repealed  law  in  the  case  of  Shahida  Bibi  and  others  v.  Habib 
Bank  Limited  and  others  (PLD  2016  SC  995)  has  inter-alia 
held as under: - 
“8. 
In  any  event,  it  is  indeed  settled  law,  in  line  with 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, that any act 
done or any action taken or purported to have been done 
or taken under or in pursuance of the repealed Act, shall 
in  so  far  as  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of 
new Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding  provisions  of  the  new  Act.  A  litigant  is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--39-- 
provided  protection  with  respect  to  any  right,  privilege, 
obligation  or  liability  acquired  or  accrued  under  any 
enactment  repealed.  Substantive  laws  are  only  very 
exceptionally  amended  with  retrospective  effect  for  the 
eminently  sensible  reason  that  one  does  not  change  the 
goal  posts  midgame.  Unless  a  Legislature  enacts  a  new 
law  (the  1997  Act)  to  be  specifically  retrospective,  and 
that  too with great particularity of language, the Courts 
are not to assume retrospectivity. There is nothing in the 
repealing  section,  i.e.  section  28  of  the  1997  Act,  to 
indicate  that  the  Legislature  meant  for  such  Act  to  be 
applied  with  retrospective  effect.  Therefore  the  question 
of retrospective application of the provisions of the 1997 
Ordinance  (and  the  1997  Act)  does  not  arise,  as  the 
execution  proceedings  in  the  case  at  hand,  though 
instituted under the 1984 Ordinance, stood transferred to 
the Banking Court established under the 1997 Ordinance 
and then the 1997 Act, and in the absence of any saving 
clause as mentioned above, the relevant provisions of the 
1997  Ordinance  (and  then  the  1997  Act)  were  to  apply 
on  the  date  of  transfer  of  such  proceedings  and 
thereafter. The Banking Court is not required to proceed 
de novo, rather from the stage which the proceedings had 
reached  immediately  prior  to  the  transfer  as  envisaged 
by 
(reproduced 
hereinabove).” 
section  7(7)  of 
the  1997  Act 
18.  Learned  counsel  representing  respondents  No.3  &  4  has 
repeatedly  argued  that  as  the  Board  has  the  authority  to 
validate/rescind  its  previous  decision  or  to  modify  the  same, 
thus,  superannuation  of  the  petitioner  was  validated  by  the 
Board in its subsequent meetings inter-alia observing that as he 
was 
involved 
in  activities  prejudicial 
to  conduct  of  a 
government  servant  he  was  removed  from  service.  It  is  very 
ironical that respondent No.2 issued impugned Office Order on 
account of superannuation of the petitioner which was validated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--40-- 
by  the  Board  in  its  143rd  meeting  without  any  addition  or 
deletion.  Nobody  can  question  the  authority  of  the  Board  to 
appoint/remove  M.D./C.E.O.  of  a  Company  but  when  it  opted 
to ratify a decision, which otherwise was not tenable in the eye 
of law, it could not be allowed to add on certain  allegations in 
the  subsequent  meetings  just  to  portray  the  petitioner  as 
persona  non  designata  or  to  create  evidence  in  support  of  an 
illegal  order  passed  by  an  incompetent  authority.  Moreover, 
after termination of the petitioner from the post of M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK  said  matter  could  not  be  reopened  while  mingling  it 
with  other  matters  as  has  been  done  by  the  Board  in  its  144th 
Meeting and onwards. 
19. 
It  is  case  of  the  respondents  that  due  to  involvement  of 
the petitioner in unlawful activities causing loss to the National 
Exchequer worth millions of rupees he could not be allowed to 
continue  as  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK.  While  asserting  so,  the 
respondents  did  not  bother  to  go  through  the  contents  of  the 
impugned  Office  Order  as  well  as  findings of  the  Board  while 
ratifying  the  said  decision.  Had  there  been  anything  adverse 
against the petitioner the same was to be confronted to him. As 
no such material was either referred by respondent No.2 while 
issuing the impugned Officer Order or by the Board at the time 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--41-- 
of ratifying the impugned Office Order said assertion cannot be 
given any credence.  
20.  According to learned counsel for respondents No.3 and 4, 
the  members  of  the  previous  Board,  which  appointed  the 
petitioner  for  second  term,  being  in  league  with  him,  the 
blunders committed by him could not be unveiled. It cannot be 
believed  that  the  Board,  which  is  chaired  by  the  Secretary, 
Ministry of Energy, was so influenced by the petitioner that any 
omission  or  commission  on  his  part  was  let  unnoticed. 
Moreover,  at  the  time  of  re-appointment  of  the  petitioner  for 
second term the Board inter-alia resolved as under: - 
“The Board appreciated the achievements of Mr. Amjad 
A.  Khan  during  his  existing  term  and  considering  his 
excellent  performance  which  is  reflected  truly  in  the 
control  of  financial  matters  and  all  time  high  Business 
acquisition  and  unprecedented 
income  and  profit, 
approved  his  re-appointment  for  another  term  of  three 
years, effective 16th of August 2016.” 
When the assertion of the respondents regarding involvement of 
the  petitioner  in  any  subversive  activities  is  considered  while 
putting  in  juxtaposition  to  the  afore-quoted  conclusion  of  the 
Board the same proves to be abortive.  
21.  As per learned counsel representing respondents No.3 & 
4  the  petitioner  was  removed  from  the  office  of  M.D./C.E.O. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--42-- 
NESPAK  on  account  of  findings  of  the  inquiry  committee.  A 
perusal  of  findings  of  the  inquiry  committee  reveals  that  the 
committee  recommended  penalty  of  censure  against 
the 
petitioner. If the competent authority was not in agreement with 
the  recommendations  of  the  inquiry  committee  either  it  could 
order for de novo proceedings or issue a Show Cause Notice to 
the  petitioner  for  imposition  of  higher  penalty  as  compared  to 
that recommended by the Inquiry Committee but in the instant 
case instead of following the due procedure, the Prime Minister 
of the country through its Secretary recommended for removal 
of  the petitioner. The  said  recommendations being  violative of 
the  judgment  of  the  Apex  Court  of  the  country  reported  as 
Secretary  Government  of  Punjab  (C&W)  and  others  vs. 
Ikramullah  and  5 others  (2013  SCMR  572)  cannot be  blessed 
with stamp of authenticity. 
22. 
It  is  high  time  to  note  that  the  documents  produced  by 
learned counsel for the petitioner are suggestive of the fact that 
the government  both  Provincial  as  well  as  Federal is  intruding 
in 
the  affairs  of  NESPAK  which  otherwise  being  an 
independent  entity  was  immune  from  such  interference.  While 
taking care of  the interference of the government in the affairs 
of  NESPAK  the  Apex  Court  of  the  country  in  order,  dated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--43-- 
21.05.2013,  passed  in  C.M.A.  No.2386  of  2013  in  CMA 
No.1564 of 2013 has inter-alia concluded as under: - 
the  Companies  Ordinance 
“*******If  in  the  past  the  Ministry  of  Water  &  Power 
has  been  interfering  in  the  appointment  of  the  Chief 
Executive,  this  appears  to  be  contrary  to  the  provisions 
of  the  Articles  of  Association  as  well  as  Section  198  & 
199  of 
to 
hereinabove.  It  also  appears  that  the  very  object  of 
creating  a 
liability 
company was to ensure that in the internal management 
of  the  Company,  there  is  no  direct  governmental 
interference.  Nonetheless 
the 
Government  cannot  override 
the  express  statutory 
provisions or the provisions of Article 45 of the Articles 
of Association reproduced above.” 
the  past  practice  of 
separate/autonomous 
referred 
limited 
23.  The  acts  of 
the  Provincial  as  well  as  Federal 
Government,  as  depicted  from  the  documents  tendered  by 
learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner,  during  the  course  of 
arguments, are proof positive of the fact that they are interfering 
in the affairs of NESPAK in sheer violation of the judgment of 
the  Apex  Court  of  the  country  justifying  interference  by  this 
Court.  
24.  The political motivation in the case of the petitioner right 
from  the  communication  addressed  by  then  Chief  Minister, 
Punjab to the then Prime Minister of the country and removal of 
the  petitioner  by  respondent  No.2  instead  of  the  Board  is 
established  beyond  any  shadow  of  doubt.  While  dealing  with 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--44-- 
political victimization of a public servant, the Apex Court of the 
country in the case of Syed Mahmood Akhtar Naqvi and others 
v.  Federation  of  Pakistan and  others  (PLD  2013  SC  195)  has 
inter-alia observed as under: - 
“12.  This  Court,  in  a  number  of  precedents  has, 
interpreted  and  emphasized  these  very  principles,  some 
of which  need to be reiterated at this point. Before that, 
however, we may note the precept and rule of public trust 
which forms the basis of this area of the law. This court 
has  repeatedly  observed  that  "functionaries  of  the  State 
are  fiduciaries  of  the  people  and  ultimately  responsible 
to  the  people  who  are  their  pay  masters."  [Syed  Yousaf 
Raza  Gillani v. Assistant Registrar, (PLD 2012 SC 466) 
affirming  Muhammad  Yasin  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan]. 
Most  recently, in the case relating to dual nationality of 
Parliamentarian,  we  have  reiterated  that  "all  State 
authority  is  in  the  nature  of  a  'sacred  trust'  and  its 
bearers  should 
fiduciaries" 
(Mehmood  Akhtar  Naqvi  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan, 
Const.  P.  5/2012).  One  of  the  implications  of  this 
concept, highlighted in the case-law considered below, is 
that  the  matter  of  tenure,  appointment,  posting,  transfer 
and  promotion  of  civil  servants  cannot  be  dealt  with  in 
an arbitrary manner; it can only be sustained when it is 
in  accordance  with  the  law.  Moreover,  the  use  of  the 
words  'in  the  public  interest'  in  such  matters  are  not 
fatuous or pointless, but emphasis the fiduciary nature of 
orders  relating  to  tenure,  posting  etc.  Thus  a  proposed 
decision which deviates from the accepted or rule-based 
norm  without  proper  justification,  can  be  tested  on  the 
touchstone of a manifest public interest.” 
 
therefore  be  seen  as 
25.  The inconsistent attitude of respondents No.3 & 4 is also 
apparent  from  the  fact  that  while  filing  report  and  parawise 
comments  initially  they  challenged  the  maintainability  of  this 
petition on the ground that the same is barred in view of Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--45-- 
212  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973 
whereas subsequently they took the stance that NESPAK, being 
a  private  limited  company,  instant  petition  is  not  maintainable 
as  it  does  not  fall  within  the  definition  of  person  as  defined 
under Article 199(5) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan,  1973.  Both  these  stances  are  contrary  to  each  other. 
Further the bar contained under Article 212 of the Constitution 
of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, being applicable in cases 
of  civil  servants  only,  is  not  attracted  to  the  instant  petition. 
Moreover,  as  NESPAK  is  exclusively  owned  by  the  Federal 
government, it falls within the definition of a person as defined 
under Article 199(5) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan,  1973.  Reliance  in  this  regard  is  placed  on  the  case 
reported  as  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Co.  Ltd.  through 
Chairman v. Iqbal Nasir and others (PLD 2011 SC 132). 
26.  Learned  counsel  representing  respondents  No.3  &  4  has 
also  challenged  maintainability  of  this  petition  on  the  point  of 
laches.  It  is  admitted  position  that  an  aggrieved  person  is 
supposed to approach this Court in terms of Article 199 of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  within 
reasonable time and according to the majority view reasonable 
time  has  been  defined  as  six  months.  The  impugned  Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--46-- 
Order  was  issued  on  10.04.2017  whereas  the  instant  petition 
was filed on 06.09.2017, thus, the same is not hit by laches. 
27. 
It is not in dispute that all the decisions of the Board were 
being  notified 
through  Company  Secretary  whereas 
the 
impugned  Office  Order  was  issued  by  the  Section  Officer 
(Admn.), Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Water & Power, 
Islamabad.  To  meet  with  the  procedural  flaws,  on  the  part  of 
respondent No.2, learned counsel for respondents No.3 & 4 has 
argued  that  as  the  impugned  Office  Order  was  ratified  by  the 
Board,  no  procedural  flaw  can  be  used  to  nullify  the  same.  In 
this regard, I disagree with learned counsel for the respondents 
for the reason that when the basis of an action is held untenable, 
the  subsequent  superstructure  cannot  be  allowed  to  remain  in 
field mere on account of ratification by the competent authority. 
Reliance  in  regard  is  placed  on  the  case  reported  as  Justice 
Khurshid Anwar Bhinder and others v. Federation of Pakistan 
and  another  (PLD  2010  SC  483).  Further,  the  Apex  Court  of 
the country, while dealing with the issue under discussion in the 
case  of  Muhammad  Hanif  Abbasi  (Supra)  has  inter-alia 
observed as under: - 
“6. 
******We are conscious of the principle that there 
is no  estoppel against law and that the point of law can 
be  allowed  to  be  raised  at  any  stage  of  the  proceeding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--47-- 
and no valid structure can be built upon a foundation of 
the law which is void ab initio………………” 
28.  Leaned counsel for respondent No.3 & 4 has vociferously 
argued that as the petitioner was re-appointed for second term, 
without  issuance  of  proclamation  in  the  national  press,  the 
prospective  contestants  were  deprived  of  their  right  to  contest 
against the post in question, thus, the impugned Office Order is 
immune from interference by this court. Had the petitioner been 
removed  from  the  office of  M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK  on  account 
of any procedural flaw/irregularity towards his appointment the 
same had to be incorporated in the impugned  Office Order. As 
no  such  reason  was  mentioned  either  in  the  impugned  Office 
Order, terminating the petitioner from the office of M.D./C.E.O 
NESPAK, or by the Board while ratifying the same, impugned 
Office  Order  cannot  be  allowed  to  hold  the  field  especially 
when  mala-fide  and  malice  on  the  part  of  the  persons  at  the 
helm  of  the  affairs  in  the  Federal  as  well  as  Provincial 
Government is floating on the surface. 
29.  As  per  section  202  of  the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984 
M.D./C.E.O. of a company can be removed by 3/4th majority of 
members  of  the  Board  or  through  a  special  resolution. 
According  to  communication,  dated  11.04.2017,  addressed  by 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--48-- 
the  Company  Secretary,  NESPAK  to  all  the  members  of  the 
Board the total number of members were 12 out of which only 
six  participated  in  143rd  meeting  of  the  Board  wherein  the 
Office  Order  regarding  termination  of  the  petitioner  from  the 
office  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  was  validated.  If  for  the  sake 
of  academic  discussion  it  is  presumed  that  after  validation  of 
the  impugned  Office  Order  by  the  Board  in  its  143rd  meeting 
the  procedural  flaw  stood  cured,  even  then  no  sanctity  can  be 
attached  to  the  said  validation  as  out  of  12  members  only  six 
participated  in  the  proceedings,  thus,  the  condition  of  3/4th 
majority of the members of the BOD as stipulated under section 
202 ibid remained unfulfilled.  
30. 
It is also imperative to note that according to Minutes of 
143rd  meeting  of  the  Board  the  official  members  including  the 
Secretary, Ministry of Water and Power (the Chairman) did not 
participate. Prima-facie, it seems that the official members, who 
were  high-profiled  officers  of  the  Federal  government,  did  not 
participate  in  the  meeting  knowing  fully  well  that  the  Office 
Order, validation whereof was sought, was not supported by the 
relevant law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--49-- 
31.  The political interference in the matter of the petitioner is 
also manifest from the fact that while dealing with Item No.2 in 
the  agenda  of  143rd  Meeting  of  the  Board  it  was  concluded  as 
under: - 
“As  per  discussion  held  with  the  BOD  members  before 
the  board  meeting  on  the  receipt  of  inquiry  report  and 
directions of the competent authority thereon, the board 
reviewed its earlier decision taken in 141st meeting of the 
Board  held  on  27-06-2016  regarding  grant  of  extension 
of  further  three  (03)  years  to  Mr.  Amjad  Ali  Khan,  Ex-
MD,  NESPAK,  and  unanimously  ratified  Office  Order 
No.7(30)/2012-NESPAK  dated  10.4.2017  affecting  the 
retirement  of  Mr.  Amjad  Ali  Khan,  Ex-Managing 
Director,  NESPAK  w.e.f.  09-04-2017  on  attaining  the 
age of superannuation.” (emphasis provided). 
The above quoted minutes of 143rd meeting of the Board make 
it  crystal  clear  that  the  Board  did  not  take  up  the  matter  of  its 
own rather the ratification regarding retirement of the petitioner 
was  result  of  direction  issued  by  the  competent  authority. 
Astonishingly, on the one hand, NESPAK authorities are of the 
view that the competent authority in the matter of the petitioner 
was the Board and on the other members of the Board resolved 
that  they  were  going  to  ratify  the  termination  of  the  petitioner 
from  the  post  of  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK  as  a  result  of  the 
direction  issued  by  the  competent  authority.  If  the  Board  had 
the exclusive competence in the matter of the petitioner, how its 
members could refer to any other competent authority. The said 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--50-- 
fact also smacks some foul play on the part of the respondents 
towards the termination of the petitioner. 
32.  To cover up the blunder committed by respondent No.2, 
while  issuing  the  impugned  Office  Order,  learned  counsel  for 
respondents No.3 & 4 has argued that as the petitioner himself 
requested  that  he  be  allowed  to  continue  as  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK to save his reputation, he was allowed to continue till 
the  age  of  superannuation  despite  the  fact  that  irregularities  of 
grave  nature  on  his  part  were  unearthed  by  the  competent 
authority. The  assertion of  learned  counsel  for the  respondents 
cannot  be  given  any  weightage  inasmuch  as  if  the  petitioner 
was  involved  in  alleged  subversive  activities  the  competent 
authority, which at present seems to be much worried about loss 
to  the  National  Exchequer,  had  to  act  promptly.  As  nobody 
initiated any proceedings against the petitioner till the issuance 
of impugned  Office Order the said  assertion  cannot be used to 
the disadvantage of the petitioner who otherwise has succeeded 
to  establish  that  his  removal  from  the  post  of  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK was politically motivated. 
33.  One  of 
the  allegations 
levelled  by 
the  NESPAK 
authorities  against  the  petitioner  was  that  he  regularized 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--51-- 
services  of  50  contract  employees  without  following  the  due 
process.  According  to  the  documents  placed  on  record  by 
learned  counsel  for 
the  petitioner 
the  said  matter  was 
thoroughly probed by NAB authorities and after considering all 
limbs of the case has concluded that not only regularization of 
the contract employees was in line with the rules on the subject 
but  also  the  petitioner  made  recruitment  against  various  posts 
after  fulfilment  of  all  codal  formalities.  Thus,  the  said  fact 
cannot be used against the petitioner. 
34. 
Indubitably, the petitioner was appointed for second term 
for  three  years  w.e.f.  16th  of  August  2016  in  view  of  his 
exceptional output portrayed in the Minutes of 141st Meeting of 
the  Board,  quoted  above,  thus  he  had  lawful  expectancy  to 
complete  his  second  term  of  three  years  especially  when  no 
omission  or  commission  was  pointed  out  on  his  part  in  the 
impugned  Office  Order.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  while  dealing  with 
the  principle  of 
legitimate 
expectancy,  in  the  case  reported  as  Secretary,  Agriculture 
Government  of  the  Punjab,  Lahore  and  others  v.  Muhammad 
Akram (2018 SCMR 349) has inter-alia observed as under: -  
“*****The  respondent  having  been  notified  as  an 
accountant  and  having served as such  for  more than  18 
long  years,  cannot  now  be  denied  his  perks  and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--52-- 
privileges  as  such.  The  payments  of  such  perks, 
privileges  and  benefits  are  also  protected  under  the 
doctrine  of 
the 
circumstances  the  respondent  was  wholly  justified  in 
expecting such payments.” 
expectancy,  as 
legitimate 
in 
Admittedly, after his appointment as M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK for 
the second term the petitioner performed his duties till issuance 
of the impugned Office Order. In this backdrop, he was entitled 
to complete his second tenure of three years until and unless he 
was  removed  by  the  Board  while  following  the  procedure  laid 
down in the repealed Companies Ordinance, 1984.  
35.  During 
the  course  of  arguments 
learned  counsel 
representing  respondents  No.3  &  4  has  put  much  emphasis  on 
the  fact  that  through  the  instant  petition  the  petitioner  has 
sought review of the order passed by the Executive. This Court 
is cognizant of the fact that in routine the Superior Courts rarely 
interfere in the decisions of the executives, however, when the 
impugned act of the executive is proved to be result of political 
victimization  or  is  found  to  be  tainted  with  malice  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Superior  Courts  to  take  care  of  such  action 
cannot be abridged. Reliance in this regard is placed on the case 
reported as Ghulam Rasool v. Government of Pakistan through 
Secretary, Establishment Division, Islamabad and others (PLD 
2015 SC 6).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--53-- 
36.  The emphasis of the learned counsel appearing on behalf 
of respondents No.3 & 4 on the fact that after ratification of the 
impugned  Office  Order  by  the  Board,  any  procedural  flaw  on 
the  part  of  respondent  No.2  stood  cured,  is  not  worth 
consideration for the reason that the Apex Court of the country 
in  the  cases  reported  as  Unair  Ali  Khan  and  others  v.  Faiz 
Rasool  and  others  (PLD  2013  SC  190)  and  Maulana  Abdul 
Haque  Baloch  and  others  v.  Govt.  of  Balochistan  through 
Secretary  Industries  and  Mineral  Development  and  others 
(PLD  2013  SC  641)  has  held  that  an  act  done  by  an  alien 
cannot be ratified by the relevant authority.  Insofar as the case 
in  hand  is  concerned,  respondent  No.2  having  no  connectivity 
with  the  appointment/removal  of  the  M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK 
could not issue the impugned Office Order, thus, the subsequent 
ratification/validation  of  such  order  does  not  bring  it  to  the 
category of legitimate order.   
37.  During  hearing  of  the  matter  learned  counsel  appearing 
on behalf of respondent No.3 & 4 took specific plea that as the 
petitioner  succeeded  to  get  appointment  against  the  post  of 
M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK 
for 
second 
term 
on 
the 
recommendations  of  Mr.  Ayyaz  Sadiq,  the  then  Speaker 
National Assembly, thus, he was rightly removed by respondent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--54-- 
No.2  whose  decision  was  ratified  by  the  Board.  The  said 
assertion  of  the  learned  counsel  instead  of  lending  any  help  to 
his clients is suggestive of the fact that the persons at the helm 
of affairs in the Federation in the previous regime misused their 
portfolio  to  intrude  in  the  affairs  of  NESPAK  which  being 
contrary to the observations/findings of Hon’ble Supreme Court 
of  Pakistan  in  the  afore-quoted  decisions  deserves  to  be  dealt 
with iron hands.  
38.  This  Court  fully  agrees  with  learned  counsel  for 
respondents  No.3  & 4  that  a  person  who seeks equity  must do 
equity.  As  far  as  the  case  in  hand  is  concerned,  the  petitioner 
has  challenged  the  impugned  Office  Order  mainly  on  the 
ground that respondent No.2 had no authority to issue the same,  
thus, the said principle is not attracted in the case in hand.  
39.  Learned  counsel  representing  respondents  No.3  &  4 
argued  with  vehemence  that  as  no  ground  regarding  political 
victimization  of  the  petitioner  was  incorporated  in  the  Writ 
Petition the oral assertions canvassed by the learned counsel for 
the petitioner  at the bar cannot be  entertained.  In  this regard,  I 
do  not  subscribe  to  the  view  point  of  learned  counsel  for 
respondents No.3 and 4 for the reason that when the assertion of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--55-- 
the  petitioner  regarding  his  political  victimization  is  supported 
by  the  relevant  documents,  referred  supra,  this  Court  can  take 
into consideration the oral submissions of the parties as well.  
40.  According  to  the  Companies  Ordinance,  1984  the 
members  of  the  Board  of  a  State  owned  Company  are  to  be 
nominated  by 
the  Federal  Government.  Admittedly, 
the 
members  of  the  Board,  who  recommended  the  petitioner  for 
appointment against the post of M.D./C.E.O. NESPAK for both 
terms, were appointed by the Federal Government, thus, at this 
stage  respondents  No.3  & 4  cannot  claim  that the  Members of 
the  said  Board  connived  with  the  present  petitioner.  If  any 
member  of  the  Board  was  involved  in  illegal  activities  the 
Federal Government could remove him but inaction on the part 
of  the  Federal  Government,  at  the  relevant  time,  suggests  that 
allegation  of  petitioner’s  connivance  with  the  members  of  the 
previous Board is result of some after-thought. 
41.  Learned  counsel  for  respondents  No.3  &  4  emphatically 
argued  that  as  the  petitioner  was  found  involved  in  illegal 
appointments  in  NESPAK  on  the  recommendations  of  the 
political  figures,  he  was  rightly  removed  from  the  office  of 
M.D./C.E.O.  NESPAK.  To  fortify  his  contention,  learned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--56-- 
counsel  has  referred  to  a  list  purportedly  prepared  by  the  then 
Personal Staff Officer to the present petitioner but has failed to 
produce  the  same  before  the  Court,  thus,  no  exception  can  be 
taken against the petitioner on the said count.  
42. 
It is very paradoxical that during the proceedings in  this 
petition  the  stance  of  the  respondents  was  that  only  the  Board 
had 
the  competence 
to  appoint/remove 
the  M.D./C.E.O. 
NESPAK.  Though  learned  counsel  representing  respondents 
No.3 & 4 addressed the Court at great length but failed to refer 
to  any  rule  or  regulation  where-under  the  government  could 
refer  the  matter  to  the  Board  after  passing  an  order  regarding 
termination of M.D./C.E.O. It is well entrenched by now that an 
act requires to be done in a particular manner  the same should 
be  done  in  that  manner  only  and  any  deviation  from  the 
procedure  provided  in  the  relevant  statute  would  amount  to 
incurable  illegality  justifying  judicial  review  by  the  Superior 
Courts. Reliance in this regard is placed on the case reported as 
Chaudhry Shujat Hussain v. The State (1995 SCMR 1249). 
43.  For what has been discussed above, I have no hesitation 
to  hold  that  respondent  No.2  had  no  jurisdiction  to  issue  the 
impugned  Office  Order.  Further,  the  acclaimed  ratification  of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.65400 of 2017. 
 
 
 
--57-- 
the impugned Office Order by the Board was not in consonance 
with the spirit of section 202 of the Companies Ordinance, 1984 
rather  the  same  was  result  of  political  influence  justifying 
interference  by  this  Court  in  exercise  of  its  Constitutional 
jurisdiction  vested  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973.  Consequently,  instant 
petition  is  accepted,  and  the  impugned  Office  Order,  being 
illegal,  unlawful  and  without  lawful  authority  is  set  aside.  No 
order as to costs. 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Announced in Open Court today i.e. 28.06.2018. 
 
Approved for Reporting. 
     Judge 
G.R.* 
 
