Stereo HCJAD 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. F.A.O No.35 /2017 
Khurram Farooq 
Versus 
Bank Al-Falah Limited 
and another  
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Decision: 
03.10.2018 
Appellant by: 
Respondents by: 
Mirza  Muhammad  Nadeem  Asif, 
Advocate. 
  
Sheikh Nadeem Ashraf, Advocate. 
 
Rana Shaher Yar, Research Officer, 
Research  Center,  Lahore  High 
Court.  
 
 
 
JAWAD HASSAN, J.- Through this Appeal, filed under 
Section  22  of  the  Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances) 
Ordinance, 2001 (the “Ordinance”), the Appellant has challenged the 
validity  of  impugned  order  dated  01.06.2017  (the  “Impugned 
Order”)  passed  by  the  Banking  Court,  Bahawalpur  (the  “Banking 
Court”)  whereby  the  Petition  for  Leave  to  Appear  (the  “PLA”)  was 
rejected 
and 
the 
case  was 
fixed 
for 
evidence  of 
the 
plaintiff/Respondents. 
 
Brief Facts 
2. 
The  facts  tersely  revealed  from  the  Appeal  are  that  the 
Respondent No.1 filed a suit for recovery of Rs.1,482,058.97 against 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
2 
the  Appellant  and  the  Respondent  No.2  alongwith  costs  of  funds 
through  the  sale  of  described  mortgage  property.  The  Appellant 
appeared  and  filed  PLA  under  Section 10  of  the  Ordinance  for  grant 
of unconditional leave to defend the suit by raising certain objections 
regarding  the  maintainability  of  the  suit  etc.  After  hearing  both  the 
parties,  the  said  PLA  was  dismissed  by  the  Banking  Court  and  the 
case was fixed for evidence of the plaintiff. Hence, this Appeal. 
 
Submissions of the Appellant 
3. 
The learned counsel for the Appellant, inter alia, contended that 
the  Impugned  Order  is  against  the  law  and  facts;  that  the  Banking 
Court  has  not  passed  the  Impugned  Order  keeping  in  view  the  facts 
and circumstances of the case in its true perspective; that the Banking 
Court  has  not  applied  its  judicial  mind  while  passing  the  Impugned 
Order as it is neither a judgment nor a decree which is against Section 
10 of the Ordinance; that the Banking Court, while rejecting the PLA 
of  the  Appellant,  has  not  taken  into  consideration  that  the  matter 
required  recording  of  evidence,  as  such  the  PLA  was  to  be  accepted 
and  the  Appellant  should  have  been  afforded  an  opportunity  to 
produce his evidence.      
 
Submissions of the Respondents  
4. 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondent  No.1 
supported the Impugned Order and submitted that the PLA was rightly 
dismissed  by  the  Banking  Court  because  it  was  not  fulfilling  the 
requirements  of  the  Section  10  of  the  Ordinance;  that  the  PLA  was 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
3 
dismissed  by  the  Banking  Court  after  examining  all  the  documents 
appended with the plaint as well as the grounds taken by the Appellant 
in the PLA. 
 
5.  We  have  heard  the  arguments  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
parties and perused the record. 
 
Conversion of Appeal into Writ Petition. 
6. 
At  the  very  outset,  before  going  into  the  merits  of  the  case,  it 
has  been  observed  here  that  this  Appeal  has  been  filed  against  the 
order dated 01.06.2017 in which the Banking Court after dismissal of 
the PLA filed by the Appellant has fixed the case for evidence of the 
Plaintiff,  as  such  on  the  face  of  it,  this  is  an  interim  order.  We  are 
mindful of the fact that Section 22(6) of the Ordinance clearly reveals 
that the Appeal against the interim order is not maintainable.  For the 
sake  of  brevity  the  said  Subsection  is  reproduced  below  and  is  as 
follows: 
“(6) No  appeal,  review  or  revision  shall  lie  against  an 
order  accepting  or  rejecting  an  application  for  leave  to 
defend,  or  any  interlocutory  order of  the Banking  Court 
which  does  not  dispose  of  the  entire  case  before  the 
Banking  Court  other  than  an  order  passed  under  sub-
section  (11)  of  section  15  or  sub-section  (7)  of  section 
19.” 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
4 
In this view of the situation, the instant Appeal was not maintainable 
but  to  meet  the  ends  of  justice  and  to  thrash  out  the  core  issues 
involved in the matter, this Court has been bestowed with the powers 
to  convert  the  instant  Appeal  into  the  writ  petition  and  or  treat  one 
kind of proceeding into another. We will fortify our view on this point 
while  seeking  guidance  from  the  recent  judgment  of  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan passed in the case titled Mian Asghar Ali 
v. Government of Punjab through Secretary (colonies) BOR, Lahore 
and  others  (2017  SCMR  118)  wherein  it  has  been  held  that  “No 
fetters or bar could be placed on the High Court and or the Supreme 
Court to convert and treat one type of proceedings into another.” The 
Similar issue was also brought before the Hon’ble Division Bench of 
the Sindh High Court in case titled Asif Kudia and others v. Messrs 
KASB  Bank  Limited  and  others  (2015  CLC  1734)  in  which  the 
Division Bench has held as under: 
 
 
“16.       It has  been held time and  again by the  Hon'ble 
Supreme Court and High Courts that the Superior Courts 
have  inherent  and  Constitutional  powers  to  remedy  and 
correct the wrongs committed by subordinate courts, and 
the  High  Court  has  vast  powers 
in 
its 
inherent 
jurisdiction  not  only  to  mould  the  relief,  but  also  to 
convert an Appeal, Constitutional Petition or Revision to 
any  other  remedy.  The  law  cited  on  this  point  by  the 
learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  is  fully  applicable  in 
the  instant  appeals.  In  this  context,  reference  may  be 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
5 
made  to  the  case  of  Syed  Ghazanfar  Hussain  through 
Legal  Heirs  and  others  v.  Nooruddin  and  others,  2011 
CLC  1303,  decided  by  a  learned  Division  Bench  of  this 
Court  which  has  a  binding  effect  on  us.  We  may  also 
refer  to  Mst.  Mubarak  Salman  and  others  v.  The  State, 
PLD  2006  Karachi  678,  which  is  also  binding  on  us, 
wherein  it  was  held  inter  alia  by  a  learned  Division 
Bench  of  this  Court  that  once  it  has  been  found  that 
Presiding Officers of the Courts have abused the process 
of  the  Court,  then  it  is  incumbent  upon  the  Superior 
Courts, and it is one of the duties of the Superior Courts, 
to  correct  such  wrongs  of  the  subordinate  courts  by 
exercising  whichever  powers  available  with  them  either 
inherent,  supervisory,  revisional  or  Constitutional 
powers,  either  on  the  application  of  any  party  or  under 
its suo motu jurisdiction ; the reason being that it was the 
act  of  the  Court  done  in  the  abuse  of  process  of  Court, 
that  is  to  be  corrected  by  the  Court  itself  or  by  the 
Superior  Court  as  soon  as  it  is  brought  to  its  notice 
through any source; and, except for the superior Courts, 
there is no other authority which can correct such act of 
the subordinate courts. 
  
17.       Regarding the objection as to the maintainability 
of  these  appeals,  we  have  already  held  that  the  learned 
Banking Court failed to exercise the jurisdiction that was 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
6 
vested in it by law, and the modes of service adopted by it 
were not in accordance with the mandatory provisions of 
section  9(5)  ibid.  Therefore,  the  ex  parte  order  passed 
against  the  appellant  and  the  order  dated  7-8-2010 
impugned in 1st  Appeal No.121 of 2010 are liable to be 
set  aside.  In  Habib  Bank  Limited  (2011  CLD  1571) 
supra,  a  learned  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  was 
pleased  to  allow  the  Constitutional  Petition  against  an 
interlocutory  order  passed  by  the  Banking  Court,  by 
holding  that  no  appeal  or  Constitutional  Petition  is 
provided  in  the  Ordinance  against  an  interlocutory 
order, but this Court in its extraordinary jurisdiction has 
power  to  correct  the  wrong,  particularly  where  no 
efficacious remedy is available to the aggrieved party. In 
Messrs  United  Bank  Limited  (2012  CLD  1556)  supra, 
wherein  an  interlocutory  order  passed  by  the  Banking 
Court  for  consolidation  of  two  Suits  was  challenged,  a 
Division  Bench  of  this  Court  held  that  Constitutional 
jurisdiction of this Court can be invoked by an aggrieved 
party  who  has  no  other  remedy,  and  Constitutional 
Petition  was  maintainable  as  the  Banking  Court  had 
failed  to  exercise  the  jurisdiction  which  was  vested  in  it 
by  the  Ordinance.  Both  the  above  cases  decided  by  the 
Division  Benches  of  this  Court  are  binding  on  us.  In 
Bank  of  Punjab  (PLD  2013  Lahore  487)  supra,  it  was 
held  by  a  learned  Division  Bench  of  the  Lahore  High 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
7 
Court that Constitutional Petition would be maintainable 
in exceptional circumstances in order to meet the ends of 
justice  where  the  petitioner  could  show  a  blatant 
illegality  in  the  impugned  order,  such  as  the  Banking 
Court  had  not  followed  the  express  mandate  of  law  or 
had  exercised 
its  powers  outside 
the 
jurisdiction 
conferred upon it.” 
 
Hence,  in  view  of  above,  we  convert  the  instant  Appeal  into  writ 
petition and proceed into the matter towards the merits of the case.  
 
Moot Point in the Petition 
7. 
The perusal of record as well as the Impugned Order reveal that 
after  hearing  arguments  from  both  the  asides,  the  Banking  Court 
dismissed the PLA filed by the Appellant and did not decree the suit 
forthwith  rather  fixed  the  same  for  evidence  of  the  Respondent 
No.1/Defendant which is against the Section 10(11) of the Ordinance 
which clearly mention that when the PLA is rejected or dismissed, the 
Banking Court shall forthwith proceed to pass a judgment and decree. 
But in this case the Banking Court instead of proceeding to decree the 
suit forthwith, fixed the same for evidence of the Plaintiff. Hence, the 
moot  point  in  the  instant  Petition  is  whether  the  Banking  Court  can 
adjourn the case for evidence after dismissing the PLA or should pass 
a judgment forthwith and if so, with application of judicial mind. 
 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
8 
8. 
The  Banking  Court  is  established  under  Section  5  of  the 
Ordinance  having  powers  under  Section  6  of  the  Ordinance.  The 
Banking  Court  can  decide  the  cases  filed  under  Section  9  or  other 
provisions  of  the  Ordinance.  In  case  the  Banking  Court  rejects  the 
PLA,  it  has  to  proceed  to  pass  judgment  and  decree  forthwith  but  if 
the  PLA  is  allowed  it  has  to  decide  the  case  after  recording  of 
evidence  of  both  the  sides  under  Section  13  of  the  Ordinance.  The 
procedure laid down under Section 10 of the Ordinance is very clear 
where the structure, patron and format is defined in subsections 3 to 6 
of  the  Ordinance.  The  Banking  Court  has  the  power  under  Section 
10(7) of the Ordinance to reject the PLA if it does not comply with the 
requirements of subsections 3, 4 & 5 of the Ordinance. Subsections 9 
& 10 of the Section 10 of the Ordinance deal with the granting of the 
PLA  and  the  condition  made  therein.  The  subsection  11  of  the 
Ordinance reads as follows: 
 
“Where the application for leave to defend is rejected or 
where  a defendant  fails to fulfill the conditions attached 
to  the  grant  of  leave  to  defend,  the  Banking  Court  shall 
forthwith proceed to pass judgment and decree in favour 
of the plaintiff against the defendant.” 
 
Determination by the Court 
9. 
The  word  used  in  subsection  11  of  the  Ordinance  can  be 
defined into the following categories which may be as follows: 
 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
9 
i.  When the PLA is granted under Section 10(9) of the 
Ordinance then certain conditions are imposed and if they 
are  not  fulfilled,  then  the  Banking  Court  can  pass 
judgment and decree forthwith in favour of the plaintiff. 
ii.  The  PLA  is  rejected  if  it  does  not  comply  with  the 
provisions  of  the  Ordinance.  If  the  PLA  is  rejected  the 
Banking Court shall proceed to pass judgment and decree 
forthwith in favour of the plaintiff.  
 
10.  The word forthwith means in legal dictionaries as follows: 
 
i. 
a  term  found  in  contracts,  court  orders,  and 
statutes, meaning as soon as it can be reasonably done. It 
implies immediacy, with no excuses for delay.  
ii.  Forthwith  means 
immediately  or  within  a 
reasonable  time  under  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  or 
promptly or as quickly as reasonably possible or as soon 
as  the  nature  of  the  case  will  permit.  In  short,  when  a 
thing  is  to  be  done  forthwith,  it  means  that  it  must  be 
performed without delay. 
 
The word forthwith and shall mentioned in the Section 10(11) of the 
Ordinance has been discussed in detail by the Hon’ble Division Bench 
of the Sindh High Court in case titled  Merssrs United Bank Limited 
v.  Banking  Court  No.II  and  2  others  (2012  CLD  1556)  in  which  it 
has been held as under: 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
10 
 
“After  carefully  examining  the  entire  section  10  of  the 
Ordinance  and  particularly  its  subsection  (11),  we  have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  word  "forthwith" 
specifically mentioned in section 10(11) of the Ordinance 
was introduced by the legislature for the first time with a 
clear and specific object, that is, for expeditious disposal 
of a banking Suit whether filed by a financial institution 
or  by  a  customer.  The  word  "forthwith" 
is  not 
meaningless  and  it  cannot  be  ignored  or  interpreted 
casually.  The  word  "forthwith"  along  with  the  word 
"shall"  used  in  section  10(11)  casts  a  duty  upon  the 
Banking Court to decree the Suit in favour of the plaintiff 
against  the  defendant  immediately  when  defendant's 
application  for  leave  to  defend  is  rejected  or  where  a 
defendant  fails  to  fulfil  the  conditions  attached  to  the 
grant  of  leave  to  defend.  In  our  opinion  the  object  of 
inserting this new provision was not to cause prejudice to 
any  party,  but  was  to  provide  an  expeditious  and 
equitable  relief  in  banking  Suits  to  the  plaintiff  after 
dismissal of defendant's application for leave to defend.” 
 
Analysis  
11.  After  receiving  the  PLA,  the  Banking  Court  has  to  decide  the 
same keeping in view the claim of the Plaintiff and the grounds of the 
PLA as per requirements of the Ordinance. After the dismissal of the 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
11 
PLA, the Banking Court has to apply its judicial mind after examining 
the  documents  filed  by  the  parties  as  per  strict  requirements  of 
Sections 9 & 10 of the Ordinance. The necessary documents appended 
with  the  plaint  including  the  statement  of  accounts  as  well  as  the 
documents  attached  with  the  PLA  including  the  finance  agreements 
are to be taken into account while deciding the PLA. Section 9(2) of 
the  Ordinance  clearly  states  that  the  plaint  shall  be  supported  by  a 
statement of account which in the case of a financial institution shall 
be duly certified under the Bankers Books Evidence Act, 1891 (XVII 
of 1891), (the “Act”) and all other relevant documents relating to the 
grant  of  finance.  The  copies  of  the  plaint,  statement  of  account  and 
other  relevant  documents  shall  be  filed  with  the  Banking  Court  in 
sufficient numbers so that there is one set of copies for each defendant 
and one extra copy. The statement of accounts has not been defined in 
the  Ordinance  but  only  mentioned  in  Section  2(3)  of  the  Act. 
Nevertheless,  the  statement  of  accounts  has  not  been  defined  in  the 
law but Encyclopedia of Banking & Finance by Charles J. Woelfel 
defined the statement of accounts in the following words: 
 
“Statement  of  Accounts.  A  continuous,  daily  posted 
record,  showing  in  detail  all  debits  and  credits  and 
balance as of the close of the period, usually one month. 
The  statement  of  account  is  rendered  by  a  commercial 
bank,  broker,  or  other  business  to  its  customers.  These 
accounts  give  dates  and  descriptions  and  permit  the 
customer  to  verify  the  bank’s  record  with  his  own.  If 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
12 
differences occur, they can then be investigated when the 
customer  reports  back  through  the  reconcilement  blank 
usually enclosed with the statement.”        
 
Application of Judicial Mind 
 
12.  When  the  Banking  Court  decides  the  case,  the  application  of 
judicial  mind  is  necessary  which  will  keep  in  mind  the  requirements 
of the  provisions of the  Ordinance  as  mentioned  above including  the 
entries  in  the  statement  of  account,  examine  the  expiry  of  finance 
agreement,  finance  amount  availed,  finance  amount  paid,  mark  up 
paid,  difference  etc.  It  has  now  been  well  settled  that  markup  more 
than  the  agreed  rate  and/or  beyond  the  agreed  period  cannot  be 
granted  to  the  financial  institution.  Similarly,  no  other  charges  or 
amounts  can  be  allowed  to  the  financial  institution  to  which  the 
customer  had  not  agreed.  The  Court  must  examine  the  claim  of  the 
financial institution in the light of the above before passing the decree. 
13.  The Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court in case titled  Silver 
Oil  Mills  Pvt.  Limited  through  Chief  Executive  and  13  others  v. 
Messrs  Union  Bank  Limited  through  vice-President  and  4  others 
(2003 CLD 1658) has held as under: 
 
“The proceedings taken thereafter by the Banking Court 
on  25-11-2002  were  merely  consequential  in  nature. 
According to section 10(11) of the Financial Institutions 
(Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance  2001  where  a 
defendant  fails  to  fulfill  the  conditions  attached  to  the 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
13 
grant  of  leave  to  defend,  the  Banking  Court  shall 
forthwith proceed to pass judgment and decree in favour 
of the plaintiff against the defendant.  
…………. 
It  is  trite  law  that  Banking  Court  upon application  by  a 
defendant is fully competent to grant leave to appear and 
defend the suit either unconditionally or subject, to such 
terms  as  it  thinks  fit.  Such  discretion  to  grant  leave 
conditionally or unconditionally is left to the Court itself 
as contemplated under Order XXXVII, rule 3, sub-clause 
(2), C.P.C. Discretion so exercised is not to be interfered 
with  lightly  unless  it  is  shown  that  the  same  was 
exercised in a fanciful or arbitrary manner. Nothing has 
been indicated from the record to suggest this position.” 
     
Furthermore,  the  Hon’ble  Sindh  High  Court  in  case  titled  Emirates 
Global  Islamic  Bank  Limited  v.  Muhammad  Abdul  Salam  Khan 
(2013 CLD 1291) has held as under: 
 
Under  section  10(11)  of  the  Ordinance,  the  Banking 
Court  has  to  pass  judgment  and  decree  in  favour  of  the 
plaintiff  against  the  defendant  forthwith  upon  dismissal 
of  the  defendant's  application  for  leave  to  defend.  This 
view  is  fortified  by  the  reported  cases  of  Apollo  Textile 
Mills 
Ltd. 
and 
others 
v. 
Soneri 
Bank 
Ltd.,  2012  CLD  337  (Supreme  Court),  Messrs  United 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
14 
Bank Ltd. v. Banking Court No.II and 2 others 2012 CLD 
1556, Mrs. Jawahar Afzal v. United Bank Ltd. 2003 CLD 
119, Khawaja Muhammad Bilal v. Union Bank Ltd. 2004 
CLD  1555  and  Habib  Bank  Ltd.  v.  Messrs  SABCOS 
(Pvt.) Ltd. 2006 CLD 244. 
 
 12.  The  dismissal  of  the application  for  leave  to defend 
does  not  mean  that  the  entire  claim  of  the  plaintiff  in  a 
Suit under the Ordinance should be decreed as prayed by 
the  plaintiff without examining the claim of the plaintiff. 
In such an event, no doubt the plaintiff becomes entitled 
to a decree, but only to the extent of such amount which 
is  permissible  in  law.  It  has  now  been  well  settled  that 
markup  more  than  the  agreed  rate  and/or  beyond  the 
agreed  period  cannot  be  granted  to  the  financial 
institution.  Similarly,  no  other  charges  or  amounts  can 
be  allowed  to  the  financial  institution  to  which  the 
customer  had  not  agreed.  The  Court  must  examine  the 
claim of the financial institution in the light of the above 
before passing the decree.” 
 
 
14. 
In  view  of  above,  we  have  noted  that  the  provisions  of  the 
Ordinance  allow  the  Banking  Court  to  pass  a  decree  forthwith  in 
terms by examining the plaint as well as the PLA filed under Sections 
9  &  10  of  the  Ordinance  but  that  power  has  to  be  exercised  with 
proper application of judicial mind. 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
15 
 
15.  From  the  above,  it  is  very  much  clear  that  when  the  PLA  is 
accepted,  the  Banking  Court  shall  treat  the  application  as  a  written 
statement, and in its order granting leave shall frame issues relating to 
the  substantial questions of law or  fact, and,  subject to  fulfillment of 
any  conditions  attached  to  grant  of  leave,  fix  a  date  for  recording  of 
evidence  thereon  and  disposal  of  the  suit.  Whereas  if  the  PLA  is 
rejected or where a defendant fails to fulfill the conditions attached to 
the  grant  of  leave  to  defend,  the  Banking  Court  shall  forthwith 
proceed  to  pass  judgment  and  decree  in  favour  of  the  plaintiff  and 
against  the  defendant.  It  is  to  be  noted  here  that  the  Banking  Court 
while  deciding  the  PLA  or  the  suit  has  to  take  into  consideration  all 
the provisions of the Ordinance as well as material available on record 
with  the  proper  application  of  judicial  mind.  The  application  of 
judicial mind is necessary and the Banking Court, while deciding the 
case,  will  keep  in  mind  the  requirements  of  the  provisions  of  the 
Ordinance  as  mentioned  above  including  the  entries  in  the  statement 
of account, examine the expiry of finance agreement, finance amount 
availed, finance amount paid, mark up paid, differences etc. including 
all the other documents tendered by both the parties by virtue of their 
respective claims. It has now been well settled that markup more than 
the agreed rate and/or beyond the agreed period cannot be granted to 
the financial institution. Similarly, no other charges or amounts can be 
allowed  to  the  financial  institution  to  which  the  customer  had  not 
agreed. The Court must examine the claim of the financial institution 
in the light of the above before passing the decree. 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
16 
16.  Moreover, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan has time and 
again  disapproved  passing  of  perfunctory  orders/judgments.  It  is 
settled law that 'judicial order" must be speaking order manifesting by 
itself  that  the  Court  has  applied  its  judicial  mind  to  the  issues  and 
points of controversy involved in the cases. Where the order is passed 
without  application  of  judicial  mind,  the  same  is  in  contravention  of 
law  and  is  not  sustainable.  A  plethora  of  judgments  by  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  as  well  as  this  Court  has  been  passed  on 
this  issue.  Reliance  in  this  regard  can  be  placed  on  the  case  titled 
Adamjee  Jute  Mills Ltd.  v. The province of East Pakistan and others 
(PLD 1959 SC (Pak) 272), Gouranga Mohan Sikdar v. The Controller 
Import and Export and 2 others (PLD 1970 SC 158), Mollah Ejahar 
Ali  v.  Government  of  East  Pakistan  and  others  (PLD  1970  SC  173), 
Muhammad  Ibrahim  Khan  v.  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Labour  and 
others  (1984  SCMR  1014),  Habib  Bank  Limited,  Lahore  v.  Messrs 
Creative Enterprises (pvt.) Ltd. (2007 C L D 244), Messrs Faisal M. 
B.  Corporation  (pvt.)  Ltd.  v.  Equity  Participation  Fund  (2006  CLD 
183),  Khalid  Shahbaz  Chaudhry v.  Prime  Commercial  Bank  Ltd 
(2005  CLD  629),  Messrs  Mohib  Exports Ltd.  v.  Trust  Leasing 
Corporation  Ltd. (2005  CLD  581),  Messrs  Sun  Rise  Textile  Ltd  v. 
Prime  Commercial  Bank  Ltd.  (2005  CLD  126)  and  Messrs 
Chancellors  Overseas  v.  Muslim  Commercial  Bank  Limited  (2004 
CLD 811). 
 
F.A.O. No.35 /2017 
17 
17.  We  have  gone  through  the  impugned  order  minutely  and 
observed  that  the  same  has  been  passed  in  a  sketchy  manner 
consisting of only a half of page coupled with the fact that the grounds 
taken by the Appellant in the PLA have not been tackled with sound 
reasoning. The impugned order has been passed without application of 
judicial mind and consequently, we are of the considered opinion that 
the Banking Court has passed the Impugned Order against the law.  
18.  The  last  but  not  least,  we  accept  the  Petition  and  set  aside  the 
Impugned  Order.  Resultantly,  the  case  is  remanded  to  the  Banking 
Court which shall take into consideration all the material produced by 
both the parties as well as the grounds taken and arguments raised and 
then decide the PLA afresh as per the above referred provisions of law 
after proper application of judicial mind. Before deciding the case the 
Banking  Court  shall issue  notice to both  the  parties  and  will provide 
an opportunity of final arguments.         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*M.NAVEED* 
(Muzamil Akhtar Shabir)       
 
  (Jawad Hassan) 
          Judge                                                    Judge 
Approved for reporting 
        Judge                                                    Judge 
       
 
 
 
 
 
