Stereo H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
 IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.14338 of 2011. 
 
(Mudassar Hassan Rana etc. v. Federal Government etc.) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Date of hearing:              17.01.2017.   
 
 
 
 
Petitioners by:  Mr.  Javed  Sultan  Chaudhary,  Advocate  for 
the petitioners in this petition. 
Mr.  Naveed  Ahmad  Khawaja  Advocate  for 
petitioners 
in  W.P.  Nos.7086/2014, 
7135/2014,  7165/2014,  7167/2014  and 
7168/2014.  
 
Respondents by:  Mr. Muhammad Mehmood Khan, D.A.G. 
Mian  Muhammad  Tariq  Hassan  Advocate 
for PIA. 
Mr.  Naveed  Ahmad  Khawaja  Advocate  for 
respondents No.6 to 10 in this petition. 
Mr.  Javed  Sultan  Chaudhary,  Advocate  for 
private respondents in connected petitions. 
 
 
 
Shujaat  Ali  Khan,  J:  -  Through  this  single  judgment  I 
intend to decide this petition (W.P. No.14338/2011) as well as 
connected  petitions  bearing  W.P.  No.7086/2014,  titled  Mst. 
Qaisra  Naeem  v.  The  District  Manager  PIA  etc.,  W.P. 
No.7135/2014,  titled  Irfan  Basit  v.  The  District  Manager  PIA 
etc.,  W.P.  No.7165/2014,  titled  Tanveer  Qasim  v.  The  District 
Manager PIA etc., W.P. No.7167/2014, titled Wajid Saleem Ch. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--2-- 
v. The District Manager PIA etc. and W.P. No.7168/2014, titled 
Muhammad  Ejaz  v.  The  District  Manager  PIA  etc.  having 
commonality  of  facts  and  law  inasmuch  as  in  this  petition 
Mudassar  Hassan  Rana  etc.  (hereinafter  to  be  referred  as  the 
petitioners) while challenging Policy circulated through Admin 
Order  No.13/2011,  has  assailed  promotion  orders  of 
respondents  No.6  to  12  (hereinafter  to  be  referred  as  the 
respondents)  whereas  in  connected  petitions  the  respondents 
have  put  a  challenge  to  proceedings  pending  before  FIA 
authorities on the complaint filed by the petitioners and others. 
2. 
Unnecessary  details  apart, 
the 
respondents  were 
promoted  from  PG-V  to  PG-VI  in  terms  of  Admin  Order 
No.13/2011,  dated  02.06.2011.  Aggrieved  by  their  promotion 
the petitioners have  filed  this  petition  whereas  the  respondents 
by  way  of  filing  connected  petitions  have  challenged  the 
competence  of  the  FIA  authorities  to  proceed  with  the 
complaint filed by the petitioners and others against them.   
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submits  that  as  the 
respondents  got  M.B.A.  degrees  without  attending  classes  the 
same  did  not  carry  any  legal  value;  that  requisite  NOCs  were 
not  got by  the  respondents prior  to  their  admission  in  M.B.A.; 
that the petitioners being senior to the respondents were entitled 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--3-- 
for promotion; that purportedly the respondents got their MBA 
degrees  from  Al-Khair  University  (AJK)  (hereinafter  to  be 
referred  as  the  University),  Islamabad  campus  but  as  the  said 
University  has  no  campus  either  in  Lahore  or  Islamabad  the 
degrees  issued  in  their  favour  are  not  valid  and  that  the 
petitioners,  alongwith  others,  have  moved  FIA  authorities  for 
criminal action against them thus they have no bearing on each 
other.  
4.  Mian  Muhammad  Tariq  Hassan  Advocate,  representing 
PIA,  while  controverting  the  contentions  urged  by  learned 
counsel for the petitioners submits that as terms & conditions of 
service  of  PIA  employees  are  governed  under  non-statutory 
rules, this petition is not maintainable; that promotion cannot be 
claimed  as  a  matter  of  right  rather  it  is  prerogative  of  the 
competent  authority  to  promote  an  employee  who  fulfills  the 
eligibility criteria; that prior to their promotion, degrees issued 
in  favour  of  the  respondents  were  sent  to  Higher  Education 
Commission  (HEC)  for  verification  whereupon  the  said  forum 
confirmed  that  the  same  were  valid;  that  HEC  got  published  a 
proclamation  in  daily  Jang,  dated  08.01.2012,  sensitizing  the 
public  at  large  about  degrees,  if  any,  issued  by  the  University 
on  the  basis  of  admissions  after  30-04-2009  would  not  be 
acknowledged; that in addition to Special Incentive on the basis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--4-- 
of MBA/MPA/MAS, a revised promotion policy 2011 has been 
published  through  Admin  Order  No.24/2011  for  promotion  of 
the  persons  serving  in  Admin  category;  that  on  the  dint  of  
Office  Order  No.24/2011  Mudassar  Hassan  Rana  (one  of  the 
petitioners)  has  already  been  promoted  in  PG-VI  whereas 
Muhammad Khalid Javed has been ignored on account of lack 
of  minimum  qualification  as  he  is  only  intermediate;  that 
promotion  of  the  respondents  was  recommended  by  the  Board 
comprising  persons  not  only  enjoying  high  profile  but  good 
reputation as well; that while introducing Fast Track Placement 
Programme (FTPP) for MBA/MPA/MAS degree holders it was 
given  option  to  the  employees  either  to  opt  for  that  or  for 
Normal  Placement Programme  (NPP) and  in the  event  of non-
clearance  of  six  weeks  rigorous  training  or  the  subsequent 
papers, the employee concerned was bound to be considered for 
promotion under the general policy; that accelerated promotion 
on  the  basis  of  MBA/MPA/MAS  degrees  was  introduced  by 
virtue  of  Admin  Order  No.24/1991  circulated  on  04.06.1991 
which was amended many a times but the petitioners instead of 
challenging  the  original  policy  has  only  assailed  validity  of 
Admin  Order  No.13/2011;  that  as  petitioners  No.3  &  4  are  no 
more  in  service  this  petition  to  their  extent  has  become 
redundant.  In  support  of  his  contentions  learned  counsel  has 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--5-- 
relied upon the cases reported as Saleem Ullah Khan v. Shahid 
Hamid and another (2011 SCMR 788), Pakistan International 
Airline  Corporation  and  others  v.  Tanweer-Ur-Rehman  and 
others  (PLD  2010  SC  676),  Syed  Noorul  Hasan  v.  The 
Secretary,  Ministry  of  Industries,  Government  of  Pakistan, 
Islamabad  and  others  (1987  SCMR  598),  Muhammad  Amin 
Bhatti v. Inspector General of Punjab Police (2011 PLC (C.S.) 
535)  and  Malik  Mazharul  Haq  and  another  v.  Chairman, 
Pakistan  International  Airlines  Corporation,  Islamabad  and  3 
others (2010 PLC (C.S.) 1472). 
5. 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  Deputy  Attorney  General, 
while supporting the view point of learned counsel representing 
PIA,  states  that  proceedings  pending  before  FIA  cannot  be 
quashed as they are independent in nature. 
6.  Mr. Naveed Ahmad Khawaja Advocate, representing the 
respondents,  while  opposing  this  petition,  submits  that  as  the 
petitioners have assailed vires of Promotion Policy the same is 
not  maintainable;  that  as  terms  &  conditions  of  service  of 
employees  of  PIA  are  governed  by  non-statutory  rules  this 
Court  lacks  jurisdiction  to  deal  with  any  issue  relating  to  said 
terms  &  conditions;  that  degrees  issued  in  favour  of  the 
respondents have already been verified by HEC, thus, it being a  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--6-- 
past and closed transaction cannot be re-opened; that as a matter 
of  fact  the  respondents  attended  MBA  classes  at  Lahore 
Campus  of  the  University  thus  no  exception  can  be  taken 
against  their  degrees;  that  the  queries  raised  in  this  petition 
revolves  around  factual  inquiry  which  cannot  be  decided  in 
Writ  jurisdiction  rather  for  the  purpose  the  petitioners  have  to 
approach  the  relevant  forum;  that  HEC  itself  fixed  30.04.2009 
for  validity  of  degrees  issued  by  the  University  campuses 
functioning beyond the territorial jurisdiction of AJK; that since 
Promotion Policy was formulated in the year 1991 it cannot be 
believed  that  the  same  was  framed  just  to  facilitate  the 
respondents as they joined the department in the year 1996 and 
that mala-fide on the part of the petitioners is manifest from the 
fact  that  Muhammad  Khalid  Javed  (one  of  the  petitioners) 
swore  an  affidavit  on  28.06.2011  to  the  effect  that  he  did  not 
want  to  proceed  with  the  matter  but  the  rest  of  the  petitioners 
with a view to mislead the Court suppressed the factum of the 
same.  
Learned  counsel  in  support  of  connected  petitions 
submits that since matter regarding validity of degrees in favour 
of  the  respondents  is  pending  adjudication  before  this  Court, 
continuation  of  proceedings  before  FIA  authorities  on  the 
complaint of the petitioners and others is a nullity in the eye of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--7-- 
law;  that  competence  of  a  person  to  hold  a  particular  post 
cannot  be  investigated  by  FIA  authorities;  that  after  validation 
of degrees issued by the University prior to 30.04.2009 by HEC 
no other authority including FIA has any power to enter into an 
inquiry  relating  to  genuineness  of  the  said  degrees;  that  while 
filing  complaint  before  FIA  authorities,  the  petitioners  and 
others  concealed  factum  of  filing  petition  before  this  Hon’ble 
Court; that none of the offences contained in Schedule attached 
with  Federal  Investigation  Agency  Act  1974 is  made  out  from 
the  contents  of  complaint  submitted  by  the  petitioners  and 
others,  therefore,  jurisdiction  of  FIA  authorities  is  barred;  that 
though  degrees  were  issued  in  favour  of  the  petitioners  on  the 
basis  of  examination  held  in  the  year  2007  but  the  petitioners 
and  others  kept  mum  till  the  year  2013  when  the  respondents 
were  promoted  in  PG-VI;  that  mala-fide  on  the  part  of  FIA 
authorities is manifest from the fact that after taking cognizance 
of  the  matter  just  to  humiliate  and  blackmail  the  respondents 
the  matter  was  unnecessarily  publicized  in  national  press;  that 
Pak Lawrence College, Lahore, where the respondents attended 
MBA  classes  was  affiliated  with  the  University  pursuant  to 
communication 
bearing  No.AU-2(25)/GA/2007, 
dated 
12.06.2007  addressed  by  the  Registrar  of  the  University  to  the 
Chairman,  Pak  Lawrence Institute, 93-1 Shadman  Lahore; that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--8-- 
the  petitioners  also  filed  a  petition  under  section  22-A  &  B 
Cr.P.C.  before  Mr.  Mazhar  Salim,  Additional  Sessions 
Judge/Ex-Officio Justice of Peace, Lahore, seeking direction to 
FIA authorities to conclude inquiry No.1/2014 wherein the FIA 
submitted  reply  inter-alia  with  the  assertion  that  originally  the 
inquiry was closed by the competent authority vide letter dated 
10.11.2014,  however,  later  on  the  same  was  re-opened  but  the 
petitioners  failed  to  provide  any  fresh  evidence  to  prove  the 
allegations  against  the  respondents,  thus,  the  continuation  of 
proceedings  before  FIA  authorities  amount  to  humiliate  and 
blackmail the respondents. In support of his contentions learned 
counsel has relied upon the cases reported as Abdul Wahab and 
others  v.  HBL  and  others  (2013  SCMR  1383),  Pakistan 
International  Airline  Corporation  and  others  v.  Tanweer-Ur-
Rehman and others (PLD 2010 SC 676), Khawaja Muhammad 
Hussain  Khateeb  v.  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Sialkot  and  7 
others (PLD 2016 Lahore 522), Muhammad Arshad Rafique v. 
Government of Pakistan through Secretary and 4 others (2016 
PLC  (C.S.)  952),  Hassan  Mehmood  v.  Habib  Bank  Limited 
through  President  and  4  others  (2016  PLC  (C.S.)  315),  Riaz 
Gul  and  others  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary, 
Ministry  of  Water  and  Power,  Government  of  Pakistan, 
Islamabad  and  others  (2016  PLC  (C.S.)  350),  Khalid  Hassan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--9-- 
Khan  v.  Pakistan  International  Air  Lines  through  Director  of 
Marketing  and  2  others  (2013  YLR  847),  Muhammad  Anwar 
Ansari  v.  Chief  Election  Commissioner,  Islamabad  through 
Secretary Election Commission of Pakistan and 5 others (2011 
YLR  2810)  and  Munir  Akhtar  Awan  and  others  v.  Khalid 
Mansoor and others (2010 YLR 3144). 
7.  While exercising his right of rebuttal, learned counsel for 
the  petitioners  submits  that  as  the  petitioners  are  not  claiming 
promotion from this Court instant petition is maintainable; that 
it  is  not  believable  that  the  respondents  attended  the  M.B.A. 
classes  regularly  while  performing  their  official  duties;  that 
HEC  in  response  to  letter  No.FIA/CCC/LHR/582,  dated 
18.03.2014,  informed  the  Additional  Director  FIA  that  the 
degrees/transcripts of the students admitted w.e.f. 30.04.2009 to 
16.10.2011  shall  not  be  validated/recognized;  that  as  some  of 
the  degrees  of  the  respondents  pertain  to  the  year  2009,  they 
cannot  be  termed  as  legitimate;  that  the  competent  authority 
issued  letters  of  displeasure,  dated  20.10.2015,  regarding 
completion  of  M.B.A.  degree  by  the  respondents  without 
getting  requisite  NOC  which  fact  is  sufficient  to  establish  that 
they got admission in M.B.A. classes without issuance of prior 
NOC  by 
the  competent  authority; 
that  by  virtue  of 
communications, dated 24.10.2016, addressed by  HR  Manager 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--10-- 
Marketing,  PIA,  to  M/s.  Wajid  Saleem  and  Qaisra  Tabassum 
(respondents  herein)  they  have  been  asked  to  submit  their 
original degrees for onward submission to HR Record meaning 
thereby that the same were not on the record of the department, 
thus,  the  assertion  of  the  respondents  that  their  degrees  have 
been  verified  for  more  than  once  by  HEC  on  the  move  of  the 
department is not believable and that as till date the respondents 
have not been issued notice in the instant petition they have no 
right of audience. To fortify his last contention learned counsel 
for the petitioners has referred to order 23.6.2011 whereby only 
notices were issued to respondents No.3 to 5 with a direction to 
file report and parawise comments.   
8. 
I  have  given  anxious  consideration  to  the  arguments 
advanced  by  the  respective  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  in 
addition to  going through the  documents forming  part  of  these 
petitions, report and parawise comments and those produced by 
the learned counsel for the parties during the course of hearing 
as well as the case-law cited at the bar. 
9. 
A cursory glance over this petition shows that  under the 
garb of a challenge to Office Order No.13/2011 the petitioners 
have  assailed  the  promotion  of  the  respondents  inter-alia  with 
the  plea  that  the  same  is  not  only  discriminatory  but  also  is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--11-- 
being  used  as  a  devise  to  infringe  the  fundamental  right  of 
promotion of the petitioners and other similarly placed persons. 
This fact brings it to light that the petitioners in the attire of writ 
of  quo  warranto  want  to  settle  their  personal  grudge  with  the 
respondents  on  account  of  their  promotion  in  PG-VI  on  the 
basis of MBA degrees. It is well entrenched by now that a writ 
of  quo  warranto  is  not  maintainable  on  behalf  of  a  person 
whose  personal  interest  is  involved.  Reliance  in  this  regard  is 
placed  on  the  cases  reported  as  Muhammad  Shahid  Akram  v. 
Government  of  the  Punjab  through  Chief  Secretary  and  3 
others  (2016  PLC  (C.S.)  1335)  and  Barrister  Sardar 
Muhammad  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan  and  others  (2013  PLC 
(C.S.)  625).  In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Shahid  Akram  (Supra) 
this  Court  while  dealing  with  the  issue  in  hand  has  inter-alia 
observed as under: - 
“9.  The next point raised on behalf of the respondents 
that  the  petition  is  fraught  with  mala  fide.  Though  the 
proceedings  in  terms  of  writ  of  quo-warranto  are  not 
adversarial  in  nature  but  these  are  inquisitorial  and 
anybody can move for the same being the wrestle blower 
but  the  blowing  of  wrestle  must  be  for  the  benefit  of 
public in general and not for the personal vengeance. It 
is  always  up  to  the  judicial  conscious  of  the  Court  to 
examine  as  to  whether  the  same  qualifies  the  yardsticks 
laid  down  in  Article  199(1)(b)(ii)  of  the  Constitution  of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 or not. But at the 
same  time  grant  of  relief  in  quo-warranto  is  based  on 
principles  of  equity  and  thus  the  conduct  and  motive  of 
the petitioner can be looked into by the High Court while 
entertaining  the  writ of  quo-warranto.  It  is  evident  from 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--12-- 
the  record  that  one  of  the  petitioner  Faisal  Mehmood 
Khan  is  an  ex-employee  of  Punjab  Emergency  Service 
Rescue  1122  who  was  proceeded  departmentally  under 
the  orders  of  respondent  No.3,  being  the  Director 
General and as a result of the departmental proceedings 
he  was  removed  from  the  service  vide  order  dated  23rd 
of  August,  2012.  This  clearly  shows  the  motivation  and 
mala  fide  on  the  part  of  the  said  petitioner  to  file  the 
petition challenging the appointment of respondent No.3. 
Even 
instant  petition  also 
approached  Human  Rights  Cell  of  the  Hon'ble  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  Islamabad  through  an  application  in 
the year 2012. The Constitutional jurisdiction cannot be 
resorted  to  settle  the  personal  differences  between  the 
parties.  Thus  this  Court  is  inclined  to  observe  that  the 
petition  is  outcome  of  the  personal  vengeance  and  the 
same is not maintainable on this score.” 
the  petitioner 
the 
in 
10.  Learned  counsel  representing  PIA  has  specifically 
pleaded  that  in  addition  to  the  Policy  relating  to  placement  of 
the  officers  having  MBA/MPA/MAS  degrees  in  next  pay 
group,  a  general  policy  regarding  promotion  of  the  admin 
category is also in vogue. The said assertion of learned counsel 
for PIA has not been controverted by the learned counsel for the 
petitioners  meaning  thereby  that  two  different  promotion 
channels  viz.  one  on 
the  basis  of  seniority-cum-fitness 
alongwith  minimum  qualification  and  other  on  the  basis  of 
MBA/MPA/MAS  degrees  is  being  followed  in  PIA.  This  fact 
also  affirms  that  the  competent  authority  has  introduced  a 
reasonable  classification  amongst  the  employees  who  are 
holding  MBA/MPA/MAS  degrees  and  those  who  do  not.  It  is 
not  the  case  of  the  petitioners  that  any  person  who  is  not 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--13-- 
possessing  the  above  said  degrees  has  been  promoted  whereas 
they  have  been  ignored  rather  their  case  is  that  Office  Order 
No.13/2011  being  discriminatory  deserves  to  be  set  at  naught. 
There  is  no  cavil  with  the  preposition  that  any  act  of  the 
executive  aiming  at  discrimination  amongst  similarly  placed 
persons is amenable to constitutional jurisdiction of this Court, 
however, when the classification is reasonable the same cannot 
be  challenged  in  writ  petition  while  pressing  into  service  the 
principle  of  discrimination.  Somewhat  similar  question  came 
under  discussion  before  the  apex  Court  of  the  country  in  the 
cases  reported  as  Government  of  the  Punjab  through  Chief 
Secretary & others v. Ch. Abdul Sattar Hans & 29 others (2015 
SCMR  915)  and  Secretary  Economic  Affairs  Division 
Islamabad  &  others  v.  Anwarul  Haq  Ahmed  and  others  (2013 
SCMR 1687). In the case of Government of the Punjab through 
Chief  Secretary  &  others  (supra)the  apex  court  of  the  country 
has inter-alia observed as under: - 
the  assumption 
“2….  We  have  gone  through  the  impugned  judgment 
rendered by the Chairman, Punjab Service Tribunal. He 
has  proceeded  on 
that  Federal 
Government  employees  and  employees  of  the  Provincial 
Government  should  receive  the  same  emoluments  and 
perquisites if they are performing the same type of duties. 
This  finding  is  flawed  for  two  reasons.  Firstly,  we  have 
not  found  any  exercise  undertaken  by  the  Tribunal  or 
indeed  any  other  government  functionary  which  would 
show  that  the  actual  work  being  performed  by  Senior 
Auditors of  the  Audit  Department  who are  employees of 
the Federal Government is exactly the same as the work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--14-- 
being  done  by  the  Deputy  Accountants  employed  by  the 
Province.  Secondly,  it  has  been  held  by  the  Service 
Tribunal as under:-- 
"The appellants possess the similar qualifications, 
nature  of  the  duties  performed  are  similar,  work 
under  the  same  roof  and  same  officer.  Similarly 
placed  are  to  be  treated  similarly.  No  doubt  the 
Provincial  Govt.  works  independently  under  the 
Constitution but generally it follows the pay scales 
sanctioned  by  the  Federal  Govt.  If  two  different 
pay  scales  are  given 
the  Federal  Govt. 
employees  and  the  Provincial  Govt.  employees  it 
may  amount  to  extracting  labour  and  exploitation 
under  Article  3  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan.  I  tend  to  agree  with  the 
judgment  of  the  Lahore  High  Court  2004  PLC 
(C.S.) 586 that it is violation of Articles 2-A, 3, 25, 
37  and  38  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973." 
to 
The  above  reproduced  observation,  however,  is  also 
flawed  because  Article  3  of  the  Constitution  has  no 
application  in  the  present  case.  We  may  note  that  the 
respondents  who  were  appellants  before  the  Service 
Tribunal  were  not  conscripted  in  service.  They  had 
joined  service  voluntarily  and  had  accepted  the  terms 
and  conditions  of  service.  It  is  evident  that  they  did  not 
compete  with  the  Senior  Auditors  (BPS-16)  of  the 
Federal  Government  and,  therefore,  cannot  claim  that 
they should be given perks and emoluments as the Senior 
Auditors  of  the  Federal  Government.  The  question  of 
exploitation  would  only  have  arisen  if  the  respondents 
had been forcibly inducted into compulsory service. This 
is  not  the  case  and  it  appears  that  they  had  happily 
joined service and are enjoying the benefits of the same. 
3. 
Thirdly, it is important to note that the Provincial 
Government  has  to  remain  within  its  own  budgetary 
constraints.  The  finding  of  the  Service  Tribunal  that  the 
"Punjab  Government  will  have  to  bear  extra  financial 
burden  of  Rs,46.44  millions,  suffice  to  say  that  the 
service  structure  and  financial  constraints  cannot  stand 
in  the  way  of  the  Constitution".  This  is  not  a  tenable 
position  because  the  amounts  paid  by  way  of  salaries, 
are  extracted  from  the  pockets  of  citizens  by  means  of 
taxation. The Province and its Government can genuinely 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--15-- 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  not  prepared  to 
burden  the  people of  the  Province by imposing an  extra 
levy on them. It is not for the Service Tribunal to tell the 
Government  of  Punjab  to  impose  additional  taxes/levies 
for  the  purpose  of  meeting  the  command  of  the  Service 
Tribunal. We are cognizant that there may still be duties 
imposed  on  Governments  which  are  absolute  and  may 
require  allocation  or  reallocation  of  financial  resources 
with the object of ensuring performance of such duties. In 
an appropriate case this can be examined. However, this 
case does not raise such issues. 
4. 
It is also important to bear in mind that Article 25 
of  the  Constitution  is  only  attracted  where  there  is  an 
apple-to-apple,  comparison.  In  the  present  case,  this  is 
not  the  position  because  both  sets  of  individuals  i.e. 
Senior Auditors of the Federal Government (BPS-16) and 
Dy. Accountants of the Provincial Government (BPS-14) 
are  not  equally  placed.  There  is  an  obvious  criterion 
which  differentiates  the  two  categories  i.e.  they  are 
employed  by  different  employers  with  different  financial 
and  other  resources.  Thus  a  very  fundamental  issue  of 
federalism has arisen in this case. If the reasoning of the 
Service  Tribunal  is  upheld,  tomorrow  a  Province  or  the 
Federation  which  is  more  affluent  than  other  Provinces 
and is prepared to raise the salaries of its employees or 
as  a  policy  decides  that  government  servants  should  be 
paid  according  to  the  market  salaries  it  will  not  be 
constitutionally  permissible  for  a  Court  to  hold  that  the 
Province  which  is  less  affluent  should  pay  the  same 
emoluments  and  provide  the  same  perquisites  as  has 
been done by the more affluent Province. The federation 
and  each  of  the  Provinces  exercise  independent  powers 
as per distribution of powers set out in Chapter 1 of Part 
V of the Constitution. This indeed is the essence of a truly 
federal constitutional structure…..” 
11. 
It  is  important  to  observe  over  here  that  though  Special 
Incentives  for  the  persons  having  MBA/MPA/MAS  degrees 
was  initially  introduced  on  04.06.1991  by  virtue  of  Admin 
Order  No.24/1991  which  remained  under  constant  amendment 
in the following years but the petitioners instead of challenging 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--16-- 
the  basic  policy  and  the  subsequent  amendments  made  therein 
only  confined  their  prayer  to  the  extent  of  Office  Order 
No.13/2011.  If  the  petitioners  were  of  the  view  that  the 
incentive  on  the  basis  of  higher/specific  qualification  was 
discriminatory  they  should  have  put  a  challenge  to  the  rest  of 
the Office Orders issued in respect of the said Policy.  
12.  During  the  course  of  arguments  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioners adopted clear cut plea that as the petitioners have put 
challenge to the policy introduced by the PIA instant petition is 
maintainable.  It  is  well  established  by  now  this  Court  rarely 
uses  its  Constitutional  jurisdiction  to  undo  a  policy  framed  by 
the competent authority. However, in the cases where it offends 
against  any  fundamental  right  or  clear  cut  provision  of  a 
legislative  piece,  this  Court  feels  no  hesitation  to  undo  the 
same.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the  case  of 
Asaf  Fasihuddin  Khan  Vardag  v.  Government of  Pakistan  and 
others (2014 SCMR 676) while highlighting the guidelines for 
interference  by  the  superior  courts  in  the  Policy  enunciated  by 
the executive has inter-alia observed as under: - 
“46.*****The  interference  with  the  decision  making 
process  is  warranted  where  it  is  vitiated  on  account  of 
arbitrariness,  illegality,  irrationality  and  procedural 
impropriety  or  where 
is  actuated  by  mala 
fides…………......The  reservations  or  restrictions,  if  any, 
in  that  behalf  should  not  be  arbitrary  and  must  be 
justifiable on the basis of some policy or valid principles, 
it 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--17-- 
which themselves are reasonable and not discriminatory. 
It was further observed that any transaction, which is not 
transparent, and goes against the interest of the general 
public  constitutes  violation  of  Article  9  of 
the 
Constitution,  which  guarantees  right  to  life  to  all 
persons.” 
If the case of the petitioners is considered on the touchstone of 
the  afore-quoted  judgment  there  leaves  no  ambiguity  that  they 
do not qualify the test laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
of  Pakistan  to  interfere  with  a  policy  issued  by  the  competent 
authority. Even otherwise, it is upto the competent authority to 
introduce  policies  for  better  output  from  its  subordinates  with 
specific  reference  to  the  nature  and  requirements  of  the  duties 
of a post. There is no denying the fact that PIA is a commercial 
entity  and  in  this  era  of  competition  it  cannot  compete  with 
other  airlines  if it does  not  introduce  special incentives  for  the 
employees  who  are  equipped  with  knowledge  of  business/ 
public  administration  as  they  cannot  be  equated  with  the 
persons having simple graduate/master degrees.  
13.  To  be  precise,  the  petitioners  have  challenged  eligibility 
of  the  respondents  to  hold  the  posts  of  PG-VI  on  the  ground 
that the MBA degrees issued in their favour are not valid inter-
alia  for  the  reasons  that  as  there  was  no  Campus  of  the 
University  either  in  Lahore  or  Islamabad  and  the  respondents 
being regular employees of PIA could not attend MBA classes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--18-- 
Firstly  taking  up  question  regarding  non-existence  of  the 
campuses of the University in Lahore or Islamabad, I am of the 
view  that  learned  counsel  representing  the  respondents  has 
referred to communication, dated 12.06.2007, addressed by the 
Registrar  of  the  University  to  the  Chairman,  Pak  Lawrence 
Institute,  Lahore  regarding  provisional  affiliation  of  the  said 
institute  with  the  University  relevant  part  thereof  reads  as 
under: - 
“I  am  directed  to  inform  you  that  the  Competent 
Authority  has  been  pleased 
to  grant  Provisional 
Affiliation  to  your  Institute  w.e.f.  2002  to  offer  BBA, 
MBA, BCS, and MCS…………” 
It  is  not  the  case  of  the  petitioners  that  the  affiliation  was  not 
bestowed  by  the  University  upon  the  aforesaid  institute. 
Further, they have not disputed the fact that said institution was 
functioning in Lahore at the relevant time. In this state of affairs 
objection of the learned counsel for the petitioners that degrees 
have  been  issued  in  favour  of  the  respondents  on  the  basis  of 
examinations  held  at  the  places  where  the  University  had  no 
campus, is not worth consideration. 
14. 
It  is  not  out  of  place  to  observe  that  question  regarding 
validity  of  degrees  issued  by  the  University  on  the  basis  of 
studies  undertaken 
in 
the  campuses  beyond 
territorial 
jurisdiction  of  AJK  was  exhaustively  dealt  in  the  case  of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--19-- 
Muhammad Anwar Ansari (Supra) wherein while clinching the 
issue,  under  discussion,  this  Court  has  inter-alia  observed  as 
under: - 
17. In the present case, the petitioner's case is on a weak 
footing  as  the  respondents  have  placed  on  record  his 
degree  of  B.Cs. along  with secondary  school  certificate, 
intermediate  certificate  as  R/1,  R/2  and  R/3.  R/3  is  a 
degree  of  B.Cs.  no  doubt  issued  'by  Al-Khair  University 
is  duly  verified  by  the  Higher  Education  Commission  of 
Pakistan  as  is  available  on  the  back  of  this  document. 
The  degree  is  verified  on.  10th  of  October,  2010.  The 
respondents  have  also  shown  in  Court  the  original 
degree which was compared with R/3 and returned. 
in 
favour  of  respondent  and  due 
18.  This  is  not  the  case  of  petitioner  that  he  casted  his 
vote 
to  his 
misrepresentation  and  fraud  that  he  is  graduate  and 
fulfilled  the  condition  of  law,  the  petitioner  has  been 
cheated.  The  case  of  petitioner  is  that  he  is  voter  in  the 
constituency  from  where  the  respondent  was  elected  as 
Member  of  Provincial  Assembly  and  as  such  he  is  not 
directly an aggrieved person. 
19.  Learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.2  has  placed  on 
record  an  extract  of  press  release  of  Higher  Education 
Commission  which  is  also  available  on  website  of  Al-
Khair University which read as under:-- 
"A  press  release  said  to  safeguard  interests 
of  students  and  ensure  provision  of  quality 
education in Pakistan, the HEC had directed 
that  Al-Khair  University  must  stop  all  new 
admissions  and  that  the  commission  would 
not  recognize any  degree  issued  to  students 
by the university after April 30, 2009." 
20. Admittedly, the respondent No.2's degree was issued 
in  pursuance  of  examination  held  in  March/April,  2000 
for  a  Session  1998-2000  and  as  such  prima  facie  the 
respondent No.2's degree has a status of genuine degree 
in terms of press not of HEC. 
21.  As  the  respondent  No.2,  prima  facie,  has  succeeded 
to establish on record that he is holding a genuine degree 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--20-- 
of  graduation  (B.Cs)  and,  as  such,  this  Court  in  its 
constitutional  jurisdiction  could  not  enter  into  factual 
controversy  for  recording  evidence  for  ascertaining  the 
real facts or to look into the allegation of petitioner.” 
Further, the similar situation also came under discussion before 
a learned Division Bench of Balochistan High Court in the case 
of  Munir  Akhtar  Awan  and  others  (Supra)  which  decided  the 
issue, under discussion, inter-alia observing as under: - 
“By  not  allowing  them  to  apply  to  the  Bar  Council, 
amounts to discrimination, because of the fact that all the 
petitioners  who  were  getting  their  legal  education  from 
Al-Khair University at Quetta before the resolution, were 
also under the bona fide impression that it has duly been 
affiliated by the University of Balochistan. In our view, it 
is  the  fault  of  Al-Khair  University  on  one  hand,  by  not 
properly  applying  to  the  Balochistan  University  for 
affiliation and on the other hand, Balochistan University 
is  at  fault  by  simply  issuing  NOC  for  establishment  of 
said  Campus.  Though  NOC 
to 
affiliation,  but  still  it  had  an  impression  on  the  raw 
minded  students  that  the  Campus  at  Quetta  is  working 
legally and lawfully, thus, for the mistaken act or fault of 
both the Universities, the students already got admissions 
or  obtained  degrees  therefrom,  before  the  resolution  of 
Pakistan Bar Council will not be penalized.” 
is  not  equivalent 
Insofar as case in hand is concerned, degrees issued in favour of 
the respondents are based on the examinations held in the years 
2007  or  prior.  It  is  imperative  to  note  that  according  to  the 
version  of  PIA,  promotion  of  the  respondents  was  subject  to 
verification of their degrees by the HEC. Upon the move of the 
department,  HEC  verified  the  degrees  issued  in  favour  of  the 
respondents  and  promotion  of  the  respondents  was  regularized 
in  PG-VI.  When  question  regarding  validity  of  degrees  issued 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--21-- 
by  University  on  the  basis  of  education  imparted  in  the 
campuses functioning beyond the territorial jurisdiction of AJK 
prior to 30.04.2009 has been put to rest by this Court as well as 
by  the  learned  Division  Bench  of  the  Balochistan  High  Court 
same cannot be allowed to be re-opened by any forum including 
PIA or FIA authorities. 
15.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  with  a  view  to 
impeach  the  credibility  of  the  degrees  issued  in  favour  of  the 
respondents 
has 
referred 
to 
letter 
bearing  No.16-
08/HEC/A&A/2014,  dated  05.05.2014,  addressed  by 
the 
Assistant  Director 
(Accreditation  &  Attestation),  HEC, 
Islamabad  to  the  Additional  Director  FIA  Lahore.  A  close 
examination  of  the  said  communication  shows  that  the  same 
related  to  an  inquiry  started  by  FIA  qua  the  admissions 
undertaken  w.e.f.  30.04.2009  to  16.10.2011.  As  the  degrees 
were  issued  in  favour  of  the  respondents  on  the  basis  of  the 
examinations  held  in  the  year  2007  or  prior,  the  said 
communication cannot be used to their disinterest.  
16. 
Insofar  as  the  issuance  of  letters  of  displeasures,  dated 
20.10.2015, to the respondents by the Deputy General Manager 
HR Marketing Department are concerned, suffice it to note that 
as  it  is  evident  from  the  contents  of  the  said  letters  that  the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--22-- 
competent authority only showed his displeasure regarding non 
obtaining  of  prior  permission  but  did  not  utter  even  a  word 
about authenticity of the degrees. Further, completion of MBA 
degree without prior permission of the competent authority can 
only be considered as procedural flaw for which the competent 
authority  was  at  liberty  to  proceed  against  the  respondents  at 
the relevant time but the said fact cannot be used to shatter the 
credibility  of  the  degrees  issued  in  their  favour  importantly 
when  the  same  have  been  verified  by  the  HEC  for  more  than 
once.  
17.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  has  emphatically 
argued that as Wajid Saleem and Ms. Qaisra Tabassum (two of 
the  respondents)  have  been  asked  to  provide  original  degrees 
for verification purposes,  the plea of the respondents  that  their 
degrees were earlier verified by HEC is not sustainable. In this 
regard,  I  am  of  the  view  that  demand  of  the  department  from 
some  of  the  respondents  to  provide their original  degrees does 
not  lend  any  support  to  the  petitioners’  version  simply  for  the 
reason  that  the  competent  authority  can  ask  any  of  its 
subordinate  to  provide  original  testimonials  for  verification 
purposes  irrespective  of  the  fact  whether  they  were  earlier 
verified  by  the  relevant  quarter  or  not  but  by  no  stretch  of 
imagination  said  fact  can  be  used  against  the  respondents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--23-- 
especially  when  nothing  adverse  in  respect  of  the  genuineness 
of their MBA degrees is on the scene.  
18.  To  be  brief,  the  petitioners  are  aggrieved  of  FTPP 
introduced  by  PIA  through  Admin  Officer  Order  No.10/2011, 
dated  20.05.2011  whereby  in  addition  to  earlier  incentive  for 
MBA/MPA/MAS  degree  holders,  some  more  incentives  were 
also  introduced  whereas  in  the  subsequent  Office  Order 
No.13/2011 only period of 3 years in PG-V was reduced to one 
year. As  the petitioners have  not  specifically  assailed  the  vires 
of  Admin  Office  Order  No.10/2011  their  prayer  for  setting 
aside of the subsequent Admin Office Order No.13/2011 cannot 
be acceded to.  
19.  According to the petitioners due to introduction of FTPP 
their  right  of  promotion  to  PG-VI  has  badly  been  affected.  As 
the  petitioners  failed  to  point  out  infringement  of  any  of  their 
fundamental right or the Policy in question offends against any 
clear  cut  law  their  request  cannot  be  blessed  with  acceptance. 
Further,  admittedly  Mudassar  Hassan  Rana,  one  of  the 
petitioners has already been promoted to PG-VI in terms of the 
policy  prevalent  for  promotion  of  the  Admin  category,  he 
cannot press into service the point of discrimination. Moreover, 
Muhammad  Khalid  Javed,  being  only  intermediate,  cannot  be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--24-- 
equated with a person having MBA/MPA/MAS degree as he is 
not  eligible  for  promotion  even  under  general  policy  as 
minimum  qualification  for  promotion  in  PG-VI  is  graduation. 
More 
importantly,  Muhammad  Arshad  Khan 
(already 
terminated  from  service)  and  Mudassar  Hafeez  Butt  (already 
retired) being no more in service to their extent instant petition 
has become redundant.   
20.  While  addressing  the  court  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioners has raised specific objection qua right of audience of 
the  respondents.  There  is  no  denying  the  fact  that  on  the 
preliminary  date  of  hearing  notices  were  only  issued  to 
respondents  No.3  to  5  only,  however,  on  09.08.2012  all  the 
parties  were  put  to  notice.  Further,  when  in  the  connected 
petitions,  filed  by  the  respondents,  notices  have  already  been 
issued to the petitioners, they (respondents) cannot be deprived 
of  their  right  to  address  the  court  importantly  when  all  the 
matters have been ordered to be heard together. 
21. 
It  is  well  entrenched  by  now  that  promotion  against  a 
particular post cannot be claimed as a matter of right rather the 
competent authority reserves the right to adjudge the eligibility 
of  a  person  for  promotion  by  formulating  a  policy.  If  the 
competent  authority  is  of  the  view  that  by  introducing  a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--25-- 
separate  policy  for  the  persons  having  MBA/MPA/MAS 
degrees, the promotion prospects of the persons not possessing 
such  degrees  would  not  be  infringed  and  on  the  other  the 
department would be able to have the services of more suitable 
persons  having  professional  qualification  the  request  of  the 
petitioners  for  promotion  in  PG-VI  cannot  be  considered  as 
fundamental  right.  While  dealing  with  the  question  regarding 
promotion of a government servant against a particular post and 
the jurisdiction of superior courts, the apex Court of the country 
in  the  case  of  Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  through 
Chief  Secretary,  Peshawar  and  others  v.  Hayat  Hussain  and 
others (2016 SCMR 1021) has inter-alia held as under: - 
It 
law 
that 
is  a  settled  proposition  of 
the 
“8. 
Government  is  entitled  to  make  rules  in  the  interest  of 
expediency of service and to remove anomalies in Service 
Rules.  It  is  the  Service  Rules  Committee  which  has  to 
determine  the  eligibility  criteria  of  promotion  and  it  is 
essentially  an  administrative  matter  falling  within  the 
exclusive  domain  and  policy  decision  making  of  the 
Government  and  the  interference  with  such  matters  by 
the Courts is not warranted and that no vested right of a 
Government  employee  is  involved  in  the  matter  of 
promotion  or  the  rules  determining  their  eligibility  or 
fitness, and the High Court has no jurisdiction by means 
of writ to strike it down as held by this Court in the case 
of  The  Central  Board  of  Revenue,  Government  of 
Pakistan v. Asad Ahmad Khan (PLD 1960 SC 81)” 
As per the ratio decidendi of the afore-quoted judgment of the 
apex Court of the country no person can claim promotion as a 
matter of right until and unless he fulfills the eligibility criteria. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--26-- 
As  far  as  the  case  in  hand  is  concerned,  as  the  petitioners  are 
not  possessing  MBA/MPA/MAS  degrees  they  cannot  claim 
promotion on the analogy of the respondents. 
22.  Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  has  put  much 
emphasis  on  the  fact  that  while  serving  in  the  department  the 
respondents  could  not  attend  MBA  classes,  thus,  the  degrees 
issued  in  their  favour  have  no  legal  backing.  In  this  regard,  I 
disagree  with  the  learned  counsel  for  the  reason  that  firstly 
according  to  the  duty  roster  employees  of  PIA  perform  their 
duties in 12 hours shift pattern. In addition thereto, there is also 
rotation  policy  according  to  which  after performing  night  duty 
for 12  hours  there  is rest  of  48 hours  and in case day  shift the 
permissible rest is 24 hours. The said fact can be verified from 
the  entries  of  Daily  Attendance  Register  attached  with  this 
petition inasmuch as on  number of occasions in the  column  of 
presence  the  employee  concerned  has  been  shown  as  “off”. 
Further,  it  is  of  common  knowledge  that  the  educational 
institutions 
running 
in  a  private  sector  especially 
in 
metropolitan cities like Lahore  have their classes  even in three 
shifts,  thus,  said  plea  of  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 
cannot be given any weightage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--27-- 
23.  During 
the  course  of  arguments 
learned  counsel 
representing PIA produced copy of proclamation got published 
by  HEC  whereby  public-at-large  was  sensitized  about  the  fact 
that  any  degree  issued  by  the  University  on  the  basis  of  study 
undertaken in any campus beyond the territorial jurisdiction of 
AJK,  after  30.04.2009,  would  not  be  acknowledged  by  HEC 
meaning thereby that the degrees issued before 30.04.2009 were 
validated.  The  said  fact  has  also  been  dilated  upon  by  the 
learned  Division  Bench  of  the  Balochistan  High  Court  in  the 
case  referred  Supra.  In  this  scenario,  this  Court  cannot  enter 
into  arena  of  factual  inquiry  as  to  whether  the  respondents 
attended classes or not as it does not fall within the domain of 
this Court. 
24.  Now  reverting  to  connected  petitions,  a  bare  perusal  of 
the complaint  submitted by  Mudassar  Hassan Rana  etc. before 
FIA  authorities  shows  that  though  the  same  was  filed  in  the 
year 2013 but they did not make any mention about the fact of 
filing  this  petition  in  the  year  2011  challenging  promotion  of 
the respondents on the basis of alleged forged and invalid MBA 
degrees. As the factum of pendency of proceedings before this 
Court was not disclosed by the complainant, the FIA authorities 
while  taking  cognizance  of  the  matter  issued  notices  to  the 
respondents  for  their  personal  appearance.  Though  they  joined 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--28-- 
proceedings and apprised the FIA authorities that not only their 
degrees have been verified for more than once by HEC but also 
matter 
is  pending  adjudication  before 
this  Court 
in  a 
Constitutional  petition 
they 
further 
requested 
the  FIA 
authorities to take off their hands but instead of acceding to the 
innocent  request  of  the  respondents,  the  FIA  authorities 
continued  proceedings  compelling  respondents  No.6  to  10  to 
file connected petitions. 
25.  At  the  cost  of  repetition  it  is  re-iterated  that  as  degrees 
issued in favour of the respondents have already been validated 
by  HEC  for  more  than  once,  the  FIA  authorities  cannot  be 
allowed to re-open the matter under the garb of complaint filed 
by  Mudassar  Hassan  Rana  etc.  concealing  material  facts,  in 
particular  the  filing  of  this  petition  on  the  same  subject.  After 
conclusion  by  this  Court  that  degrees  issued  in  favour  of  the 
respondents were genuine in nature continuation of proceedings 
before FIA authorities would amount to double jeopardy. In the 
cases referred Supra when it has already been declared by this 
Court  as  well  as  learned  Division  Bench  of  Balochistan  High 
Court  that  the  degrees  issued  by  the  University  prior  to 
30.04.2009  are  valid,  the  FIA  authorities  have  no  justification 
to  proceed  with  the  complaint  filed  by  the  petitioners  and 
others. This Court is cognizant of the fact that proceedings in a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--29-- 
criminal  case  cannot  be  halted,  however,  when  those  run 
contrary to any verdict of a superior Court  or would ultimately 
end  in  smoke  the  same  cannot  be  allowed  to  remain  in  field 
rather  deserves  to  be  curbed  with  full  force.  Reliance  in  this 
regard  is  placed  on  the  cases  reported  as  Miraj  Khan  v.  Gul 
Ahmed  and  3  others  (2000  SCMR  122),  Mst.  Mehrun  Nisa  v. 
Zainulabidin  and  5  others  (1995  SCMR  1139)  and  Haji 
Muhammad  Latif  v.  Farman  Ali  and  another  (1990  SCMR 
1299). 
26.  Learned counsel for the petitioners as well as the Deputy 
Attorney General have taken the stance that as the proceedings 
pending  before  FIA  authorities  have  no  nexus  with  the  instant 
petition,  the  same  cannot  be  interfered  with  by  this  Court. 
Perhaps  said  plea  has  been  raised  by  both  sides  in  oblivion  of 
the fact  that  while  filing their  reply  in  the  petition  filed  by  the 
petitioners  under  section  22-A  &  B  Cr.P.C.  before  the  Ex-
Officio Justice of Peace, the FIA authorities inter-alia took the 
following stance: - 
“It is submitted that enquiry No.1/2014 of FIA/CCC was 
initiated  on  written  complaint  of  the  petitioner.  The 
complainant alleged the different employees of PIA were 
promoted on the basis fake/Bogus degrees. In this regard 
a detailed enquiry was conducted by Muhammad Sarwar 
SHO/Inspector/FIA/CCC Lahore, who submitted detailed 
report recommending there in that the matter is pending 
before  Honorable  Lahore  High  Court  Lahore  and  to 
avoid double jeopardy, it is recommended that either the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--30-- 
enquiry be dropped at FIA and or be kept pending till the 
decision of Honourable Lahore High Court Lahore.  The 
competent  Authority 
the 
circumstances closed the subject enquiry vide letter dated 
10-11-2014.  Later  the  enquiry  was  reopened  by  the 
competent 
No.DPL/E-
86/2013/FIA/CCC/LHR/ under the order of session court 
dated 23-12-2014 and entrusted to undersigned. 
considering 
authority 
letter 
after 
vide 
all 
the  enquiry 
to  provide  any 
After  reopening 
the  complainant  was 
summoned 
fresh  evidence.  The 
complainants  provided  written  statements  but  could  not 
provide  any  further  evidence.  The  statements  of  alleged 
persons were also recorded. 
the  enquiry 
Detailed  enquiry  has  been  conducted  in  the  matter, 
during 
the  alleged 
employees  of  PIA  obtained  their  degrees  from  Al-Khair 
University Lahore Campus and Al-Khair University AJK 
verified their degrees……” (emphasis provided) 
transpired 
that 
it 
In  view  of  the  aforesaid  clear  cut  stance  of  FIA  authorities 
before a Court of law renders it more than clear that they have 
got verified the degrees of the respondents from the University 
and  the  same  were  found  genuine.  In  this  backdrop  the 
continuation  of  proceedings  before  FIA  authorities  amounts  to 
misuse of law by the petitioners. 
27.  Admittedly, the petitioners are serving employees of PIA 
and  have  put  a  challenge  to  Promotion  Policy  issued  by  the 
department  in  addition  to  calling  in  question  the  promotion 
orders of the respondents. As terms & conditions of employees 
of  PIA  are  governed  under  non-statutory  rules, instant  petition 
filed on their behalf is not maintainable. The apex Court of the 
country,  in  its  recent  judgment  PIA  Corporation  v.  Syed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--31-- 
Suleman  Alam  Rizvi  and  others  (2015  SCMR  1545)  while 
clinching the issue under discussion has held that Constitutional 
petition  filed  by  employees  of  a  Corporation  having  non-
statutory rules, is not maintainable.   
28.  As  a  necessary  corollary  to  the  discussion  made  in  the 
fore-going  paragraphs  I  have  no  hesitation  to  hold  that  the 
petitioners  have  miserably  failed  to  make  out  a  case  for 
interference 
in 
the  Promotion  Policy  under  which 
the 
respondents  were  promoted  to  PG-VI.  Further,  no  concrete 
material  proving  the  degrees  possessed  by  the  respondents  as 
invalid has been produced by them. Consequently, this petition 
(W.P. No.14338/2011) is dismissed with no order as to cost.  
29. 
Insofar  as  connected  petitions  (W.P.  Nos.7086/2014, 
7135/2014,  7165/2014,  7167/2014  and  7168/2014)  are 
concerned, as this Court has already concluded that the degrees 
possessed  by 
the  respondents  (petitioners 
in  connected 
petitions) are valid especially after authentication for more than 
once  by  HEC,  FIA  authorities  have  no  power  to  proceed  with 
the complaint filed by Mudassar Hassan Rana etc. Resultantly, 
connected  petitions are allowed  and  the proceedings  pending 
before  FIA  authorities  are  quashed.  As  a  result, 
the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.14338 of 2011. 
 
--32-- 
complainant  filed  by  Mudassar  Hassan  Rana  etc.  before  FIA 
authorities shall stand dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
(Shujaat Ali Khan) 
Judge 
Announced in Open Court today i.e. 08.02.2017. 
Approved for Reporting. 
G R * 
 
 
     Judge 
 
    
