Stereo HCJAD 38 
Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. W.P. No.109335 of 2017 
Aamir Tufail Chaudhary 
Versus 
Government 
of 
Punjab and 2 others. 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Decision: 
03.01.2018 
Petitioner by: 
Respondents by: 
 
Barrister  Haris  Azmat,  Barrister 
Maryam  Hayat,  Mr.  Muhammad 
Bilal  Ramzan,  Mr.  Ali  Sindhu  & 
Mr.  Khursheed  Nawaz  Bangash, 
Advocates.  
Mr.  Abdul  Sammad,  Additioal 
Prosecutor-General. 
Mr.  Nawazish  Ali,  Director 
Prosecution Department. 
Mr.  Junaid  Safdar,  Branch  Officer 
PPSC. 
 
JAWAD  HASSAN,  J.-    Through  the  instant  Constitutional 
petition,  filed  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (the  “Constitution”),  the  Petitioner  has 
made the following prayers: 
“(i)  Set aside the Impugned Order; 
(ii)  Direct the Respondents to issue appointment letter 
to the Petitioner and appoint him for the job post; 
(iii)  Restrain 
the  Respondents 
someone else to the job post; 
from  appointing 
(iv)  Any  other  relief  deemed  appropriate  may  also  be 
granted.”   
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
2 
2. 
The brief facts revealed from the petition are that the Petitioner 
is an Advocate of High Court and is visually impaired and blind. The 
Petitioner is registered  with  Provincial  Council  for  Rehabilitation of 
Disabled Persons. He has also been issued with a disability certificate 
from  the  said  Department.  In  pursuance  of  an  advertisement  for  the 
post  of  Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor  (DDPP)  issued  by  the 
Respondent No.2 on 03.01.2016 in the Department of the Respondent 
No.3 reserving two posts for disabled persons, the Petitioner applied 
in disable quota and cleared all the tests and stood at Sr. No.1 in the 
list  of  the  successful  candidates.  Subsequently,  the  Petitioner  also 
passed the interview and his name was included in the list of disable 
candidates at Sr. No.14. The Respondent No.2 also issued letter dated 
18.05.2016 recommending the names of all the successful candidates 
including  the  Petitioner  in  which  a  condition  was  imposed  by  the 
Respondent No.2 that all the disabled candidates must be required to 
appear  before  a  Special  Medical  Board  to  re-examination  their 
disability. Thereafter, the Respondent No.2 also issued another letter 
dated  09.11.2016  recommending  the  name  of  the  Petitioner  against 
disable quota. However, despite repeated requests the Petitioner was 
not  issued  appointment  letter  whereas  all  the  other  selected 
candidates were issued joining letters.  
3. 
Feeling  aggrieved 
thereby 
the  Petitioner 
filed  W.P. 
No.27195/2016  which  was  withdrawn  by  the  Petitioner  on  the 
undertaking  given  by  the  Respondents  to  appoint  the  Petitioner. 
Thereafter, an offer letter was issued to the Petitioner on 21.12.2016 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
3 
imposing  condition  as  mentioned  in  letter  dated  18.05.2016  to  get  a 
clearance  from  Medical  Board.  Subsequently,  the  Respondents  also 
wrote  a  letter  dated  26.12.2016  to  the  Petitioner  for  his  re-
examination  before  the  Special  Medical  Board  to  determine  his 
disability  and  suitability  against  any  suitable  post.  In  pursuance  of 
which  the  Petitioner  appeared  before  the  Special  Medical  Board, 
constituted  on  the  instructions  of  the  Respondents  comprising  six 
senior  doctors  including  eye  specialist,  which  unanimously  gave  a 
report  dated  04.01.2017  that  the  Petitioner  be  adjusted  against  the 
disable  quota  in  the  Prosecution  Department.  But  on  refusal  to  be 
appointed the Petitioner  filed  a representation  on 06.07.2017 which 
was decided by the Respondent No.3  through impugned order dated 
17.10.2017,  on  the  directions  of  this  Court  passed  in  W.P. 
No.64050/2017 vide order dated 30.08.2017. Hence, this petition.  
4. 
Learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the impugned 
order is misconceived and against the actual facts of the matter; that 
in  view  of  condition  mentioned  in  letters  dated  18.05.2016  and 
21.12.2016  issued  by  the  Respondents,  the  Medical  Board  has 
already  cleared  the  Petitioner  through  report  dated  04.01.2017 
whereas directing the Petitioner to appear before  the Special Medical 
Board  thereafter  for  re-examination  is  based  on  mala    fide;  that  the 
said  report  of  the  Medical  Board  has  never    been  challenged  by  the 
Respondents;  that  the  impugned  order  is  based  on  mala  fide  just  to 
deprive the Petitioner from his fundamental right; that  a vested right 
has  been  accrued  in  favour  of  the  Petitioner  and  the  Respondents 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
4 
cannot deviate from the same; that a discriminatory attitude is being 
adopted  towards  the  case  of  the  Petitioner;  that  all  the  citizens  are 
equal before the law and are entitled to equal protection of law; that 
discrimination  against  any  person  on  the  basis  of  disability  is  a 
violation  of  the  inherent  dignity  and  worth  of  a  human  being;  that 
after  issuance  of  offer  letter  to  the  Petitioner  and  fulfilling  all  its 
requirements  the  Respondents  are  now  estopped  by  their  words  and 
conduct;  that  under 
  the  principle  of  locus  poenitentiae  the 
Respondents  cannot  deny  the  Petitioner  their  right  of  appointment 
against  the said post. To fortify his contentions,  the learned counsel 
for  the Petitioner has placed reliance on the case titled Hafiz Junaid 
Mahmood  Versus  Government  of  Punjab  and  others  (PLD  2017 
Lahore  1),  Muhammad  Yousaf  and  another  v.  Chairman  Federal 
Public  Service  Commission and  4 others  (PLD 2017  Lahore  406), 
Bashir  Ahmed  Solangi  v.  Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  Sindh, 
Karachi and 2 others (2004 SCMR 1864), Mst. Basharat Jehan v. 
Director  General  (2015  SCMR  1418),  Mst.  Saima  Hameed  v. 
Executive  District  Officer  (Health)  Pakpattan  Sharif  and  2  others 
(2011  PLC  (C.S)  351),  Zakir  Muneer  v. Executive  District  Officer 
(Health)  Abbottabgad  and  3  others  (2011  PLC  (C.S.)  1651), 
Munawar  Hassan  v.  Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  Balochistan 
and  3  others  (2017  PLC  (C.S.)  81)  &  Jawad  Ali  and  others  v. 
Superintendent Jail and others (2017 PLC (C.S.) 587).    
5. 
On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the  Respondents 
vehemently  controverted  the  arguments  advanced  by  the  learned 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
5 
counsel for the Petitioner and submitted that the impugned order has 
rightly  been  passed;  that  no  discrimination  has  been  made  to  the 
Petitioner  rather  the  Petitioner  was  required  to  appear  before  the 
Special  Medical  Board  for  re-verification  of  his  disability  and 
suitability; that the earlier Board was not a Special Medial Board  for 
re-verification  of  the  Petitioner’s  disability  and  determination  of 
suitability  to  perform  his  job  related  duties/functions;  that  in  the 
earlier Board which was  not a Special Medical Board, there was no 
finding 
regarding 
suitability 
to  perform  his 
job 
related 
duties/functions; that the  merit list or offer letter do not create  any 
vested right in favour of the Petitioner; that inspite of repeated letters 
dated  22.08.2017  and  13.09.2017,  the  Petitioner  did  not  appear 
before  the  Special  Medical  Board  which  is  a  pre-condition,  as  such 
he is not entitled to be issued appointment letter; that even now if the 
Petitioner appears before the Special Medical Board, the Respondents 
may deal with him in accordance with law. 
6. 
Arguments pro and con heard and record perused.    
7. 
From  the  record  it  is  evident  that  in  the  advertisement  two 
seats  were  reserved  for  disable  persons. The  Petitioner  after  passing 
all  the  tests  was  declared  successful  candidate  in  disable  quota  and 
duly  recommended  alongwith  other  candidates,  as  per  letter  dated 
18.05.2016.  The  recommendations  of  the  Punjab  Public  Service 
Commission  (the  “Commission”)  were  subject  to  passing  such 
medical test of the candidates as may be required under the Rules. As 
per  paragraph  8  of  the  said  letter  the  recommendation  of  the 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
6 
Commission  is  subject  to  the  condition  that  in  case  of  disabled 
candidate, he/she should reappear  before special medical board who 
should  re-verify  his/her  disability  and  determine  suitability  to 
perform  his/her  job  related  duties/functions.  Meaning  thereby  that 
the  condition  was  that  the  disable  person  has  to  (i)  reappear  before 
Special Medical Board (ii) who should re-verify his/her disability and 
(iii)  determine 
suitability 
to  perform  his/her 
job 
related 
duties/functions.  Subsequently,  the  Petitioner  was  issued  offer  letter 
dated  21.12.2016  mentioning  clause-xi  that  the  appointment  is 
subject to verification of your antecedents from Local Police/Special 
Branch and subject to clearance of medical board. In pursuance  of 
which  the  Petitioner  submitted  his  acceptance  letter  mentioning  
therein that with due respect I have the honour to submit that I accept 
the  offer  of  appointment  as  Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor  (BS-
18)  in  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  contained  in  letter 
No.SO(C)PPD/7-4/2014(Vol-III)  dated  21.12.2016.  The  Petitioner 
has  placed  on  record 
letter  dated  26.12.2016 
through  C.M. 
No.3/2017,  written  by  the  Respondent  No.3 
to  the  Medical 
Superintendent, Services Hospital, Lahore requesting as under: 
“It  is,  therefore,  requested  that  special  Medical  Board 
may be constituted for medical examination of the officer 
at  the  earliest    and  report  regarding  his  fitness  be 
submitted  to  this  Department  before  his  joining  as 
Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor  (BS-18)  in  Public 
Prosecution Department.”  
8. 
It is clear from the record that the Special Medical Board was 
constituted  in  pursuance  of  letter  dated  26.12.2016  written  by  the 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
7 
Respondent  No.3  to  the  Medical  Superintendent,  Services  Hospital, 
Lahore  which  conducted  his  medical  examination  with  the  finding 
that “adjusted against disable quota”. The said Board prepared report 
on 04.01.2017. It is very much apparent from the said letter that the 
request  was  made  therein  that  Special  Medical  Board  may  be 
constituted for medical examination of the officer at the earliest and 
report  regarding  his  fitness  be  submitted  to  this  Department  before 
his  joining  as  Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor  (BS-18)  in  Public 
Prosecution Department, which was  duly conducted in favour of the 
Petitioner; meaning thereby that except the report of the said special 
medical  board  (dated  04.01.2017)  nothing  was  required  before 
joining of the Petitioner as DDPP. 
9. 
The record also reveals that the Petitioner has attached with the 
petition  copy  of  disability  certificate  as  Annexure-B.  Thereafter  he 
got  conducted  his  medical  examination  from  the  Special  Medical 
Board  constituted  in  pursuance  of  letter  dated  26.12.2016  of  the 
Respondents.  The  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
Respondents  that  the  Medical  Superintendent  Services  Hospital, 
Lahore  was  issued  letters  dated  22.08.2017  and  thereafter  dated 
13.09.2017  for  re-examination  of  the  Petitioner  by  the  Special 
Medical  Board  to  determine  his  suitability  to  perform  his/her  job 
related  duties/functions  but  the  Petitioner  did  not  appear  before  the 
said  Board,  as  such  his  representation  was  dismissed,  is  not 
instructive.  Because,  the  earlier  Special  Medical  Board    was 
constituted  in  pursuance  of  letter  dated  26.12.2016  and  thereafter 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
8 
when  the  Petitioner  was  not  appointed  and  he  started  litigation  the 
Respondents issued the said letters dated 22.08.2017 and 13.09.2017 
after a considerable delay of about 9 months which smells mala fide 
on the part  of the Respondents and as counter blast of litigation. This 
clearly  shows  that  the  Respondents  were  judicially  estopped  from 
writing  the  letters  again  because  already  on  26.12.2016  specific 
instructions  for  constitution  of  Special  Medical  Board  were  issued. 
Reliance in this regard can be placed on the case  titled  JDW Sugar 
Mills LTD. and others v. Province of Punjab and others (PLD 2017 
Lahore 68) wherein it has been held as under: 
“Fundamental duty of court to protect the integrity of the 
judicial  process  and  a  party  could  not  approbate  and 
reprobate  at  the  same  time.  When  a  party  took  an 
inconsistent position in the same case or in a prior case, 
the  principle  of  judicial  estoppel  should  be  applied. 
Judicial  estoppel  was  an  equitable  doctrine,  which 
precluded  a  party  from  taking  inconsistent  positions 
before the court and protected the integrity of the judicial 
system  and  not  of  the  litigant.  Principle  of  judicial 
estoppel 
sought 
to  ensure 
respect 
for 
judicial 
proceedings  and  to  avoid  inconsistency  and  abuse  of 
process.  Under  the  doctrine  of  judicial  estoppel,  court 
could stop a party from taking up contradictory stances if 
it  was  clearly  inconsistent  with  the  previous  position 
taken by that party before another Court. Application of 
judicial  estoppel  depended  upon 
the 
facts  and 
circumstances of each case and when a party put forth a 
position,  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  one  case  and  was 
successful  in  such  an  assertion,  then  that  party  was 
estopped from asserting a different position on the same 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
9 
facts in a second case. Party, who was to be estopped in 
the  second  case  had  to  be  the  same  party  in  the  earlier 
case meaning thereby the party is the same in both cases. 
Issue for which the party was estopped from asserting its 
facts must have had some nexus in both proceedings and 
it was imperative that such equitable principle be applied 
so  that  a  judicial  process  functions  properly  and 
effectively.  Litigants  must  approach  the  Court  in  a 
truthful  manner  especially  if  the  litigant  party  was  the 
government.  Party  could  always  vigorously  assert  its 
position, but could not misrepresent the facts in order to 
gain  some  advantage  in  the  process.  When  a  party  had 
formally  asserted  a  certain  version  of  the  facts  in 
litigation,  he  or  she  could  not  later  change  those  facts 
because  the  initial  version  no  longer  suits  him  or  her. 
For  application  of  the  principle  of judicial  estoppel,  the 
Court  must  ascertain  that  a  party  had  asserted  a 
contradictory  position  before  another  Court  which 
position  was  accepted  by  that  Court.  Party's  later 
position  must  be  clearly  inconsistent  with  its  earlier 
position, and the courts should inquire whether the party 
had succeeded in persuading a court to accept its earlier 
position  and  it  had  to  be  determined  whether  the  party 
seeking  to  assert  the  inconsistent  position  would  derive 
an unfair advantage or impose an unfair detriment on the 
opposing  party  if  not  estopped.  Party's  change  in  its 
factual  or 
legal  position 
threatened 
to  produce 
inconsistent  decisions  by  the  courts  and  therefore,  the 
doctrine of judicial estoppel was necessary to protect the 
integrity  of  the  court  from  the  harm  caused  when  a 
litigant  engaged  in  cynical  gamesmanship,  achieving 
success on one position yet arguing a different position in 
another  case  to  satisfy  an  exigency  of  the  moment. 
Allowing  a  litigant  to  adopt  contradictory  positions  in 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
10 
different courts would mean that one court was misled or 
perhaps defrauded.” 
10. 
 
From the above, it can safely be held that a vested right 
has been accrued in favour of the Petitioner which cannot be deviated 
from  by 
the  Respondents.  Furthermore, 
the  Petitioner  filed 
representation  when  he  was  declined  appointment  which  was 
dismissed  vide  the  impugned  order.  The  perusal  of  the  impugned 
order  reflects  that  the  above  facts  have  not  been  taken  into 
consideration  by  the  Respondents  while  deciding  the  representation, 
as such the impugned order is liable to be set aside. 
11.  This  Court  recently  passed  judgment  in  a  similar  issue  in 
Muhammad Yousaf’s case supra in which it has been held as under: 
“Fundamental  rights  under  the  Constitution  do  not 
distinguish between a person with or without disabilities. 
It  recognizes  the  inherent  and  inalienable  dignity  of  all 
human  beings  as  the  foundation  of  freedom,  justice  and 
peace. Right to life and right to dignity are the epicenters 
of our constitutional architecture. Right to life recognizes 
the  importance  of  accessibility  to  physical,  social, 
economic  and  cultural  environment,  to  health  and 
education and to information and communication. Such a 
right  enables  persons  with  disabilities  to  fully  enjoy  all 
human  rights  and  fundamental  freedoms.  Every  human 
being  has  the  inherent  right  to  life  and  to  ensure  its 
effective 
includes  persons  with 
disabilities, at par with the others. Right to life and right 
to dignity are deeply interwoven” 
enjoyment, 
this 
12.  Moreover,  this  Court  in  Hafiz  Junai  Mahmood  case  supra  has 
held that this constitutional construct creates an obligation on the State 
and other  institutions  of  the State to  make  all possible  endeavours to 
mainstream  persons  with  different  abilities  and  to  embrace  the 
diversity  in  the  society.  The  State  and  its  institutions  are  under  a 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
11 
constitutional  obligation  to  go  the  extra  mile  and  ensure,  within  the 
means  available, 
that  person  with  disabilities  get  reasonable 
accommodation in order to enjoy their fundamental rights in the same 
manner as enjoyed by other citizens of Pakistan. It is for the State and 
its  institutions  to  provide  the  architecture,  the  structure,  the  assistive 
and  adaptive  technology,  the  system,  the  equipment  and  the 
facilitative  support  to  persons  with  disabilities,  so  they  can  actualize 
their  constitutional  rights  and  freedom.  In  the  present  case,  the 
department  should  have  considered  the  possibility  of  providing 
necessary  technical  and  human  support  to  ensure  that  the  petitioner 
was able to perform as an educator and was not discriminated on the 
ground of disability. 
13. 
 
Pursuant  to  the  Office  letter  dated  21.12.2016  a  vested 
right  has  been  created  in  favour  of  the  Petitioner  which  now  cannot 
be  taken  away  by  not  issuing  the  appointment  letter.  It  is  also 
submitted by the learned counsel for the Petitioner that the Petitioner 
was selected for the post of Assistant Director Legal in the Office of 
Anti-Corruption Establishment Punjab on disability quota as well but 
he did not join the same because he was assured by the Respondents 
that  he  will  be  issued  an  appointment  letter  by  them.  It  is  settled 
principle  of  law  that  once  a  decisive  step  has  been  taken  by  the 
relevant  authority  the  same  cannot  be  retracted  since  it  has  vested 
valuable  rights.  The  offer  letter  was  issued  to  the  Petitioner  and  the 
Petitioner  in  consequence  whereof  fulfilled  all  the  terms  and 
conditions  of  the  offer  letter  by  having  his  degrees  verified  and 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
12 
having  a  fresh  medical  examination.  The  Respondents  under  the 
principle of locus poenitentiae cannot deny the Petitioner the post as 
valuable rights had accrued to the Petitioner and the same could not 
be recalled. 
14. 
 
In  another  case  titled  Bashir  Ahmed  Solangi  v.  Chief 
Secretary,  Government  of  Sindh,  Karachi  and  2  others  (2004 
SCMR  1864)  it  has  been  held  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan that it is settled principle of law that if inconsequence to an 
order passed by an authority competent to pass such an order, certain 
rights  are  created  in,  favour  of  a  person,  the  said  order  cannot  be 
subsequently  undone  or  withdrawn.  The  authority  being  responsible 
of  passing  of  an  order  creating  certain  rights  would  not  be  legally 
justified to take a turn and retrace the steps to undo the said order on 
the  ground  that  it  was  passed  in  violation  of  rules  or  was  a  wrong 
order.    
15. 
 
Moreover, in similar case Mst. Basharat Jehan supra  it 
has  been  held  that  once  a  person  is  appointed  after  fulfilling  all  the 
codal  formalities,  appointment  letter  is  issued,  it  was  held  that  a 
vested right is created and appointment letter could not be withdrawn. 
Reliance  is  also  placed  on  the  case  titled  Mst.  Saima  Hameed  v. 
Executive  District  Officer  (Health)  Pakpattan  Sharif  and  2  others 
(2011  PLC  (C.S)  351),  Zakir  Muneer  v. Executive  District  Officer 
(Health)  Abbottabgad  and  3  others  (2011  PLC  (C.S.)  1651), 
Munawar  Hassan  v.  Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  Balochistan 
W.P. No.109335 /2017 
13 
and  3  others  (2017  PLC  (C.S.)  81)  &  Jawad  Ali  and  others  v. 
Superintendent Jail and others (2017 PLC (C.S.) 587). 
16.  On the touchstone of the above discussion, I am of the firmed 
view that the impugned order has been passed against the actual facts 
and is misconceived. Resultantly, the same is hereby set aside and the 
instant petition is allowed. The Respondents are directed to allow the 
Petitioner to submit his joining into service as DDPP within ten days 
from the receipt of certified copy of this judgment with intimation to 
the Deputy Registrar (Judicial) of this Court.  
                                          
                                
       
 
   
 
      (JAWAD HASSAN) 
 
JUDGE 
 
       
 
*M.NAVEED* 
