Stereo.  H C J   Form HCJDA 38. 
 
Judgment Sheet 
 
  
IN THELAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 
 
Civil Revision No. 1681/2016. 
 
, etc. 
 
T.M.A., etc.    
versus  
Khalid Rafique Ahmad. 
Date of Hearin  Date of hearing       
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
05.03.2018  
Petitioners by:  
 
Respondent by:  
Mr. Tasawar Hussain Gondal, Advocate. 
  M/s. Shaigan Ijaz & Ihsan Ahmad Bhindar, Advocates. 
 
Ch.  Muhammad  Masood  Jahangir,  J.-  By  filing  the  instant  Civil 
Revision,  the  petitioners  have  assailed  order  as  well  as  judgment  of  the  two 
Courts  below  whereby  application  for  grant  of  temporary  injunction  made  by 
respondent/plaintiff in his declaratory suit was concurrently allowed.  
2. 
As per facts disclosed in the plaint, the respondent claimed himself to 
be  the  owner  of  property  measuring  07½  marlas  and  in  January,  2010  he 
approached  the  petitioners  for  the  approval  of  map  to  renovate  the  hospital 
already  constructed  at  site  and  on  its  receipt  the  petitioners  through  notice 
dated  01.08.2011 
required  deposit  of  conversion 
fee  amounting 
to 
Rs.9,00,000/-,  but  subsequently  through  notice  dated  05.09.2011,  half  of  the 
said  amount  was  demanded  and  the  vires  of  these  notices  were  assailed 
through  institution  of  declaratory  suit  accompanied  by  an  application  under 
Order  XXXIX  Rules  1  &  2  of  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908  for 
restraining  the  petitioners/defendants  to  act  upon  the  impugned  notices.  The 
suit  as  well  as  application  was  contested  with 
the  defence 
that 
respondent/plaintiff  as  per  the  Punjab  Land  Use  (Classification,  Restrictions 
and Redevelopment) Rules, 2009 was under obligation to pay the fee, and that 
without  paying  the  fee,  neither  nature  of  a  property  could  be  allowed  to  be 
converted  nor  its  site  plan  would  be  sanctioned.  The  application  for  grant  of 
Civil Revision No.1681/2016 
temporary  injunction  was  concurrently  allowed  vide  orders  referred  in  para  1 
2 
ante, hence the instant Civil Revision. 
3. 
4. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
It was not denied by  the learned counsel for the respondent/plaintiff 
that the latter submitted the site plan for its approval to construct hospital in the 
residential area. The original record was brought by the learned counsel for the 
petitioners and recital of application made by the respondent to the former was 
reflective  of  the  fact  that  he  was  eager  to  raise  a  new  commercial  building 
having  three  floors  up  to  the  height  of  35  feet.  No  doubt  adjacent  to  it,  a 
hospital  had  already  been  approved  and  constructed  over  a  residential  plot 
titled by father of the respondent and it appeared that for the extension thereof, 
the  plan  was  submitted  by  respondent.  It  was  a  simple  case  to  the  extent  of 
refusal  of  temporary  injunction,  as  the  respondent  failed  to  make  out  a  prima 
facie  arguable  case,  who  at  the  most  was  to  face  the  loss  in  terms  of  coins, 
which could not consider to be an irreparable loss, hence all the three elements 
did  not  tilt  in  fvour  of  the  respondent,  but  both  the  Courts  below  without 
adverting thereto passed the impugned orders.  
5. 
Consequently, this Civil Revision is allowed, the impugned order as 
well  as  judgment  passed  by  the  learned  Courts  below  is  hereby  set  aside  and 
application  moved  under  Order  XXXIX  Rules  1  &  2  of  the  Code  ibid  stands 
dismissed.  However,  it  is  clarified  that  the  above  findings  being  based  on 
tentative  assessment  of  the  material  on  record  are  not  meant  to  prejudice  the 
case of either party at  the time of final adjudication, which will be  dealt with 
on the basis of the evidence likely to be adduced by the parties during the trial. 
6. 
Before  parting  with  this  judgment,  to  this  Court,  most  apposite  and 
imperative  question  would  be;  whether  after  paying  the  conversion  fee,  a 
hospital  or  any  commercial  building  could  be  allowed  to  be  erected  in 
residential area. There is no cavil to admit that use of property is a recognized 
right, but it has to remain subject to reasonable restriction and no one can be 
Civil Revision No.1681/2016 
3 
allowed to construct or use his premises in whatever manner he likes, even at 
the  cost  of  discomposure  and  nuisance  to  the  others  breathing  in  the 
immediate  neighborhood  or  exactly  in  the  vicinity  thereof.  I  must  add  here 
that  although  some  Rules/Regulations  are  in  field  to  countenance  any  such 
conversion  amounting  to  distract  the  peace,  coziness,  health,  greenery/flora, 
smooth  flow  of  traffic  and  most  significantly  in  violation  of  master  plan 
approved for the domiciliary region, but the Rules/Regulations are envisioned 
to homogenize the associations  inter se neighbourers as  well as among State 
and the Nationals, which neither can be supported nor perpetuated and there is 
no other axiom that every organ of the State including Federal and Provincial 
Governments  as  well  as  Local  Government  besides  Cantonment  Boards  is 
bound  to  follow  the  law  to  perform  its  obligations  and  none  can  claim 
exception  to  it.  A  master  plan  for  a  Housing  Scheme  without  reserving 
independent  plots 
for  academic 
institutions,  hospital, 
commercial 
areas/shops/malls, mosque, playgrounds or  banquet halls having independent 
areas for parking cannot be approved. The departments of the State especially 
Municipalities, Local Government and Cantonment Boards are functioning to 
mint money or raise their revenue without sensing the problems to be faced by 
the citizens for whom comfort/ease they were established and for that reason 
each of the residential area has changed its character. The schools, hospitals, 
clinics,  marriage  halls,  gymnasiums,  snooker  clubs, saloons,  shopping malls, 
shops  hotels,  guest  rooms  and  offices  have  rapidly  been  erected  in  our 
residential areas without realizing that its outcome will be nuisance, pollution, 
congestion,  discomfort,  injury  to  privacy  and  hurdle  to  flow  of  traffic.  We 
have  ruined  our  civilization  and  no  heed  is  being  paid  on  behalf  of  the 
concerned State organs or the authorities including Local Government Bodies 
to  overcome  these  problems.  The  plans  of  the  commercial  buildings  without 
examining  its  suitability  or  considering  its  backdrop  are  being  approved  on 
the whims and desires of the persons, who are either financially sound or have 
Civil Revision No.1681/2016 
4 
some influential personality at their back. Practically plans for raising most of 
the  commercial  buildings  are  being  sanctioned  without  comprehending  that 
parking  area  was  reserved  or  not,  but  even  if  at  the  time  of  sanction,  it  was 
shown  therein,  then  after  construction  same  starts  utilizing  for  commercial 
activities  and  the  officials  of  building  wings  of  the  concerned  authorities/ 
Local Bodies are benefitted thereof, whereas traffic hurdles are to be faced by 
the citizens and the command of the traffic police  ceased its effect to restore 
the flow of traffic. To adjudge civilization of a society, traffic discipline may 
be one of its indicators and we have been flopped so far to achieve any respect 
to this extent. Much water has flown under the bridges and there left no much 
time  to  save  our  society  from  further  destruction.  It  is  high  time  for  the 
awakening  of  individuals  as  well  as  organs  of  the  State  to  remove  the 
infirmities  wherever  those  are  and  to  advance  forward  while  realizing  that 
every  step  has  to  be  taken  as  per  law  and  law  only,  hence  any 
Rules/Regulations, if are made and still in field, may not be applied to militate 
the master plan of a scheme, even at the cost of generating revenue cannot be 
enforced,  but  have  to  be  revisited  at  appropriate  forums.  Let  a  copy  of  this 
judgment  be  forwarded  to  the  Chief  Secretary,  Secretary  Local  Bodies, 
Government of Punjab, Lahore, Attorney General of Pakistan, Islamabad and 
Advocate  General,  Punjab,  Lahore  to  examine  the  relevant  law/rules  on  the 
subject  for  conversion  of  residential  area  to  commercial  one  and  make/ 
propose necessary amendments/improvements to eliminate the hurdles created 
thereby  for  maintaining  beautification  of  the  vicinity  as  per  its  original  plan. 
They  are  also  required  to  look  that  in  future  no  residential  building  will  be 
allowed  to  be  converted  into  another  class  to  cause  nuisance  for  the  other 
inhabitants  and  on  commercial  areas/roads  no  commercial  building  to  be 
approved  without  reserving  adequate  area/spot  for  parking  of  vehicles  and 
also ensure that the same is not used except for the said purpose as well. The 
relevant  Authorities  are  also  obliged  to  take  action  for  the  shifting  of 
Civil Revision No.1681/2016 
5 
commercial  activities  going  on  in  the  residential  areas  to  restore  its  original 
position  as  well  as  peace  and  also  revisit  the  earlier  approved  plans  of  the 
commercial  buildings  available  on  commercial  zones/roads  and  if  anyone  is 
found  short  of  basic  necessities,  it  should  be  given  a  notice  to  get  rid  of  the 
inadequacies  within  maximum  period  of  four  months  and  even  then  if  they 
fail,  stringent  action  for  the  stoppage  of  their  proscribed  and  irrational  
activities  triggering  problems  for  the  others  shall  be  commenced  and  unless 
the  deficiencies  are  made  good,  no  such  commercial  buildings,  which  are 
providing big source for blocking traffic in our main cities, will be allowed to 
exist. 
 
 
K. Mahmood 
 
(Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir) 
Judge 
 
                                         Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
