Stereo.HCJDA 38. 
JUDGMENT SHEET. 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
MAQSOOD PERVAIZ CH. 
 
Versus. 
 
MST. NAUSHEEN CHAUDHARY, ETC. 
 
JUDGMENT. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of hearing:  15.11.2018 
 
Petitioner by: 
Mr. Liauqat Ali Butt, Advocate 
Respondent 
No.1: 
Mr. Saqib Haroon Chishti, Advocate. 
 
Mirza  Viqas  Rauf,  J.  This  petition  under  Article  199  of  The 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 urges a dispute inter-se the 
petitioner namely Maqsood Pervaiz Chaudhry and his daughter Mst. Nausheen 
Chaudhary  i.e.  respondent  No.1  (hereinafter  referred  as  “respondent”).  The 
background of the dispute is that the petitioner was married to Mst. Robina i.e. 
respondent No.2 and as a result of matrimonial tie, the “respondent” was born 
on 30th June, 1983. The parents of the “respondent” parted their ways through a 
divorce in the year 1987. As the “respondent” was minor at that time, she was 
handed  over  to  her  mother,  who  later  on  got  married  with  one  Muhammad 
Nawaz.  In  the  year  2012,  the  “respondent”  instituted  a  suit  for  recovery  of 
maintenance  allowance  arraying  her  parents  as  defendants.  During  the 
pendency  of  the  suit,  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court  fixed  the  interim 
maintenance  @  Rs.18,000/- by  way of  order  dated  15th  November,  2012 with 
the direction to the petitioner to pay the maintenance to the “respondent” on or 
before  14th  of  each  month.  On  failure  to  pay  the  interim  maintenance,  the 
learned  Judge  Family  Court  decreed  the  suit  by  invoking  the  provisions 
contained  in  Section  17-A  of  The  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  by  way  of  order 
dated 20th February, 2015. The appeal was though filed by the petitioner before 
 
 
 
                  W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
 
 
2 
the learned Additional District Judge but the same was dismissed being barred 
by time vide order dated 4th July, 2015, hence this petition.  
2. 
 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  contended  that  petitioner  being 
father can be held responsible for payment of maintenance to the “respondent” 
only  when  she  shows  obedience  to  him.  It  is  contended  that  “respondent”  is 
major  and  she  is  even  avoiding  to  live  with  her  father.  Learned  counsel 
submitted  that  petitioner  has  been  knocked  out  on  the  basis  of  technicalities. 
Learned counsel argued that even in absence of any evidence, the learned Judge 
Family  Court  was obliged  to  consider  all  the  relevant  factors while  fixing  the 
quantum  of  maintenance.  While  making  reference  to  the  impugned  judgment 
and  decree  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  learned  counsel 
submitted that same is the outcome of inapplication of judicious mind. Learned 
counsel added that even otherwise petitioner has no source of income to satisfy 
the  decree,  which  is  harsh  and  arbitrary. It  is  contended  that  appeal  under  the 
circumstances  should  not  have  been  dismissed  by  the  learned  Additional 
District  Judge  in  a  mechanical  manner  on  the  basis  of  limitation,  which  was 
even duly explained.   
3. 
 
Conversely,  learned  counsel  for  the  “respondent”  vehemently 
resisted  the  instant  petition  and  submitted  that  the  petitioner,  by  his  own 
conduct, is not entitled for the discretionary relief. He added that petitioner has 
failed to pay any maintenance to the “respondent” and he does not deserve any 
leniency. 
4. 
 
After having heard learned counsel for both the sides, I have perused 
the record. 
5. 
 
The matter in hand is not an ordinary case involving maintenance of 
minor  child.  The  “respondent”  no  doubt  is  the  daughter  of  petitioner.  She  is, 
however, a major and admittedly having age of 35 years. She instituted the suit 
against  both  her  parents  averring  therein  that  soon  after  separation,  petitioner 
handed  over  money  to  respondent  No.2  for  purchase  of  residential  house  for 
“respondent”,  who  accordingly  purchased  house  No.91  Karim  Block,  Allama 
 
 
 
                  W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
 
 
3 
Iqbal  Town,  Lahore  but  she  malafidely  got  transferred  the  same  in  her  own 
name  instead  of  “respondent”.  It  is,  however,  an  admitted  position  that  house 
was rented out and rent derived therefrom was spent upon the maintenance of 
“respondent”. As per own stance of the “respondent” she was getting education 
from American National School and all the expenditures were catered through 
the monthly rent of the house till 2003 whereafter respondent No.2 refused to 
pay any maintenance to her. This ultimately prompted the “respondent” to file 
the suit against her parents.  
6. 
 
It  is  noteworthy  that  claim  of  maintenance  was  though  claimed 
against the parents jointly but only petitioner was burdened with the liability of 
maintenance.  Record  reveals  that  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  while 
proceeding  with  the  suit,  fixed  the  interim  maintenance  @  Rs.18,000/-  per 
month by way of order dated 15th November, 2012 and directed the petitioner 
to  deposit  the  same  till  14th  of  each  month.  The  petitioner,  feeling  aggrieved 
filed  W.P.No.30484/2012  which  was  disposed  of  with 
the  following 
observations vide order dated 11th December, 2012: - 
“2. 
Since  no  evidence  has  been  brought  on  record  regarding  the 
income of the petitioner, therefore, I deem it appropriate to modify the order 
of the learned trial Court and interim maintenance allowance is  reduced to 
Rs.10,000/- per month with the further direction to the learned trial Court to 
decide the question of maintenance of the respondent/plaintiff within a period 
of one month from the order of this Court without being influenced from any 
observation of this Court.” 
 
 
The  above  referred  order  was  then  assailed  by  the  “respondent” 
through I.C.A No.36 of 2013 but the same was dismissed vide order dated 24th 
January, 2013. The suit, however, was ultimately decreed vide order dated 20th 
February,  2015  in  terms  of  Section  17-A  of  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  on 
account of failure of the petitioner to pay interim maintenance and he was held 
liable to pay Rs.20,000/- per month with 20% annual increase from the date of 
institution of the suit till marriage of the “respondent” whereas suit to the extent 
of respondent No.2 was dismissed. The petitioner though filed an appeal under 
Section  14  of  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  before  the  learned  Additional 
 
 
 
                  W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
 
 
4 
District Judge, Lahore but same was dismissed vide order dated 4th July, 2015, 
being barred by time.  
7.     
Though dismissal of appeal of the petitioner on account of limitation 
apparently burdens him to satisfy this Court as to what illegality is committed 
by the learned Appellate Court in this regard but the circumstances brought on 
record  to  this  effect  are  sufficient  to  persuade  the  Court  to  ponder  upon  the 
legality  and  propriety  of  the  impugned  orders,  instead  of  closing  the  eyes  to 
perpetuate an illegality, which is floating on the surface of record. 
8. 
 
Before adverting to the question of limitation, it would be relevant to 
first analyze the legality of proceedings before the family Court resulting into 
passing  of  decree  for  maintenance  against  the  petitioner.  No  doubt  father  is 
bound to maintain his child but in the manner befitting his status and financial 
condition.   
9. 
 
As already observed, this is not  an ordinary case of maintenance of 
minor child but it relates to a female who attained majority and living separate 
from her father since separation of matrimonial tie of her parents. Admittedly, 
soon  after  separation,  the  petitioner  (father)  had  arranged  a  source  of 
maintenance  for  the  “respondent”  in  the  shape  of  house  handed  over  to 
respondent No.2 (mother), who initially maintained her through the income of 
rent.  This  clearly  shows  that  father  was  well  aware  of  his  responsibilities  to 
maintain  her  daughter  and  for  that  very  purpose  he  had  made  sufficient 
arrangements. 
10.   
It is quite strange that suit was though instituted against parents and 
petitioner resisted the suit seriously with the contention that the “respondent” is 
a married person and she is disobedient towards him, the learned Judge Family 
Court  burdened  him  with  the  maintenance,  while  ignoring  all  the  relevant 
material. 
11.   
Chapter  XIX  of  Principles  of  Mahommedan  Law  by  D.F.  Mulla 
deals with  the  maintenance of  relatives. Para 370  lays down  the conditions  of 
maintenance of children and grandchildren, which reads as under: - 
 
 
 
                  W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
 
 
5 
“370.Maintenance  of  children  and  grandchildren  (1)  A  father  is 
bound to maintain his sons until they have attained the age of puberty. He is 
also  bound  to  maintain  his  daughters  until  they  are  married.  But  he  is  not 
bound  to  maintain  his  adult  sons  unless  they  are  disabled  by  infirmity  or 
disease.  The  fact  that  the  children  are  in  the  custody  of  their  mother  during 
their infancy (section 352) does not relieve the father from the obligation of 
maintaining  them.  But  the  father  is  not  bond  to  maintain  a  child  who  is 
capable of being maintained out of his or her own property. 
(2) 
If  the  father  is  poor,  and  incapable  of  earning  by  his  own 
labour, the mother, if she is in easy circumstances, is bound to maintain her 
children as the father would be. 
(3). 
If  the  father  is  poor  and  infirm,  and  the  mother  also  is  poor, 
the obligation to maintain the children lies on the grandfather, provided he is 
in easy circumstances.”  
(Underlining supplied for emphasis.) 
It  is  manifestly  clear from  the  above  that  father  is only bound  to  maintain his 
unmarried major daughter. There is yet another condition disentitling the child 
from  claiming  maintenance  if  he/she  could  be  maintained  from  his/her  own 
property or the father is poor and infirm. 
12.   
Bare  reading  of  the  above  referred  provision  of  law  envisages  that 
father cannot be burdened with the maintenance in all circumstances. There is 
no  cavil  that  a  family  Court  is  vested  with  the  power  to  pass  an  order  for 
interim maintenance at any stage of proceedings in a suit for maintenance under 
Section  17-A  of  the  Family  Courts  Act,  1964  to  be  paid  to  a  child  by  the 
fourteenth  day  of  each  month,  failing  which  the  Court  may  strike  off  the 
defense  of  defendant  and  decree  the  suit  but  such  powers  are  not  to  be 
exercised arbitrarily, illegally and whimsically. 
13.   
Even in case of non-compliance of order of interim maintenance, the 
family Court is obliged under Section 17-A of the Family Courts Act, 1964 to 
look into the contents of plaint and other supporting documents on the record of 
the case. After having examined the order dated 20th February, 2015, resulting 
into  decreeing  the  suit  on  the  mandate  of  Section  17-A  ibid,  there  can  be  no 
second  opinion  that  suit  was  decreed  in  a  perfunctory,  whimsical  and 
 
 
 
                  W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
 
 
6 
mechanical  manner.  Learned  counsel  for  the  “respondent”  even  when 
confronted with this aspect, he has no answer rather conceded legal flaw in the 
order passed by the learned Family Court. 
14.   
There  is  yet  another  important  aspect  that  Section  17-A  of  The 
Family Courts Act, 1964 was inserted initially in the Act ibid, which was in the 
following form: - 
17-A. Interim order for maintenance.—At any stage of proceedings  
in a suit for maintenance, the Family Court may pass an interim order 
for  maintenance,  whereunder  the  payment  shall  be  made  by  the 
fourteenth of each month, failing which the Court may strike off the 
defence of the defendant and decree the suit. 
The  above  provision  was,  however,  later  on  substituted  by  the  Family  Courts 
(Amendment) Act 2015 (XI of 2015) in the following manner: - 
“17-A.  Suit  for  maintenance.– (1) In  a  suit  for  maintenance,  the 
Family  Court  shall,  on  the  date  of  the  first  appearance  of  the 
defendant, fix interim monthly maintenance for wife or a child and if 
the  defendant  fails  to  pay  the  maintenance  by  fourteen  day  of  each 
month,  the  defence  of  the  defendant  shall  stand  struck  off  and  the 
Family  Court  shall  decree  the  suit  for  maintenance  on  the  basis  of 
averments in the plaint and other supporting documents on record of 
the case. 
(2)  In a decree for maintenance, the Family Court may: 
(a)  fix an amount of maintenance higher than the amount prayed for 
in  the  plaint  due  to  afflux  of  time  or  any  other  relevant 
circumstances; and 
(b)  prescribe the annual increase in the maintenance. 
(3)  If the Family Court does not prescribe the annual increase in the 
maintenance, the maintenance fixed by the Court shall automatically 
stand increased at the rate of ten percent each year. 
(4)  For  purposes  of  fixing  the  maintenance,  the  Family  Court  may 
summon  the  relevant  documentary  evidence  from  any  organization, 
body  or  authority  to  determine  the  estate  and  resources  of  the 
defendant.” 
(Underlining is supplied for emphasizes) 
 
 
 
                  W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
 
 
7 
From the collective reading of new and old form of Section 17-A of the 
Family  Courts Act,  1964,  it  can  safely be  inferred  that  the  said provision  was 
inserted in order to protect the minor children and the wife during the pendency 
of the suit, so that they should not be hampered due to financial constraints in 
their daily life. After the amendment in the year 2015, the intent of legislature 
became  more  clear  and  unequivocal  that  the  grant  of  interim  maintenance 
relates to wife or a child. The world “Child” is nowhere defined in The Family 
Courts  Act,  1964.  For  the  purpose  of  convenience,  we  thus  have  to  advert  to 
ordinary meaning of child. The dictionary meaning of word “Child” in different 
law dictionaries is given as follows:- 
a. The New International Webster’s Comprehensive Dictionary of 
the  English  Language  (Deluxe  Encyclopedic  Edition):  “Child”  1. 
An offspring of either sex of human parents; a son or daughter. 2. A 
young  person  of  either  sex  at  any  age  less  than  maturity,  but  most 
commonly  one  between  infancy  and  youth.  3.  A  descendant  in  any 
degree: the Children of Israel. 4. A childish person; one immature in 
judgment  or  discretion.  5.  A  person  or  thing  considered  as  an 
offspring or product: Poems are the  children of fancy.  6. A follower 
or disciple. 7. Law A legitimate son or daughter. In some States, as in 
Louisiana, the term includes all descendants in the direct line.  
b.  Black’s Law Dictionary (Ninth Edition): 1. A person under the 
age  of  majority.  2.  Hist.  At  common  law,  a  person  who  has  not 
reached the age of 14. 3. A boy or girl; a young person. 4. A son or 
daughter 5. A baby or fetus 
c.  The  Chambers  Dictionary  (12th  Edition):  “Child/Children;  a 
very young person  (up to the age of sixteen for the purpose of some 
acts  of  parliament,  under  fourteen  in  criminal  law);  a  female  infant 
(dialect and archaic); a son or daughter; a childish person; a person 
strongly  influenced  by,  associated  with,  or  a  product  of  (another 
person, or group of people, an age or environment, etc); a disciple or 
adherent:  (also  childe  or  chylde)  a  youth  of  gentle  birth,  esp  in 
ballads, etc (archaic); an offspring; a descendant; an inhabitant.  
d.  GEM  Advanced  Practical  Dictionary  (English  to  English  and 
Urdu With Brief General Knowledge): “Child” a new born human 
being: offspring: an infant. 
 
 
 
                  W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
 
 
8 
e.    Legal  Terms  &  Phrases  Judicially  Defined  from  1947-2012 
(2013  Edition):  “Child”  youngster,  baby,  offspring,  teenager.  “The 
word ‘child’ according to its use in the English language has different 
meanings,  according  to  the  context,  if  used  without  reference  to 
parentage,  it  is  generally  synonymous  with  the  word  ‘infant’  and 
means a person who has not attained the age of majority. Some times 
it may be used in a context which shows that it refers to quite young 
children, for, instance, as a notice that ‘children are not admitted to 
this enclosure’ would hardly be held to apply to young persons of 18 
to  20;  it  would  mean  children  who  are  too  young  to  look  after 
themselves.  Where  the  word  ‘child’  is  used  with  reference  to 
parentage,  it  means  a  descendant  of  the  first  degree,  a  son  or  a 
daughter,  and  has  no  reference  to  age”;  Omar  Ali  Shaikh  vs. 
Shamsunnar Begum. DLR 1965 Dac. 173 Ref. AIR 1943 Bom.48. 
    
After  going  through  the  definition  of  “child”  provided  in  various  dictionaries, 
no cavil left that in terms of Section 17-A of The Family Courts Act, 1964, a 
Family  Court  can  fix  the  interim  maintenance  of  a  child  falling  within  the 
definition  provided  hereinabove.  The  “respondent”  was  admittedly  neither  of 
tender age, infant, immature, descendant or young, rather she is having an age 
of about 35 years. Thus, the order fixing the interim maintenance was even not 
tenable on this score alone.  
15.   
Now  attending  the  question  that  appeal  filed  by  the  petitioner  was 
barred by time, it is observed that learned Additional District Judge dismissed 
the appeal being barred by 70 days. There is no cavil that in terms of Rule 22 of 
The  Family  Courts  Rules,  1965,  an  appeal  under  Section  14  of  The  Family 
Courts Act, 1964 shall be preferred within thirty days of the passing of decree 
or decision but appellate Court is vested with the power to condone any delay 
in  filing  the  appeal  on  showing  sufficient  cause  by  the  appellant.  Perusal  of 
record  clearly  reveals  that  petitioner  provided  sufficient  explanation  resulting 
into  delayed  appeal  but  same  was  not  attended  properly  by  the  learned 
Appellate  Court.  Even  otherwise,  when  decree  under  appeal  was  apparently 
9 
 
 
 
                  W.P.No.27141 of 2015 
 
 
 
suffering illegalities and material irregularities, the learned Additional District 
Judge should have exercised its jurisdiction with great care and caution. 
16.   
The nutshell of above discussion is that both the Courts below have 
proceeded in an illegal and unlawful  manner. Thus, while allowing the instant 
petition,  order  dated  15th  of  November,  2012  as  well  as  order  dated  20th 
February,  2015  passed  by  the  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  Lahore  and  order 
dated 4th July, 2015 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Lahore are 
set  aside.  As  a  result  thereof,  suit  shall  be  deemed  to  be  pending  before  the 
learned Judge Family Court, Lahore who shall proceed with the same keeping 
in  view  the  observations  made  hereinabove  and  then  decide  the  same  afresh, 
strictly  in  accordance with  law within  two months  from  the date  of  receipt of 
instant order. Office to transmit copy of this order to the learned District Judge, 
Lahore for compliance. 
 
Zeeshan 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
(MIRZA VIQAS RAUF) 
JUDGE 
