 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
    LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE  
 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
      E.P.No.46 of 2018 
 
 
Vs. 
Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi, etc 
Abdul Wahab Baloch 
 
                 JUDGMENT 
 
Date of hearing 
Petitioner by: 
Respondent No.1by:  Mr. Babar Awan,Sajid Munawar Qureshi and 
19.11.2018. 
Mr. Mubeen-ud-Din Qazi, Advocate 
Respondent No.2 to 
10  
Amicus curie  
Mr. Muhammad Ilyas Khan, Advocates  
Ex-parte  
Mr. Shan Gul and Mr. Muhammad Arif Raja, 
Additional Advocate Generals, Punjab 
SHAHID WAHEED,  J:-     The election of respondent No.1, 
Imran  Ahmad  Khan  Niazi, as  a  Member  of  National  Assembly  from 
constituency  NA.  95  (Mianwali-I)  in  General  Elections,  2018  has 
been  challenged  through  this  election  petition  under  Section  139  of 
the Elections Act, 2017 by the petitioner, Abdul Wahab Baloch, who 
is a defeated candidate, inter alia, on four grounds, that is, firstly, the 
nomination papers of the respondent No.1 were invalid; secondly, the 
respondent  No.1  was  not,  on  the  nomination  day,  qualified  under 
Article 62 (1)(d) (f) of the Constitution of the Islamic of the Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973 to contest election; thirdly, the respondent No.1 had 
failed to comply with the provisions of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  the  Elections  Act,  2017  and  the  rules 
framed thereunder as he had failed to fulfill the mandatory conditions 
incorporated  in  the  nomination  papers  as  well  as  affidavit  attached 
therewith  under  the  direction  of  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan, with the object to procure the result invalidly of the election 
in  his  favour;  and,  lastly  the  election  of  respondent  No.1  has  been 
procured by corrupt practice.  
2. 
 Vide  order  dated  05.10.2018  process,  subject  to  question  of 
maintainability of the election petition, as per modes suggested in sub-
section  (2)  of  Section  145  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  was  issued.  In 
response to notice Mr. Babar Awan, Advocate, entered appearance on 
 
2 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
behalf of respondent No.1, whereas respondent No.8, Sardar Bahadar 
Khan, appeared in person. The other respondents, to wit, respondents 
No.2  to  5,  7,  9  and  10  had  not  appeared  and,  thus,  they  were 
proceeded  against  ex-parte  vide  order  dated  18.10.2018.  Respondent 
No.6,  Muhammad  Khalid,  however,  sent  a  letter  dated  15.10.2018 
through courier stating therein that he had nothing to say in favour or 
against  the  election petition. The  said  letter  was  taken  on  record. On 
the  next  date  of  hearing,  that  is,  25.10.2018  respondent  No.1 
submitted  written  statement,  copy  whereof  was  handed  over  to 
petitioner’s  counsel;  respondent  No.8  made  a  request  that  he  did  not 
want  to  file  written  statement  and,  thus,  his  right  to  file  written 
statement was closed; and, that respondent No.6 was not in attendance, 
therefore, he was proceeded against ex-parte. Thereafter, the case was 
fixed for arguments on the question of maintainability of the election 
petition.  
3.  Mr.  Shan  Gul  and  Mr.  Muhammad  Arif  Raja,  learned 
Additional  Advocate  Generals,  in  response  to  notice  under  Section 
152  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  entered  appearance  and  assisted  this 
Tribunal on the questions to be determined at threshold.   
4. 
Before  examining  the  question  qua  maintainability  of  the 
present election petition it would be apposite to state that according to 
Article  225  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973  (“the  Constitution”)  no  election  to  a  House  or  Provincial 
Assembly  can  be  called  in  question  except  by  an  election  petition 
presented to such Tribunal and in such manner as may be determined 
by  the  Act  of  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament).  Such  law  made  in 
pursuance of Article 225 of the Constitution is the Elections Act, 2017. 
The  entire  election  process  commencing  from  the  issuance  of  the 
notification calling upon a constituency to elect a member or members 
right  up  to  the  final  resolution  of  the  dispute,  if  any,  concerning  the 
election is regulated by the Elections Act, 2017, different stages of the 
process being dealt with by different provisions of  the Act, there can 
be no election to a House or a Provincial Assembly except as provided 
by  the  Elections  Act,  2017  and  again,  no  such  election  may  be 
questioned except in the manner provided by the Elections Act, 2017. 
 
3 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
So,  the  Election  Act,  2017  is  a  complete  and  self-contained  code 
within  which  must  be  found  any  right  claimed  in  relation  to  an 
election  or  an  election  dispute.  Thus,  the  right  to  dispute  an  election 
being statutory  creation is subject to statutory limitation. An election 
petition is a statutory proceeding to which principles of equity do not 
apply but only those rules which the statute makes and applies. It is a 
special  jurisdiction  and  a  special  jurisdiction  has  always  to  be 
exercised  in  accordance  with  the  statute  creating  it  and  thus,  in  the 
trial  of  election  disputes,  Tribunal  is  put  in  a  straightjacket.  In  the 
above backdrop it has to be seen whether the election petition at hands 
is compliant with the provisions of the Election Act, 2017 or whether 
the  objections  with  regard  to  maintainability  of  the  election  petition 
have any substance.  
5. 
First  objection  canvassed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  No.1  is 
that  the  present  election  petition  is  barred  by  time.  Elaborating  this 
objection  it  is  submitted  that  as  per  Section  142  (1)  of  the  Elections 
Act,  2017,  election  petition  was  required  to  be  presented  to  this 
Tribunal within 45 days of the issuance of notification of the name of 
the  returned  candidate  by  the  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan. 
According to learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 
the  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan  on  07.08.2018 
issued 
notification of the names of the returned candidates and that from the 
said  date  the  last  date  for  filing  the  election  petition  before  this 
Tribunal  was  21.09.2018  whereas  the  same  was  filed  on  22.09.2018 
and, thus, it was patently barred by time; and, that since the provisions 
of Section 5 of the  Limitation Act, 1908 do not apply to the election 
petition,  same  is  liable  to  be  dismissed  on  this  short  ground.  I  am 
afraid  this  objection  is  not  well  founded  for  two  reasons.  Firstly, 
Section 142 of  the  Elections  Act, 2017  contemplates that  an  election 
petition shall be presented to the Election Tribunal within 45 days of 
the  publication  in  the  official  Gazette  of  the  names  of  the  returned 
candidates.  It  means  that  period  of  limitation  for  filing  election 
petition  before  this  Tribunal  shall  be  computed  from  the  date  of 
publication in the official Gazette of the names of returned candidates. 
It  is  true  that  on  07.08.2018  the  Election  Commission  of  Pakistan  in 
 
4 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
pursuance of sub-section (1) of Section 98 of the Elections Act, 2017 
issued notification of the names of candidates returned to the National 
Assembly  of  Pakistan  as  a  result  of  General  Elections,  2018  but  the 
same  was  published  in  the  Gazette  of  Pakistan  on  29.08.2018.  The 
period  of  limitation  for  presenting  the  election  petition  before  this 
Tribunal,  thus,  started  running  from  the  date  of  publication  in  the 
official  Gazette  of  the  names  of  the  returned  candidates,  that  is, 
29.08.2018  and  from  the  said  date  the  last  date  for  filing  election 
petition  was  12.10.2018. Since the  election petition  was presented to 
this Tribunal on 21.09.2018, it could not be held that the same was out 
of  time.  Secondly,  assuming  that  argument  canvassed  on  behalf  of 
respondent No.1 is correct  and last date for filing the election petition 
before  this  Tribunal  was  21.09.2018,    even  then  the  presentation  of 
election  petition  before  this  Tribunal  on  22.09.2018  on  account  of 
benefit  provided  in  Section  4  of  the  Limitation  Act,  1908  read  with 
Section 10 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 cannot be held barred by 
time  as  on  21.09.2018  the  Tribunal  and  its  office  was  closed  due  to 
9th/10th Muharram Holidays.  
6. 
Second  objection  is  that  the  election  petition  is  liable  to  be 
rejected under Section 145 of the Elections Act, 2017 as the same has 
not been verified in the manner laid down in the Civil Procedure Code, 
1908 (Act V of 1908). It is argued that provisions of Section 144 (4) 
of the Elections Act, 2017 are mandatory in nature as the spirit of law 
is to ensure that the person making the allegations of corrupt practice 
realizes  the  seriousness  thereof  as  such  a  charge  would  be  akin  to  a 
criminal  charge,  since  it  entails  the  party  indulging  in  such  practice 
with  different  penalties.  It  is,  therefore,  equally  essential  that 
particulars of the charge or allegation are clearly and precisely stated 
on  oath  in  the  election  petition  to  afford  a  fair  opportunity  to  the 
person against whom it is leveled to effectively counter the same. Mr. 
Babar  Awan,  Advocate  by  making  reference  to  the  cases  of  Zia  ur 
Rehman v Syed Ahmad Hussain and others (2014 SCMR 1015), Lt. 
Col.  (Rtd)  Ghazanfar  Abbas  Shah  v  Mehr  Khalid  Mehmood 
Sargana  (2015  SCMR  1585)  and  Muhammad  Nawaz  Chandio  v 
Muhammad  Ismail  Rahu  (2016  SCMR  875)  submits 
that 
 
5 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
verification clause of the election petition suffers from defects; that is 
to  say  (a)  that  a  verification  clause  is  printed  which  has  been  signed 
by the petitioner, however, if stamp/seal of the Oath Commissioner is 
available thereon, there is no need to mention that the Oath has been 
administered by the Oath Commissioner; (b)  that  the  time  and  place 
have not been mentioned on the verification clause; however, the date 
has been mentioned i.e. 18th day of September 2018. The petition has 
been  prepared  on  18.09.2018  in  Lahore  as  written  at  page  25  of  the 
petition whereas the same was verified on Oath on the same day, thus, 
in the said circumstances, the omission of time and place is substantial 
in nature; (c) that the petitioner in purported verification has failed to 
specifically disclose that as to what number of paragraphs/grounds of 
the petition have been verified by the petitioner on his own knowledge 
and  what  he  has  verified  upon  the  information  received  by  him  and 
that  only  a  vague  assertion  has  been  made;  that  the  petitioner  has  in 
contravention  to  law  only  stated  in  the  verification  clause  that 
paragraph No.1,2, 4, 6a, d, f, h, j,k, m, n, o, p, q, w, x, cc and ff are 
correct  without specifying the source, i.e., information, knowledge or 
belief. Thus, purported verification is defective and petition is liable to 
be dismissed; (d) 
that  the  petition  has  not  been  verified  at  all  in 
accordance with law and verification of election petition has not been 
made  on  Oath  before  the  Oath  Commissioner  as  required  under  the 
law.  The  seal/stamp  of  Oath  Commissioner  available  on  verification 
clause  pertains  to  some  purported  Affidavit.  It  shows  that  the 
petitioner  never  appeared  before 
the  Oath  Commissioner  for 
verification of the election petition in contravention to the mandatory 
requirement  of  law,  consequently  making  the  election  petition 
incompetent  and  liable  to  be  summary  rejection:  and,  (e)  that  the 
contents  of  the  purported  seal/  stamp  of  the  Oath  Commissioner  are 
unclear,  vague  and  not  legible  and,  therefore,  the  said  verification  is 
defective and not in accordance with law.  
7. 
The law governing preliminary objection relating to verification 
of the election petition has been provided in subsection (4) of Section 
144  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  which  postulates  that  an  election 
petition  and  its  annexures  shall  be  signed  by  the  petitioner  and  the 
 
6 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
petition shall be verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908) for verification of the pleadings. The 
Code  of  Civil  Procedure  (CPC)  1908  through  its  Order  VI  Rule  15 
CPC prescribes the manner of verification of pleadings which reads as 
under: 
Verification of Pleadings:--- (1) Save as otherwise 
provided  by  any  law  for  the  time  being  in  force,  every 
pleadings shall be verified on oath or solemn affirmation 
at the foot by the party or by one of the parties pleading 
or by some other person proved to the satisfaction of the 
Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case. 
2). 
The person verifying shall specify, by reference to 
the  numbered  paragraphs  of  the  pleadings,  what  he 
verifies of his own knowledge and what he verifies upon 
information received and belief to be true.  
3) 
The  verification  shall  be  signed  by  the  person 
making it and shall state the date on which and the place 
at which it was singed.” 
The following are the main features of the verification in accordance 
with above cited provisions of CPC: 
i) 
ii) 
it has to be on oath or solemn affirmation; 
the  person  verifying  shall  specify  the  paragraphs,  which 
he verifies on his own knowledge and paragraphs which 
are believed to be true by him separately;  
iii) 
the  verification  shall  be  signed  by  the  person  making  it; 
and 
iv) 
it  shall  contain  the  date  and  place  when  and  where 
signatures were appended.  
The above said provision of law is in parametria to Section 55 (3) of 
the  previous  law,  i.e.  the  Representation  of  People  Act,  1976  and 
Section  36  (3)  of  the  Senate  (Elections)  Act,  1975,  which  have  been 
under consideration before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in 
different cases, and, thus,  survey  thereof would be helpful  to  resolve 
preliminary  question  with  regard  to  validity  of  verification  given  at 
the bottom of  the present election petition. I will begin survey of the 
 
7 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
case  law  by  referring  to  the  case  of  Engr.  Iqbal  Zafar  Jhagra  and 
others v Khalilur Rehman and 4 others (2000 SCMR 250) wherein 
it was held as follows: 
Subsection  (3)  of  section  36  (ibid)  clearly  requires  that 
every petition and every Schedule or Annexures shall be 
signed  by  the  petitioner  and  verified  in  the  manner  laid 
down  in  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  for  verification  of 
pleadings.  The  verification  of  pleadings  has  been 
provided  under  Order  6,  Rule  15,  C.P.C.  which  when 
read  with  section  139,  C.P.C.,  clearly  shows  that  the 
pleadings are to be verified on oath and the oath is to be 
administered by a person, who is duly authorized in that 
behalf.“ 
 
 
 
Second  judgment  on the subject  rendered in  the  case of  Sardarzada 
Zafar Abbas and others v Syed Hssan Murtaza and others  (PLD 
2005  SC  600)  wherein  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  after 
examining the provisions of Order VI Rule 15 CPC held as follows: 
“  The  Code  contains  such  provisions  under  Order  VI, 
rule  15,  which  requires  the  verification  of  pleadings  on 
oath.  Such  verification  is  not  to  be  signed  in  routine  by 
the deponent but being on oath, it requires to be attested 
either  by  the Oath Commissioner or any other authority 
competent  to  administer  oath.  It  needs  hardly  to  be 
emphasized 
that  every  oath 
is 
to  be  practically 
administered.----------------------------------------------------- 
under  election 
laws  such  verification  on  oath 
is 
mandatory  because  of  being 
followed  by  penal 
consequences under section 63(a) of the Act that makes it 
mandatory for the Tribunal to dismiss election petition if 
the  provisions  of  section  54  and  55  of  the  Act  have  not 
been complied with. Similar view was taken by this Court 
in  Iqbal  Zafar  Jhagra‟s  case  (2000  SCMR  250),  though 
related  to  the  Senate  elections.  It  is,  therefore,  settled 
that  the  verification  on  oath  of  an  election  petition 
 
8 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
though  mannered  in  accordance  with  civil  law  yet  it 
entails  upon  penal  consequences  and  hence 
is 
mandatory.------------------------------------------------------- 
We  have  considered  this  aspect  thoroughly  and  have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  in  the  given  circumstances, 
there is no material difference between a verification on 
oath and a verification through an affidavit. An affidavit 
is  a  sworn  statement  in  writing  while  a  verification  is  a 
confirmation in law by oath in order to establish the truth, 
accuracy and reality of a statement of fact. Thus, there is 
practically  no  difference  whatsoever  by  verifying  a 
statement on oath and by verifying the same statement on 
affidavit.”  
 
 
 
In  the  case  of  Malik  Umar  Aslam  v  Sumera  Malik  and  another 
(PLD 2007 SC 362) it was held as follows: 
“ Under section 55(3) of the Act, 1976, it has been made 
obligatory  upon  the  person,  who  has  challenged  the 
Elections, to verify the same in the manner prescribed for 
verification  of  plaint  by  C.P.C    thus  by  reference,  the 
provisions of Order VI, Rule 15 C.P.C. have been made 
applicable.  As  per  its  provision,  every  pleadings  is 
required to  be  verified on oath or  solemn affirmation at 
the foot by the party or by one of the parties to pleadings 
or  by some  other person to the satisfaction of the Court 
acquainted with the facts of the case. It may not be out of 
context  to  note  that  the  verification  of  the  pleadings  on 
oath was introduced by the Law Reforms  Ordinance (XII 
of  1972)  read  with  section  6  of  the  Oaths  Act,  1873,  by 
adding the words “on oath or solemn affirmation”  after 
the  word  verified in Rule 15(i) of  Order VI,  C.P.C.  It  is 
also  pertinent  to  note  that  after  the  said  importance  of 
the same amendment in presence of verified pleadings on 
oath,  the  court  has  been  empowered  to  proceed  case  ex 
parte  against  the  opponents  and  pass  a  decree,  under 
 
9 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
Order  IX,  rule    6  (1),  C.P.C.  without  calling  for  an 
affidavit  in  ex  parte  proof.  We  believe  that  there  is  no 
point  to  address  ourselves  on  this  question  namely  if 
verification on oath has not been made before the person 
authorized to administer the oath, the same would not be 
considered  to  be  valid  verification  because  for  the 
purpose  of  taking  oath  one  has  to  bind  down  himself  to 
speak  the  truth  otherwise  he  or  she  would  be  liable  for 
the  curse  of  Almighty  Allah  if  the  truth  is  not  spoken. 
Under section 6 of the Oath Act, 1873, the procedure has 
been  prescribed  for  taking  the  oath  duly  attested  by  an 
authorize person. Admittedly in instant case, verification 
has not been made on oath before an authorized person, 
therefore, the appellant, on realizing the major defect in 
the  Election  Petition,  submitted  an  application  seeking 
amendment in the petition, to the extent of verifying it on 
oath,  accordingly.  ----------------------------------------------
----------------------------  At  this  juncture,  it  would  be 
appropriate  to  attend  to  the  argument  of  the  learned 
counsel  for  appellant  that  the  Tribunal  should  have 
allowed the application for the amendment, enabling the 
appellant to submit the Election Petition duly verified or 
attested  on  oath  and  to  remove  the  defect  in  view  of 
provision  of  section  62  (3)  of  the  Act,  1976  and 
according to him, amendment in the plaint or petition is 
permissible at any stage as it has been held in S.M. Ayub 
v Yousaf Shah (PLD 1967 SC 486).---------------------------
----------------------------------------------  In  the  case  in 
hand, 
the  appellant  knowing  well 
the  mandatory 
provision of section 55 (3) of the Act, 1976, did not apply 
for amendment within the prescribed period of limitation 
for  filing  of  Election  Petition.  Undoubtedly,  if  during 
period  of  limitation  for  filing  of  petition  such  an 
amendment is sought, the Court may consider the request 
according to the settled principle relating to amendment 
 
10 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
in  the  pleadings  but  once  limitation  period  has  already 
expired,  then  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Court  to  examine 
whether  a  right;  which  has  been  created  on  account  of 
bar  of  limitation  in  favour  of  opposite  side  can  be 
snatched  by  allowing  amendment  in  the  pleadings, 
enabling 
the  plaintiff 
(petitioner) 
to  put  up  a 
better/perfect  case  against  defendant  (respondent).  In 
this  behalf  the  consistent  practice  of  the  Courts  is  that 
amendment  in  such  matters,  where  limitation  creates  a 
hurdle,  is  not  to  be  allowed  on  condoning  the  delay, 
particularly where no request has been made to enlarge 
the  period  of  limitation.  For  the  above  proposition  we 
are fortified by the judgments in the cases of Bhagwanji v 
Alembic Chemical Works (AIR 1948 PC 100) and Saeed 
Sehgal v Khurshid Hasan (PLD 1964 SC 598).”    
 
 
 
Next is the case of Moulvi Abdul Qadir  and other v Moulvi Abdul 
Wassay  and  others  (2010  SCMR    1877)  wherein  it  was  held  as 
follows: 
“  It  is  well-settled  that  question  of  law,  pronounced  or 
declared  by  this  Court  in  terms  of  Article  189  of  the 
Constitution  has  binding  effect  on  all  the  functionaries, 
both  executive  and  particularly  the  judicial  authorities. 
The  superior  Courts,  Tribunals  have  obligation  to 
implement  and  adhere  to  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme 
Court. We feel no hesitation in holding that the Election 
Tribunal,  perhaps  on  account  of  non-availability  of 
proper assistance, proceeded to decide the cases against 
the  appellants  for  the  reasons  mentioned  hereinabove. 
This Court in the case of Bashir Ahmad Bhabhan (supra) 
has  settled  the  question  with  regard  to  verifying  the 
pleadings  notwithstanding  the  numbered  paragraphs  or 
the pleadings, what he verifies on his own knowledge and 
what he verifies upon information received and believed 
to  be  true.  This  provision  of  law  in  fact  cannot  be 
 
11 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
considered  to  be  mandatory  as  a  person  can  verify  the 
paras  in  the  pleadings  on  his  own  knowledge  without 
verifying and para upon receipt of the information, same 
are believed  to be true.”  
 
The relevant extract from the judgment rendered in the case of Zia ur 
Rehman  v  Syed  Ahmad  Hussain  and  others  (2014  SCMR  1015) 
reads as under: 
“Admittedly  both  the  election  petitions  filed  by  the 
respondents  in  the  afore-mentioned  appeals  were  not 
verified  on  oath  in  the  manner  prescribed  under  the 
afore-quoted  provision.  If  the  law  requires  a  particular 
thing to be done in a particular manner it has to be done 
accordingly,  otherwise  it  would  not  be  in  compliance 
with  the  legislative  intent.  Non-compliance  of  this 
provision carries a penal consequence in terms of section 
63  of  the  Representation  of  the  People  Act  whereas  no 
penal  provision  is  prescribed  for  non-compliance  with 
Order VI, rule 15 of the Civil Procedure Code”. 
  
In  the  case  of  Inayatullah  v  Syed  Khurshid  Ahmad  Shah  and 
others (2014 SCMR 1477) it was settled as follows: 
“The  rubber  stamp  of  the  Oath  Commissioner  wherein 
blank spaces have been filled show that the affidavit was 
sworn on 17.06.2013. However, the attestation has been 
made on 18-6-2013. The verification on the petition itself, 
for  whatever  it  is  worth,  also  states  in  its  body  that  the 
verification  was  made  on  17th  June,  2013,  but  this 
verification  is  also  incorrect  bearing  in  mind  that  the 
copy of the Election Petition was sent to the respondents 
on  the  following  day  i.e.  18-6-2013.  The  affidavit  of 
service which has been signed by the appellant states on 
oath “that before filing of petition [appellant] [sic] have 
served  it  to  the  respondents  through  notice  by  courier, 
the  receipts  of  those  are  appended  herewith”.  This 
 
12 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
statement  has  been  verified  on  17-6-2013  and  the 
attestation  has  also  been  made  on  17-6-2013.  This 
affidavit  of  service  is  itself  belied  and rendered  false by 
the  courier  receipts  which  show  that  the  copy  of  the 
petition was sent on 18-6-2013 and not on 17-6-2013.” 
 
In  the  case  of  Hina  Manzoor  v  Malik  Ibrar  Ahmed  and  others 
(PLD  2015  SC  396)  importance  of  verification  of  an  Oath 
Commissioner was discussed in following words: 
“It  is  now  well  settled  that  merely  affixing  signature  at 
the  foot  of  the  election  petition  and/  or  under  its 
verification 
clauses,  without 
the 
same 
being 
attested/verified  by  an  Oath  Commissioner,  or  some 
other  authorized  person,  by  itself,  does  not  meet  the 
requirement  of  verification  as  prescribed  by  Order  VI, 
rule  15,  C.P.C.,  and  thus  renders  the  petition  non-
compliant  with  the  provisions  of  section  55  (3)  of  the 
ROPA,  essentially  entailing  its  dismissal  in  terms  of 
section 63 (a) of the ROPA.” 
 
In the case of Ch. Zawwar Hussain Warrich v Muhammad Aamir 
Iqbal  and  others  (2015  SCMR  1186)  filing  of  affidavit  along  with 
election petition was found sufficient compliance of law in following 
terms: 
“ We have come to the conclusion that, since the affidavit 
had  been  filed  along  with  the  election  petition  and  had 
been duly attested by the Oath Commissioner, there was 
sufficient compliance with the provision of section 55(3) 
of  the  ROPA  and  as  a  consequence,  the  penalty  under 
section 63(a) is not attracted.”  
 
 
 
Manner and mode of making verification or affidavit was discussed in 
detail in the case of Lt.  Col  (Rtd)  Ghazanfar  Abbas  Shah  v  Mehr 
Khalid Mehmood Sargana and others (2015 SCMR 1585), relevant 
extract is as follows: 
 
13 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
“  With  regards  to  verification  of  election  petitions  on 
oath, it is clear from the provisions of section 55(3) of the 
ROPA  that  an  election  petition  has  to  be  verified  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Order  6  Rule  15, 
C.P.C.,  which  provide  the  basics  as  to  how  pleadings 
have  to  be  verified,  what  shall  be  the  contents  of  the 
verification of pleadings and how they have to be attested 
by the oath commissioner when read with other relevant 
provisions  of  law.  Be  that  as  it  may,  in  addition  to  the 
law cited by both the sides (from some other dicta), it is 
conclusively  settled  by  this  Court  that  verification  of  an 
election petition is mandatory and a petition which lacks 
proper  verification  shall  be  summarily  dismissed  by  the 
tribunal,  even  if  the  respondent  has  not  asked  for  or 
prayed for its dismissal.----------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Taking  into  account  the  verification  of  the  election 
petition 
independent  of 
the  affidavit, 
it  has  been 
conspicuously  noticed  that  there  is  no  date  or  place 
mentioned  in  the  verification  i.e.  at  what  date  and  what 
place the verification was made by the appellant. The two 
stamps  of  the  oath  commissioner,  Lahore  Cantt,  affixed 
at the bottom of the verification also do not postulate the 
date  on  which the  verification  was  made by the  election 
petitioner.  Besides, 
it 
is  not  reflected 
from 
the 
verification whether the appellant was present at the time 
of  verification  before  the  oath  commissioner because he 
has  not  been  identified  with  reference  to  his  national 
identity card, rather by some Advocate, whose name and 
particulars  are  not  even  mentioned  on 
the  said 
verification.  Therefore  on  account  of  the  deficiencies 
identified  above,  we  hardly  find  the  verification  to  be 
valid  in  terms  of  spirit  of  provision  of  section  55  (3)  of 
the  ROPA  and  in  line  with  the  law  laid  down  by  this 
Court in various dicta. Resultantly, we have no hesitation 
 
14 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
to  hold  that  the  verification  is  not  in  accord  with  the 
law.”--------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
------ 
From the High Court Rules and Orders reproduced in the 
preceding para, it is clear to our mind that an affidavit has 
to meet the following requisites: 
1.  Identification of deponent (Rule 11) 
2.  Particulars of deponent and identifier to be mentioned 
at the foot of the affidavit (Rule 11)  
 
3.  Time  and  place  of  the  making  of  the  affidavit  to  be 
specified (Rule 11) 
 
4.  Certification by Court/Magistrate/Other Officer at the 
foot  of  the  affidavit  that  such  affidavit  was  made 
before him (Rule 12) 
 
5.  Date, Signature and name of office and designation of 
the  Court/Magistrate/Other  Officer  to  be  subscribed 
underneath the Certification (Rule 12) 
 
6.  Every  exhibit  referred  to  in  the  affidavit  to  be  dated 
and  initialed  by  the  Court/Magistrate/Other  officer 
(Rule 12) 
 
 
 
 
of 
an 
contents 
affidavit, 
7.  Where  deponent  of  an  affidavit  does  not  understand 
the 
the 
Court/Magistrate/Other  officer  administering  oath 
must  read  out  the  contents  of  an  affidavit  to  such 
person so that he understands. Where such is the case, 
the  Court/Magistrate/Other  officer  shall  note  at  the 
foot of the affidavit that the affidavit has been read out 
to the deponent and he  understands its contents (Rule 
14) 
8.  Deponent to sign/mark and verify the affidavit and the 
Court,  Magistrate  or  other  officer  administering  the 
oath or affirmation to attest the affidavit (Rule 15) 
9.  Oath 
to 
be 
by 
administered 
the 
Court/Magistrate/Other officer in accordance with the 
Indian Oaths Act, 1878 and affidavit to be verified by 
deponent  and  attested  by  Court/Magistrate/Other 
officer on forms appended thereto (Rule 16).------------
------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------- 
 
15 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
It  is  also  relevant  to  note  here  that  in  an  ordinary  lis 
(suit  etc)  requiring  verification  and  support  by  an 
affidavit, if the verification or affidavit is flawed, such 
lapse may be considered an irregularity and be treated 
as  a  curable  defect,  but  we  are  not  laying  down  any 
hard and fast rule, because the matter before us is not 
pertaining  to  ordinary  litigation,  however  in  the  case 
of  an  election  petition  the  law  is  very  stringent  and 
imperative.  Therefore  if  the  election  petition  has  not 
been  verified  in  accordance  with  law,  this  cannot  be 
treated  as  a  curable  defect  and  the  Election  Tribunal 
particularly  after  the  lapse  of  the  period  of  limitation 
prescribed for filing of election petition, cannot permit 
the election petitioner to cure the same.  -----------------
----------------------------------------------------------  We 
have applied our mind to this aspect of the matter and 
hold that in order to meet the real object and the spirit 
of the election laws which require verification on oath, 
in  an  ideal  situation,  the  Oath  Commissioner  at  the 
time  of  verification  of  the  petition  etc.  and  also  the 
affidavit, 
must 
record 
and 
endorse 
verification/attestation that the oath has been actually, 
physically  and  duly  administered  to  the  election 
petitioner/deponent.  But  as  the  law  has  not  been  very 
clear  till  now,  we  should  resort  to  the  principle  of 
presumption  stipulated  by  Article  129  (e)  ibid  in  this 
case  for  avoiding  the  knock  out  of  the  petition  for  an 
omission and lapse on part of the Oath Commissioner. 
But  for  the  future  we  hold  that  where  the  election 
petition or the affidavit is sought to be attested by the 
Oath Commissioner, the election petitioner shall insist 
and shall ensure that the requisite endorsement about 
the  administration  of  oath  is  made,  otherwise  the 
election  petition/affidavit  shall  not  be  considered  to 
have  been  attested  on  oath  and  thus  the  election 
 
16 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
petition  shall  be  liable  to  be,  inter  alia,  dismissed  on 
the  above  score.  We  consciously  and  deliberately 
neither apply this rule to the instant case nor any other 
matter  pending  at  any  forum  (election  tribunal  or  in 
appeals).” 
Requirement of making verification on Oath of the amended election 
petition was highlighted in the case of Sardar  Muhammad  Naseem 
Khan  v  Returning  Officer  and  others  (2015  SCMR  1698)  in 
following terms: 
“The  amended  petition  in  this  case  for  all  intents  and 
purposes  shall  be  a  final,  independent  and  separate 
document (election petition) which had to be verified per 
the mandate of law. It is conceded by the learned counsel 
for the appellant, when confronted with the fact that the 
amended  election  petition  filed  by  the  appellant  has  not 
been verified in accordance with law, that if the original 
election  petition  is  ignored  from  consideration,  the 
amended petition will be hit by the provisions of section 
55(3)  and  63  of  the  Act.  Obviously  on  account  of  the 
above, 
the 
impugned  decision  of 
the  Tribunal 
is 
unexceptionable.  
 
 
In the case of  Muhammad Ibrahim Jatoi v Aftab Shaban Mirani 
and  others  (2016  SCMR  722)  short  affidavit  in  support  of  election 
petition which duly fulfills the requirement of Order VI rule 15 CPC 
was found sufficient in following words: 
“As  regards  the  argument  now  raised  that  the  election 
petition  is  not  supported  by  a  full  affidavit  as  per  the 
requirement  of  the  provisions  of  the  Sindh  Chief  Court 
Rules, suffice it to say that when one looks at Section 55 
of  the  Act,  the  only  requirement  of  law  is  regarding 
verification as per the provisions of Order VI, rule 15 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (C.P.C.) and not vis-
à-vis any affidavit required to be given in support of the 
election  petition.  Therefore,  the  argument  about  a  full 
 
 
17 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
length  affidavit  has  no  substance.  As  far  as  the 
verification  of 
the  election  petition  otherwise 
is 
concerned, we have examined the document and find that 
a short affidavit to that effect in support thereof has been 
given  which  duly  fulfills  the  requirements  of  Order  VI, 
Rule  15,  C.P.C.  as  has  been  held  in  the  judgment 
reported  as  Sardarzada  Zafar  Abbas  and  others  v  Syed 
Hassan Murtaza and others (PLD 2005 SC 600) and Lt. 
Col  ®  Ghazanfar  Abbas  Shah  v  Mehr  Khalid  Mehmood 
Sargana etc (2015 SCMR 1585) 
In the case of Feroze Ahmad Jamali v Masroor Ahmad Khan Jatoi 
2016 SCMR 750) the words “on solemn affirmation before me” in the 
stamp  of  Oath  Commissioner  were  construed  that  the  deponent  was 
duly  present before  the  Oath  Commissioner  at  the time  of  attestation 
and  was  administered  Oath;  and,  identification  of  deponent  by 
Advocate  knowing  the  deponent  personally  was  found  valid.  The 
relevant extract of the judgment is reproduced below: 
“Besides  we  have  examined  the  verification  part  of  the 
election  petition  and  we  find  that  it  complies  with  the 
provisions  of  Order  VI  Rule  15  of  the  Code  of  Civil 
Procedure,  1908  (C.P.C.)  in  letter  and  spirit.  The 
reasons of the learned Tribunal and  the argument of the 
respondent  that  it  does  not  mention  the  date,  day  and 
place  of  the  verification  or  the  proper  identification  of 
the  appellant,  suffice  it  say  that  at  the  bottom  of  the 
petition (in the verification portion), though not in typed 
form the date has been clearly written by hand. There is 
another  stamp  of  the  Oath  Commissioner  appearing  on 
the left of the verification portion of the election petition 
which mentions the date as 26.6.2013 (albeit also written 
by  hand).  With  respect 
to  attestation, 
the  Oath 
Commissioner  in  clear  and  unequivocal  terms  has 
stamped  on  „S.A  before  me‟  (i.e.  on  solemn  affirmation 
before  me),  which  clearly  indicates  that  the  appellant 
 
18 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
was  duly  present  before  the  Oath  Commissioner  at  the 
time  of attestation  and  was  administered  oath.  It  is also 
spelt  out  from  the  Oath  Commissioner‟s  stamp  that  the 
election  petition  was  attested  at  Sukkur.  As  regards 
identification of the appellant, he has been duly identified 
by  Mukesh  Kumar,  Advocate  who  has  mentioned  of 
knowing  the  appellant  personally;  thus  we  are  of  the 
candid view that in the light of the law laid down by this 
Court  in  Lt.  Col.  (Rtd)  Ghazanfar  Abbas  Shah  v  Mehr 
Khalid Mehmood Sargana and others (2015 SCMR 1585) 
there is no defect in the verification.  
 
In the case of  Ch.  Muhammad  Ayaz  v  Asif  Mehmood  and  others 
(2016  SCMR  849)  default  in  respect  of  verification  of  election 
petition  was  not  allowed  to  be  removed  after  period  of  limitation  in 
following words.  
“It  has  been  observed  that  the  above  quoted  provisions 
specifically  state  that  verification  is  to  be  made  at  the 
time  of  filing  of  the  election  petition  and  any  default  in 
this  regard  would  be  considered  to  be  a  significant 
omission  and  fatal.  Admittedly  the  appellant  had  sought 
amendment  in  the  election  petition  after  the  period  of 
limitation  as  such  the  petition,  in  the  light  of  the  above 
provisions, could not have been considered and allowed 
and  warranted  dismissal  being  not  maintainable  on  this 
very  score.  Keeping  in  view  the  above  provisions 
verification  of  the  election  petition  was  a  mandatory 
requirement  and  that  too  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions of Order VI, Rule 15 (2) of C.P.C.  specifying 
to  numbered  paragraphs  of  the  pleadings,  what  he 
verifies on his own knowledge and what he verifies upon 
information  received  and  believed  to  be  true.  It  is  an 
admitted  position  that  the  appellant  had  initially  not 
verified  the  election  petition  filed  by  him  which  is 
apparent  as  he  subsequently  filed  application  seeking 
 
19 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
amendment to do so and that also with an application for 
condonation  of  delay.  In  the  light  of  the  above  whether 
the election petition was maintainable and the deficiency 
could  have  been  allowed  to  be  rectified  and  that  also 
after  the  passing  of  the  period  of  limitation  and  in 
circumstances  non-compliance  of 
the  mandatory 
provisions  of  Section  55  (3)  of  the  Act  is  fatal  to  the 
maintainability to the election petition.  
 
In the case of Muhammad  Nawaz    Chandio  v  Muhammad  Ismail 
Rahu (2016 SCM 875) importance of verification of election petition 
was highlighted in following words: 
“Adverting first to the  contention  of  the learned  counsel 
for  the  Appellant  that  the  Election  Petition  was  not 
verified  in  accordance  with  law  i.e.  under  Rule  15, 
C.P.C.,  hence,  did  not  comply  with  the  mandatory 
requirement  of  section  55  (3)  of  ROPA  and,  therefore, 
merited  summary  dismissal  on  this  ground.  We  have 
examined  the  Election  Petition,  a  copy  whereof  is 
available  on  the  record.  It  bears  verification  on  solemn 
affirmation  that  what  has  been  stated  therein  is  true  to 
the  best  of  knowledge  and  belief  of  the  Election 
Petitioner.  It  bears the  stamp and  signature  of  the  Oath 
Commissioner.  The  place  (Hyderabad)  whereat  the 
contents  of  the  Election  Petition  were  verified  is  also 
stated  therein.  The  date  is  also  mentioned  by  the  Oath 
Commissioner.  The  Election  Petitioner  i.e.  the  present 
Respondent  No.1  entered  the  witness  box  as  PW-1  and 
owned  the  said  Election  Petition  by  identifying  his 
signatures  thereupon.  In  this  view  of  the  matter,  it 
appears that the requirement of Order VI, Rule 15, C.P.C. 
has  in  essence  been  complied  with.  The  additional 
requirements  enjoined  upon  the  Oath  Commissioner 
referred  to  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Appellant  by 
relying upon the judgment of this Court in the case of Lt. 
 
20 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
Col. (Ret) Ghazanfar Abbas‟s case (supra) are not really 
relevant  as  such  requirement,  if  applicable,  would  be 
mandatory  in 
the 
future  as  has  been  specifically 
mentioned in the said judgment. In this view of the matter, 
the learned Election Tribunal has correctly held that the 
Election  Petition  could  not  be  dismissed  on  the  ground 
that it was not duly verified.   
 
 Last  case  on  the  subject  is  the  case  of  Sultan  Mahmood  Hinjra  v 
Malik  Ghulam  Mustafa  Khar  and  others  (2016  SCMR  1312) 
wherein it was held as follows: 
“From the above, it is crystal clear that verification of an 
election petition in the prescribed manner is a mandatory 
requirement  and  that  too  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of  Order  VI,  Rule  15,  C.P.C.  specifying  to 
numbered  paragraphs  of  the  pleadings  what  he  verifies 
of  his  own  knowledge  and  what  he  verifies  upon 
information  received  and  believed  to  be  true.  From  the 
record  it  reveals  that  the  Appellant  while  filing  his 
election  petition  did  not  comply  with  the  mandatory 
requirements  with  regard  to  the  verification  of  the 
election  petition  and  to  cure  such  defect  subsequently 
submitted  an  affidavit  in  this  regard,  wherein  the  entire 
contents  of  his  election  petition  were  reproduced.  It 
would  be  pertinent  to  mention  at  this  juncture  that 
although  the  provisions  relating  to  the  verification  of 
pleadings are generally directory in nature, the position 
is different in election laws by virtue of section 63 of the 
ROPA,  1976  which  casts  upon  the  Tribunal  a  duty  to 
dismiss  the  election  petition  if  the  provisions  of  section 
54 or 55 of the ROPA, 1976 have not been complied with, 
as such its compliance has been held to be mandatory in 
nature  by  virtue  of  the  penal  consequences  prescribed 
under section 63 of the ROPA, 1976.-------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
 
21 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
-------------------------------------------------------------------- 
When the affidavit at hand is examined in the light of the 
above  it  transpires  that  certain  essential  requirements 
are missing therefrom. Firstly, it has not been mentioned 
whether  the  Respondent  No.1  was  administered  oath  by 
the Oath Commissioner before the attestation was made. 
Secondly, 
it  has  not  been  specified  whether 
the 
respondent  No.1  was  duly  identified  before  the  Oath 
Commissioner. In this regard, it has simply been stated at 
the  foot  of  the  affidavit  that  the  Respondent  No.1  was 
present  before  the  Oath  Commissioner 
in  person, 
however,  the  details  of  the  person  identifying  the 
Respondent  No.1  have  not  been  mentioned  whereas 
according  to  the  above  quoted  provisions,  the  Oath 
Commissioner  is  bound  to  specify  at  the  foot  of  the 
affidavit the name and description of the person by whom 
identification  of  the  deponent  was  made  and  in  this 
regard a certificate has to be appended. Furthermore, it 
is  also  not  clear  from  the  affidavit  that  the  Respondent 
No.1 was identified with reference to his ID card and in 
this  regard,  no  ID  card  number  is  given,  as  such  the 
identification does not seem to have been made. There is 
yet,  another  aspect  to  the  matter.  The  affidavit  in 
question  does  not  make  any  reference  to  the  numbered 
paragraphs    contained  therein  which  the  Respondent 
No.1 verifies on his own knowledge and what he verifies 
upon  information  received  and  believed  to  be  true. 
Further, the affidavit in question also does not make any 
reference  to  the  verification  of  the  annexures  appended 
along  with  the  petition,  which  although  have  been 
mentioned in the said affidavit”.        
8. 
The above survey of case law indicates the following principles 
qua valid verification of election petition: 
i) 
that election petition is to be verified on oath. Such verification 
is not to be signed in routine by the deponent but being on oath 
 
22 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
it  requires  to  be  attested  either  by  the  Oath  Commissioner  or 
any other authority competent to administer oath, which is to be 
practically administered; 
ii) 
that  verification  on  oath  of  an  election  petition  though 
mannered in accordance with civil law yet it entails upon penal 
consequences and hence is mandatory;  
iii) 
that  there  is  no  material  difference  between  a  verification  on 
oath  and  a  verification  through  an  affidavit  for,  that  is  an 
affidavit is a sworn statement in writing while a verification is 
confirmation  in  law  by  Oath  in  writing  to  establish  the  truth, 
accuracy and reality of a statement of fact;  
iv) 
the  purpose  of  taking  oath  is  to  bind  down  the  deponent  to 
speak truth otherwise he or she would be liable for the curse of 
Allah Almighty, if the truth is not spoken;  
v) 
that  request  for  rectification  of  defective  verification  may  be 
considered  by  the  Tribunal  according  to  the  settled  principle 
relating  to  amendment  in  the  pleading  during  period  of 
limitation  for  filing  of  election  petition  but  once  limitation 
period  has  already  expired  the  defect  in  verification  cannot  be 
allowed to be removed; 
vi) 
that the objection that election petitioner in his verification has 
failed to give reference to the paragraphs of the pleadings as to 
what he happened to verify on his own knowledge and what he 
happened to verify upon information received and believed   to 
be true is not very material because at times the entire statement 
happens  to  be  given  on  the  basis  of  one’s  knowledge  and  at 
times on the basis of information received and, thus, it depends 
upon  the  facts  of  each  case,  as  to  what  category  assertions 
belong to;  
vii) 
that the amended election petition is also required to be verified 
in accordance with Order VI Rule 15 CPC; 
viii) 
that  election  petition  is  not  required  to  be  supported  by  a  full 
affidavit.  Short  affidavit  is  sufficient  if  it  duly  fulfills  the 
requirement of Order VI Rule 15 CPC;  
 
23 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
ix) 
that the words “solemn affirmation before me” in the stamp of 
the  Oath  Commissioner  would  be  sufficient  to  indicate  that 
election  petitioner  was  duly  present  before 
the  Oath 
Commissioner  at  the  time  of  attestation  and  was  administered 
oath;  
x) 
that  identification  of  the  deponent/election  petitioner  before 
Oath  Commissioner  should  be  made  with  reference  to  his/her 
National Identity Card; 
xi) 
that  identification  of  the  deponent/  election  petitioner  by  an 
Advocate who has mentioned of knowing the election petitioner 
personally  is  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  identification  before 
the Oath Commissioner;  
xii) 
that identification of the deponent by an Advocate, whose name 
and  particulars  are  not  mentioned  on  the  verification,  is  not 
valid;  
xiii) 
that the date and place of verification, that is, at what date and 
at what place the verification was made by the deponent should 
be specified;  
xiv)  That only that affidavit shall be treated valid for the purpose of 
verification of the election petition which is in conformity with 
the requirements mentioned in  the High Court Rules & Orders 
read with Order XIX CPC; and, 
xv) 
that  in  order  to  meet  with  the  real  object  and  the  spirit  of  the 
election 
laws  which  require  verification  on  oath,  Oath 
Commissioner at the time of verification of the election petition 
and also the affidavit, must record and endorse the verification/ 
attestation  that  the  oath  has  been  actually,  physically  and  duly 
administered  to  the  election  petitioner/deponent;  and  it  is  the 
duty  of  election  petitioner  to  insist  and  ensure  that  the  said 
endorsement is made.  
9. 
In the light of above stated principles of law, I now proceed to 
examine the validity of verification of the present election petition. In 
the case on hands following verification has been given at the bottom 
of the petition. 
 
24 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
“  It  is  verified  on  oath  at  Islamabad  on  this  18th  day  of 
September, 2018 that the contents of paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 6a, 
d,  f,  h,  j,  k,  m,  n,  o  ,  p,  q,  w,  x,  cc  and  ff  are  correct  and 
paragraphs 5, 6b, c, 2, I, l, r, s, t, u, v, y, z, aa, bb, dd, ee, gg, 
to the best of my knowledge and belief are true and correct.”  
 
The  petitioner,  who  is  an  Advocate  of  Supreme  Court  and    also 
Member  of  the  Sindh  Bar  Council  through  this  petition  has  made  a 
prayer that a declaration be issued to the effect that: (a) nomination of 
respondent  No.1  was  invalid;  (b)  respondent  No.1  as  returned 
candidate  was  not  on  the  nomination  day,  qualified  for,  rather  was 
disqualified from, being elected or to hold elective office of member 
of  National  Assembly  from  constituency  NA.95-  Mainwali-I  under 
Article  62  (1),  (d),  (e)  and  (f)  and  Article  63  (1)  (o)  and  (p)  of  the 
Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973;  and,  (c) 
respondent  No.1  has  been  guilty  of  corrupt  practice  throughout.  The 
said declaration has been sought inter-alia on the basis of (i) judgment 
of  paternity  in  the  case  of  Anan  Luisa  White  v  Imran  Khan  by 
Superior Court of the State of California for County of Los Angeles, 
(ii)  copy  of  order  of  appointing  guardian  of  minor,  (iii)  copy  of 
consent of proposed guardian, (iv) copy of declaration Carolina White 
etc, (v) tweets between Tyriana Jad Khan and Jemima, (vi) biography 
“Imran vs Imran untold story” written by Frank Huzur; and (vii)  book 
of  Reham  Khan.  It  means  that  all  the  paragraphs  of  the  election 
petition are not happened to be correct according to knowledge of the 
petitioner  and  thus  the  principle  settled  in  the  case  of  Sardarzada 
Zafar Abbas and others v Syed Hssan Murtaza and others  (PLD 
2005  SC  600)  cannot  be  applied  here.    The  petitioner  was,  thus, 
required to give reference to paragraphs of the petition which he was 
verifying to be correct according to his knowledge and the paragraphs 
which  were  correct  according  to  his  belief.  This  requirement  has  not 
been complied with and, thus, the verification given at the bottom of 
present  petition,  reproduced  hereinabove,  being  not  in  accordance 
with provisions of Order VI Rule 15 CPC is not valid. 
10.  Second limb of the objection to the verification is that the same 
was  not  made  on  oath,  which  is  evident  from  the  stamp  of  the  Oath 
Commissioner affixed beneath the verification. Answer to this aspect  
 
25 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
 
 
26 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
response, he has submitted that this is a question of fact to be proved 
on  evidence;  and,  that  if  at  this  stage  Tribunal  wants  to  understand 
true  meaning  of  the  stamp  or  to  read  the  missing  letters  then  Oath 
Commissioner may be summoned. The reply is neither persuasive nor 
satisfactory. According to the case of Gulzar  Khan  v  Shahzad  Bibi 
and  another  (PLJ  1974  SC  179),  Amir  Abdullah  Khan  through 
Legal  Heirs  and others  v  Col. Muhammad  Attaullah  Khan (PLD 
1990 SC 972) and  Mst. Maryam Bibi and others v Muhammad Ali 
through  L.Rs  (2007  SCMR  281),  the  question  of  the  proper 
construction of document is a question of law and not of fact. 
11.  Oath is one of the important components of the verification of 
election  petition.  In  fact,  it  is  Oath  which  provides  justification  to 
bring the result of the election under judicial scrutiny and control so as 
to ensure that the true will of the people is reflected in the results; and, 
to  secure  that  only  the  persons  who  are  eligible  and  qualified  under 
the  Constitution  obtain  the  representation.  The  other  object  for  the 
verification  of  pleadings  on  Oath  is  to  fix  the  responsibility  for  the 
averments  and  allegations  in  the  petition  on  the  person  signing  the 
verification  and,  at 
the  same 
time, 
to  discourage  wild  and 
irresponsible allegation as firstly; the success of a candidate who has 
won at an election cannot be lightly interfered with; secondly, setting 
aside  of  an  election  involves  serious  consequences  not  only  for  the 
returned  candidate  and  the  constituency,  but  also  for  the  public  at 
large inasmuch as re-election involves an enormous load on the public 
exchequer  and  administration;  and,  thirdly,  false  cases  not  only 
contribute to the work load of the Tribunal and kill its precious time 
but create hurdle in the ways of genuine litigants who sincerely need 
assistance of the Tribunal for obtaining justice.  Law, thus, ordains the 
parties to approach Tribunal with genuine grievance on truthful facts. 
Where false facts are pleaded on oath and false evidence is produced 
to  mislead  the  Tribunal  calling  upon  it  to  interfere  with  people’s 
verdict of election, misconduct of the party is always viewed seriously 
by  initiating  criminal  proceedings  against  it  under  Section  193  PPC. 
In  the  present  case  the  petitioner  has  challenged  the  election  of 
respondent  No.1  primarily  on  the  allegation  that  he  is  not  of  good 
 
27 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
character  and  is  commonly  known  as  one  who  violates  Islamic 
Injunctions and, that he is not sagacious, righteous, honest and Ameen. 
These are serious allegations and, therefore, required to be declared on 
Oath,  which  is  missing.  It  appears  that  the  word  “Oath”  has  been 
deliberately  omitted  or  got  omitted  in  the  attestation  or  stamp  of  the 
Oath  Commissioner  so  as  to  avoid  any  consequence  on  not  being 
proved the allegation set out in the petition. This is adroit maneuvers. 
It  is  in  this  perspective  this  Tribunal  neither  can  read  nor  supply  the 
word  “Oath”  in  the  attestation  of  the  Oath  Commissioner  so  as  to 
make  it  perfect.  Even  otherwise,  it  is  not  the  function  of  Tribunal  to 
make  instrument  but  to  interpret  it.  Omission  of  the  word  “Oath”  in 
the  attestation  of  Oath  Commissioner  leads  to  the  conclusion  that 
verification  of  election  petition  was  not  made  on  Oath  and  thus  it  is 
not in accordance with Order VI rule 15 CPC. This defect is fatal and 
renders present election petition incompetent.  
12.  There  is  another  flaw  in  the  attestation  of  verification  by  the 
Oath Commissioner. It is not reflected from the verification/attestation 
whether  the  petitioner  was  present  at  the  time  of  verification  before 
the  Oath  Commissioner  because  he  had  not  been  verified  with 
reference 
to  his 
identity  card.  The 
line  “who 
is  personally 
known/identified  by  Abdul  Wahab  Baloch”  occurring  in  the  above 
pasted  stamp  of  the  Oath  Commissioner  makes  the  attestation 
ambiguous.  It  is  not  clear  from  the  said  line  as  to  whether  petitioner 
namely  Abdul  Wahab  Baloch  was  personally  known  to  the  Oath 
Commissioner or whether the petitioner himself disclosed his identity 
or someone who was his namesake had identified him before the Oath 
Commissioner. At the best this can be said to be a patent ambiguity in 
the stamp of the Oath Commissioner. It is settled principle of law that 
where  the  document  or  deed  is  ungrammatical  and  cannot  be  read 
literally so as to give any clear meaning without adding or removing 
some  words,  there  is  patent  ambiguity  and  oral  evidence  is  not 
admissible  to  supply  the  defect.  Exactly,  the  same  principle  is 
conveyed  through  the  maxim  ambiguities  verborum  patens  nulla 
verification  excluditue  (that  which  is  patently  ambiguous  on  its  face 
cannot  be  made  clear  by  external  proof).  The  above  stated  patent 
 
28 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
ambiguity  renders  the  attestation  of  the  Oath  Commissioner  void  for 
uncertainty and consequently it is held that verification was not made 
in  accordance  with  law  and  resultantly  election  petition  being  non-
compliant  with  the  mandatory  provision  of  Section  144  (4)  of  the 
Elections Act, 2017 merits to be summarily rejected.          
13.  There is yet another defect in the election petition. According to 
Section  144  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017    election  petition  shall,  inter 
alia, contain affidavit of service to the effect that copy of the petition 
along  with  copies  of  all  annexures,  including  list  of  witnesses, 
affidavit and documentary evidence, have been sent to all respondents 
by registered post or courier service. In order to meet this requirement 
the petitioner has appended affidavit of service, available at page 440 
of this file, which reads as under: 
“ I, Abdul Wahab Baloch, deponent hereby state on oath 
that  a  copy  of  the  petition  along  with  copies  of  all 
annexures,  including  list  of  witnesses,  affidavit  and 
documentary  evidence  have  been  served  to  all  the 
respondents by registered post at their addresses.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deponent 
 
Underneath  the  above  citied  petitioner’s  solemn  affirmation,  the 
following statement is typed.   
Sworn  at  Islamabad  this  18th  day  of  September  2018, 
before  me.  The  affidavit  is  filed  on  behalf  of  Abdul 
Wahab Baloch. 
Oath Commissioner 
The  above  statement  was  though  typed  at  the  bottom  of  petitioner’s 
solemn affirmation but not signed by the Oath Commissioner and thus, 
it cannot be taken into consideration to hold that the petitioner made 
the  affirmation  of  the  facts  stated  in  the  affidavit  on  Oath  before  the 
Oath  Commissioner.  However,  beneath  the  said  statement  there  is  a 
rubber  stamp  of  Oath  Commissioner  which,  is  selfsame  the  rubber 
stamp  pasted  above  and  thus  for  reasons  recorded    about  it  in 
preceding  paragraphs,  being  ambiguous  renders  affidavit  of  service 
defective and invalid. Notwithstanding the defective affidavit, there is 
29 
EP.No.46 of 2018 
another  aspect  which  indicates  that  provisions  of  clause  (c)  of 
subsection  (2)  of  Section  144  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  were  not 
complied with.   The petitioner has also placed on record copy of the 
notice  which  was  sent  to  all  respondents  of  the  instant  petition.  This 
notice is available at page 438 of this file and reads as follows: 
“Please  take  notice  that  I  am  filing  election  petition 
before 
the  Hon‟ble  Election  Tribunal 
for  N.A-95 
(Mianwali-1)/  Lahore  High  Court  to  challenge  the 
election  Notification  dated  07.08.2018  of  respondent 
No.1  (Imran  Ahmad  Khan  Niazi)  as  returned  candidate 
from the above constituency.” 
Perusal of the above cited notice makes it pellucid that the petitioner 
through  said  notice  had  not  sent  copy  of  the  election  petition  along 
with  copies  of  annexures,  including  list  of  witnesses,  affidavit  and 
documentary  evidence  to  all  respondents.  It  means  that  affidavit  of 
service,  available  at  page  440  of  this  file  is  false  and,  thus,  election 
petition  under  Section  144  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  is  liable  to  be 
rejected at the threshold. 
14.  Upshot of above discussion is that election petition in hands is 
non-compliant  with  the  mandatory  provisions  of  Section  144  of  the 
Elections Act, 2017 and, therefore, the same is hereby rejected.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID WAHEED) 
 
JUDGE    
Announced in open Court on__________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE  
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arshad* 
