JUDGMENT SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, 
MULTAN  
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
      Criminal Appeal No. 70 of 2009  
(Punjab Provincial Cooperative Bank Limited v. The State & 5 others) 
 
JUDGMENT 
18.12.2018 
Ch. Khalid Mehmood Arain, Advocate 
Mr.  Muhammad  Ahsan-ul-Haq,  Deputy  District 
Public Prosecutor  
Mr. Muhammad Anwar Awan, Advocate 
Mr. Waseem Mumtaz, Advocate 
 
DATE OF 
HEARING 
Appellant 
by: 
State by: 
Respondents 
No.2 & 4 by: 
Respondent 
No.3 by: 
 
 
 
 
TARIQ  SALEEM  SHEIKH,  J.  –  This  appeal  under 
Section 417(2A) Cr.P.C. is directed against judgment dated 10.1.2009 
passed  by  the  learned  Special  Judge,  Anti-Corruption,  Multan, 
whereby Respondents No.2 to 6 were acquitted. Respondents No.5 & 
6 (Ghazanfar Ali and Muhammad Aslam Shah) have passed away so 
it has abated to their extent.   
2. 
Briefly,  the  prosecution  case  is  that  Ch.  Abdul  Ghafoor, 
Zonal  Chief,  Punjab  Provincial  Cooperative  Bank  Limited,  Multan 
Zone, vide letter dated 15.3.2000, made a complaint to the Additional 
Director,  Anti-Corruption  Establishment,  Multan,  that  Muhammad 
Aslam, Manager, Makhdoompur  Pahooran  Branch  (absconding  since 
10.3.2000),  had  misappropriated  huge  amount  of  public  money  with 
the  connivance  of  other  staff  members  which  had  caused  loss  to  the 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
 
2 
tune  of  Rs.10,39,000/-  to  the  bank.  They  also  stole  demand  draft 
forms bearing No. 072270 to 072275 and used the same to embezzle 
an additional sum of Rs.4,38,900/-. The Complainant added that these 
figures  were  tentative.  A  special  audit  of  the  branch  was  in  progress 
which  would  determine  the  actual  loss.  On  the  basis  of  the  said 
complaint F.I.R No. 13/2000 dated 24.4.2000 was registered at Police 
Station  ACE,  Khanewal,  for  offences  under  Sections  409,  420,  467, 
468,  471,  161  PPC  read  with  Section  5(2)  of  the  Prevention  of 
Corruption  Act,  1947.  The  ACE  investigated  the  case.  The  Branch 
Manager, Muhammad Aslam, could not be arrested and was declared 
a proclaimed offender. During the investigation Respondents No. 2 to 
4  and  Respondents  No.5  &  6  (since  deceased)  were  found  guilty. 
Report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. was submitted accordingly.  
3. 
On  26.03.2005,  the  learned  Special  Judge  indicted  the 
Respondents.  They  professed  innocence  and  claimed  trial.  It  is 
important  to  note  that  before  the  framing  of  charge  Respondent 
Ghazanfar Ali moved an application under Section 249-A Cr.P.C. for 
his  acquittal  which  was  dismissed  by  the  learned  Special  Judge  vide 
order  dated  8.12.2004.  He  filed  Crl.  Revision  No.  42/2005 
thereagainst before this Court which was dismissed in limine.  
4. 
The  prosecution  cited  46  witnesses  in  the  calendar  of 
witnesses.  Out  of  them  it  examined  25  till  30.10.2005  after  which 
Respondent  Ghazanfar  Ali  filed  second  application  under  Section 
249-A  Cr.P.C.  The  learned  Special  Judge  dismissed  it  as  well  vide 
order dated 21.12.2005. The trial progressed at a slow pace afterwards 
and  only  four  more  witnesses  were  recorded  till  22.12.2008. 
Eventually,  vide 
judgment  dated  10.1.2009,  he  acquitted 
the 
Respondents  holding  that,  firstly,  delay  in  disposal  of  criminal  cases 
constituted an abuse of the process of court. The prosecution could not 
complete  its  evidence  even  after  four  years  which  could  not  be 
tolerated.  Secondly,  there  was  no  probability  of  the  Respondents 
being convicted. Aggrieved, the Appellant has filed the instant appeal 
before this Court.  
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
3 
 
5. 
Mr. Muhammad Anwar Awan, Advocate, who represented 
Respondents  No.  2  &  4,  raised  a  preliminary  objection  regarding 
maintainability  of  this  appeal.  He  argued  that  Special  Judges  are 
appointed  under  Section  3  of 
the  Pakistan  Criminal  Law 
(Amendment) Act, 1958 (the “Amendment Act”), to take cognizance 
of  the  offences  punishable  under  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act, 
1947,  and  other  penal  offences  mentioned  in  the  Schedule  thereto. 
Appeal  against  the  judgment  of  conviction  by  the  Special  Judge  is 
filed  under  Section  10(1)  of  the  Amendment  Act  before  the  High 
Court  whereas  under  Section  10(2)  only  the  public  prosecutor  under 
the  direction  of  the  Federal  Government  is  competent  to  prefer  an 
appeal  against  an  order  of  acquittal.  Neither 
the  Provincial 
Government  nor  the  complainant/private  party  was  competent  to  file 
such appeal. He maintained that right of appeal given to an aggrieved 
person  under  Section  417(2A)  Cr.P.C.  against  the  order  of  acquittal 
did not extend to private persons in cases decided by the Special Court 
regarding  a  scheduled  offence.  He  placed  reliance  on  Ashiq 
Muhammad and another v. Khuda Bakhsh and 5 others (PLD 1998 
Pesh.  68),  Abdul  Qayyum  v.  Aziz-ur-Rehman  Shah  (2004  PCr.LJ 
422), Mian Khalid Rauf v. Ch. Muhammad Saleem and others (PLD 
2006 Lah. 147), and The State v. Abdul Qayyum and another (2011 
PCr.LJ 252).  
6. 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  Appellant,  Ch.  Khalid 
Mehmood  Arain,  Advocate,  contended  that  the  aforementioned 
objection was misconceived and based on misconstruction of law. He 
argued  that  Section  10(2)  of  the  Amendment  Act  did  not  curtail  the 
right of the aggrieved (private) person granted under the general law, 
i.e. Section 417(2A) Cr.P.C., to assail an order of acquittal. He relied 
upon  The  State  v.  Bashir  Ahmad  and  6  others  (2000  YLR  1634), 
Federal Government of Pakistan through Director, Intelligence and 
Investigation,  Customs  and  Excise  v.  Akhtar  Javed  (2002  YLR 
2444), Rasool Khan and 9 others v. Haji Banaras Khan and 5 others 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
 
4 
(2002  PCr.LJ  286),  and  Hazoor  Bakhsh  v.  Riaz  Ali  Abbasi  and 
another (PLD 2003 Kar. 340). 
7. 
Section  10  of  the  Amendment  Act  deals  with  appeal, 
revision and transfer of cases. Its relevant portion reads as under:  
10. Appeal, revision and transfer of cases. (1) An appeal from the 
judgment  of  a  Special  Judge  shall  lie  to  the  highest  Court  having 
appellate jurisdiction in  the territorial  limits  in  which the offence is 
tried by the Special Judge and the same Court shall also have powers 
of revision.  
(2)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  Section  417  of  the  Code  of 
Criminal  Procedure,  1898,  in  any  case  tried  by  a  Special  Judge 
appointed  by  the  Federal  Government  under  Section  3,  in  which 
such  Special  Judge  has  passed  an  order  of  acquittal,  the  Federal 
Government may direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to 
such Court as aforesaid.  
8. 
The  question  as  to  whether  a  private  person  aggrieved  of 
an  order  of  acquittal  passed  by  a  Special  Court  could  file  an  appeal 
came  up  for  consideration  in  a  number  of  cases  but  there  were 
divergent  rulings.  Eventually  the  issue  was  authoritatively  settled  by 
the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  Mian  Khalid  Rauf  v. 
Chaudhry  Muhammad  Saleem  and  another  (PLD  2015  SC  348).  It 
reasoned that Section 10(1) creates a right of appeal for any aggrieved 
person from the judgment of the Special Court whether it is set up by 
the  provincial  or  the  federal  government  under  Section  3  of  the 
Amendment  Act.  Hence,  no  distinction  can  be  made  or  the  right  of 
appeal taken away from any aggrieved person whether such appeal  is 
filed  against  acquittal  or  conviction.  Section  10(2)  cannot  be  read  to 
limit the right of appeal against an order of acquittal  recorded by the 
Special  Court  to  the  federal  government  because  it  is  at  the  most  a 
corollary to the general right of appeal contained in Section 10(1). The 
Apex Court ruled:  
“Consequently  it  would  be  quite  appropriate  to  observe  that  any 
aggrieved  person  whether  it  be  the  Federal  or  the  Provincial 
Government  or  an  accused  or  a  Complainant  could  approach  the 
High  Court  in  appeal  against  either  an  order  of  conviction  or 
acquittal  or  for  that  matter  for  the  purpose  of  enhancement  of  a 
sentence passed by any Special Judge appointed under the Act 1958 
and  as  much  should  be  read  into  Section  10(1)  of  the  Act.  In  this 
regard, it may also be observed that perhaps this was the legislative 
intent, as Section 10(2) of the Act was added to cater for the right of 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
 
5 
the  Federal  Government  to  file  an  appeal  against  acquittal  as  such 
right was not given to it under Section 417, Cr.P.C.”  
9. 
Interestingly, the above-mentioned judgment was delivered 
in  appeal  against  the  judgment  passed  by  this  Court  in  Criminal 
Appeal  No.  688/2004  which  is  reported  as  PLD  2006  Lah.  147 
(supra) and relied upon by the learned counsel for Respondents No. 2  
& 4. In this view of the matter, the objection regarding maintainability 
of this appeal is overruled.  
10. 
Now  I  turn  to  the  merits  of  the  case.  The  learned  counsel 
for  the  Appellant  contended  that  law  of  limitation  did  not  prescribe 
any time-line within which a criminal Court must conclude a trial and 
that  its  failure  would  necessarily  entail  acquittal  of  an  accused.  In 
every case delay did not constitute abuse of process of law. The Court 
must  take  stock  of  the  circumstances  which  caused  the  delay  before 
quashing  the  proceedings.  The  learned  counsel  argued  that  in  the 
instant case the delay was not attributable to the prosecution as it did 
not seek a single unnecessary adjournment. The learned Special Judge 
had not adverted to this aspect while passing the impugned judgment. 
He  further  contended  that  when  FIR  No.13/2000  was  lodged  it  was 
estimated  that  the  Respondents  had  embezzled  Rs.14,77,900/-  but 
after  the  special  audit  of  the  branch  it  was  found  that  the  actual 
amount  was  around  Rs.46,00,000/-.  The  learned  Special  Judge  had 
relied on certain portions of the deposition of    PW-26 Abdul Ghafoor 
to hold that the charge against the Respondents was groundless which 
was  erroneous.  He  did  not  consider  the  testimony  of  other  28 
witnesses  and  the  bulk  of  documentary  evidence  they  had  adduced 
which  supported  the  prosecution  case  and  adequately  showed  that 
they  had  committed  the  alleged  offence  and  was  sufficient  to  record 
conviction against them. 
11. 
The  learned  Deputy  District  Public  Prosecutor  supported 
this  appeal  and  adopted  the  arguments  of the learned  counsel  for  the 
Appellant. 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
6 
 
12. 
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the Respondents 
controverted the aforementioned contentions. They contended that the 
Respondents  were  suffering  the  agony  of  criminal  proceedings  since 
the  year  2000.  They  faced  investigation  for  five  years  and  then  trial 
for  another  four  years  until  the  learned  Special  Judge  passed  the 
impugned  judgment  and  acquitted  them.  They  argued  that  it  was  a 
mockery  of  law  to  allow  criminal  cases  to  proceed  for  such  a  long 
time. They added that even though 29 witnesses were examined in the 
instant  case,  there  was  not  an  iota  of  incriminating  evidence  against 
the Respondents. PW-26 Abdul Ghafoor, who carried out the special 
audit  of  the  branch,  had  rather  proved  that  the  charge  against  them 
was groundless. 
13. 
A  speedy 
trial  benefits  both 
the  accused  and 
the 
prosecution  and helps  in  providing  reasonably  prompt  administration 
of justice. According to H.L. Dattu J.,[1] it serves a three-fold purpose: 
firstly, 
it  protects 
the  accused  against  oppressive  pre-trial 
imprisonment;  secondly,  it  relieves  the  accused  of  the  anxiety  and 
public  suspicion  due  to  unresolved  criminal  charges  and,  lastly,  it 
protects  against  the  risk  that  evidence  will  be  lost  or  memories 
dimmed  by  the  passage  of  time,  thus  impairing  the  ability  of  the 
accused to defend himself.  
14. 
The right to a speedy trial is a derivation from a provision 
of  Magna  Carta.  This  principle  was  incorporated  into  the  Virginia 
Declaration  of  Rights  of  1776  and  from  there  into  the  Sixth 
Amendment  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  of  America 
which reads: “In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the 
right to  a speedy  and  public trial….”  In  India, the  concept of speedy 
trial is read into Article 21 of the Constitution as an integral part of the 
fundamental  right  to  life  and  liberty.  Reliance  is  placed  on 
Hussainara Khatoon and others v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar, 
Patna 
(AIR  1979  SC  1360)  and  Sudarshanacharaya  v. 
                                           
1.Ranjan Dwivedi v. C. B. I., through the Director General (AIR 2012 SC 3217) 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
 
7 
Purushottamacharya and another (AIR 2012 SC 3854). In Pakistan 
as  well  the  right  of  an  accused  to  have  a  speedy  trial  is  duly 
recognized. A Division Bench of this Court in the case Ghulam Qadir 
Khan v. The State [PLD 1963 (W.P.) Lahore 32] ruled as under: 
 
 
“In  our  view,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  sound  reason  for 
making a distinction between the delay which might occur during the 
investigation stage preceding the institution of proceedings in Court, 
and the delay that might occur during the conduct of the proceedings 
in Court. The effect in both cases is the same, namely, that justice is 
delayed, and the accused and in some cases possibly the prosecution 
may be seriously prejudiced by the long delay occurring between the 
commission of the offence and the conclusion of the trial. The delay 
in  both  cases,  if  unjustified,  will  constitute  unnecessary  harassment 
of the subject, by keeping the sword of prosecution hanging over the 
head of the accused for a long time. The proceedings must, therefore, 
be regarded as oppressive in either case and not calculated to secure 
the ends of justice. In both cases it is the process of the Court which 
is invoked and, therefore, if there is any abuse of the process of the 
Court, the proceedings may be quashed.” 
The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  approved  the 
above  statement  of 
law 
in  State 
through  Advocate-General, 
N.W.F.P.,  Peshawar  and  others  v.  Gulzar  Muhammad  and  others 
(1998 SCMR 873). 
15. 
 
However,  the  most  intriguing  question  is  whether  delay 
per se entitles an accused to acquittal. In the United States there is the 
Federal  Act  called  the  Speedy  Trial  Act,  1974,  which  sets  out  time-
lines  for  completing  the  various  steps  of  a  federal  criminal 
prosecution.  Similarly,  Rule  48  of  the  Federal  Rules  of  Criminal 
Procedure grants the trial Court discretion to dismiss cases that are not 
brought to trial promptly. Nevertheless, all delays are not fatal for the 
prosecution.  18  US  Code  §  3161  makes  certain  statutory  exclusions 
for determining whether the prescribed time-limits have been met. For 
example, it  excludes the  time  between  the  filing of a  motion and the 
conclusion  of  the  hearing  on  that  motion  (whether  or  not  a  delay  in 
holding  that  hearing  is  reasonably  necessary),  delays  caused  by 
unavailability  of 
the  accused  or  an  essential  witness,  delays 
attributable to a co-accused and delay resulting from an interlocutory 
appeal.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  trial  Court  cannot  dismiss  a  case 
mechanically  when  a  time  limitation  is  violated.  The  sanction  of 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
 
8 
dismissal  may  be  with  or  without  prejudice  to  re-prosecution.  In 
assessing whether dismissal should be with prejudice, the Court must 
consider  the  seriousness  of  the  offence,  the  circumstances  leading  to 
dismissal,  and  the  impact  that  re-prosecution  would  have  on  the 
administration  of  justice.[2]  In  United  States  v.  Taylor  [487  U.S.  326 
(1988)],  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  trial  court  must  examine  each 
statutory  factor  in  deciding  to  dismiss  charges  with  prejudice.  In  the 
said case the Supreme Court found that a minor violation of the time 
limitations  of  the  Speedy  Trials  Act  did  not  justify  dismissal  with 
prejudice of an indictment charging serious drug offences.[3]  
16. 
 
As  already  noted,  India  also  recognizes  that  there  is 
societal  interest  in  providing  a  speedy  trial.  It  is  an  “important 
safeguard to prevent undue and oppressive incarceration, to minimize 
anxiety  and  concern  accompanying  the  accusation  and  to  limit  the 
possibility  of  impairing  the  ability  of  an  accused  to  defend  himself.” 
However, in Abdul Rehman Antulay etc. v. R.S. Nayak and another 
(AIR  1992  SC 1701), a  Constitution Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  of 
India  held  that  delay  in  conclusion  of  criminal  trials  may  be 
occasioned by a host of factors. Therefore, the question as to whether 
there is any delay and whether it has infringed an accused’s right of a 
speedy trial should be determined with reference to the circumstances 
of each case. It ruled: 
“While determining whether undue delay has occurred (resulting in 
violation of Right to Speedy Trial) one must have regard to all the 
attendant  circumstances,  including  nature  of  offence,  number  of 
accused  and  witnesses,  the  work-load  of  the  court  concerned, 
prevailing  local  conditions  and  so  on  –  what  is  called,  the 
systematic delays. It is true that it is the obligation of the State to 
ensure  a  speedy  trial  and  State  includes  judiciary  as  well,  but  a 
realistic and practical approach should be adopted in such matters 
instead of a pedantic one.” 
17. 
 
Again, in Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab (1994 Cr. LJ 
3139), it was observed: 
                                           
2.Speedy Trial Act-Wikipedia https: // en.m.wikipedia.org. 
3. Ibid. 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
9 
 
 
“Of  course,  no  length  of  time  is  per  se  too  long  to  pass  scrutiny 
under  this  principle  nor  the  accused  is  called  upon  to  show  the 
actual prejudice by delay  of disposal  of cases. On the other hand, 
the  court  has  to  adopt  a  …  balancing  approach  by  taking  note  of 
the  possible  prejudices  and  disadvantages  to  be  suffered  by  the 
accused by avoidable delay and to determine whether the accused 
in  a  criminal  proceeding  has  been  deprived  of  his  right  of  having 
speedy trial with unreasonable delay which could be identified by 
the factors (1) length of delay, (2) the justification for the delay, (3) 
the  accused’s  assertion  of  his  right  to  speedy  trial,  and  (4) 
prejudice  caused  to  the  accused  by  such  delay.  However,  the  fact 
of  delay  is  dependent  on  the  circumstances  of  each  case  because 
reasons  for  delay  will  vary,  such  as  delay  in  investigation  on 
account of the widespread ramification of crimes and its designed 
network either nationally or internationally, the deliberate absence 
of  witness  or  witnesses,  crowded  dockets  on  the  file  of  the  court 
etc.” 
18. 
 
The  same  principles  obtain  in  Pakistan.  The  delay 
tolerated varies with the complexity of the case, the manner of proof 
as  well  as  the  gravity  of  the  offence.  There  cannot  be  any  universal 
rule  in  this  regard.  The  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  reiterated  this 
statement  of  law  in  the  case  of  Gulzar  Muhammad  (supra)  as 
follows: 
“We  are  conscious  of  the  fact  that  mere  delay  per  se  is  not 
generally  sufficient  to  come  to  a  finding  that  there  is  an  abuse  of 
the  process  of  the  Court.  If  there  is  good  reason  for  delay  at  the 
investigation  stage,  by  reason  of  say,  the  complexity  of  the  case, 
the magnitude of the evidence to be collected, or disappearance of 
the accused persons, it is clear that such a delay will not constitute 
a good reason for quashing the proceedings. In the case of Ghulam 
Qadir  Khan  (supra)  it  had  been  rightly  pointed  out  that  similar 
considerations  would  apply  to  the  delay  that  might  occur  in  the 
disposal  of  the  case  after  it  is  instituted  in  Court.  If  there  are  no 
unnecessary  adjournments  by 
the  delay 
occasioned  by  undesirable  tactics  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution 
but,  on the other hand, it  is  due to some  action  on the part of the 
accused person or due to the very nature of the case itself, such a 
delay  would  not  be  considered  as  amounting  to  an  abuse  of  the 
process  of  the  Court.  It  was  in  this  background  that  further 
principle in the case of Ghulam Qadir Khan (supra) was enunciated 
that the circumstances  connected with the delay in the disposal of 
the case will have to be examined in each case before a finding can 
be  arrived  at  as  to  whether  the  delay  constitutes  an  abuse  of  the 
process of the Court or not, and no valid distinction can be made in 
the  delay  that  occurs  during  the  investigation  stage  or  that  occurs 
during the trial.” 
the  Court,  nor 
is 
19. 
 
Coming  to  the  present  case,  it  is  observed  that  the 
Respondents  were  indicted  on  26.3.2005.  There  were  a  total  of  74 
dates of hearing after the charge was framed. The prosecution cited 46 
witnesses in the calendar of witnesses out of whom it examined 25 till 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
 
10 
30.10.2005. After that Respondent Ghazanfar Ali filed an application 
under  Section  249-A  Cr.P.C.  which  the  learned  Special  Judge 
dismissed vide order dated 21.12.2005. The trial progressed at a very 
slow  pace  from  then  onwards  and  the  testimony  of  only  four  more 
witnesses was recorded until 10.1.2009 when the impugned judgment 
was  passed  and  the  trial  was  closed.  I  have  carefully  examined  the 
Order  Sheet  of  the  learned  Special  Court  and  have  found  that  the 
delay  was  occasioned  primarily  due  to  the  accused.  While  fixing 
responsibility for the delay the Court would not make a mathematical 
calculation  as  the  learned  counsel  for  Respondents  No.  2  to  4 
attempted  to  suggest.  It  would  rather  take  into  account  the  overall 
conduct of the accused and the dilatory tactics employed by them and 
their  counsel  to  drag  the  case.  They  cannot  be  permitted  to  take 
premium of their own wrongdoings. Any other course would  destruct 
the whole system. 
20. 
 
The  learned  counsel  for  Respondents  No.  2  to  4 
submitted that at one stage this Court issued a direction to the learned 
Special Judge to conclude the trial of the case within four months. He 
contended  that  non-compliance  with  the  said  direction  also  created  a 
right  in  favour  of  Respondents  No.  2  to  4  to  seek  acquittal  and  the 
impugned judgment could be maintained on this ground as well. I am 
afraid, this contention has no force. Indeed, the High Court can issue 
directions  to  the  subordinate  courts  under  Article  203  of  the 
Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  and  their  non-
compliance  may  have  consequences  for  the  Presiding  Officer 
concerned,  it  does  not  create  any  right  in  favour  of  the  accused  as 
argued. 
21. 
 
The  learned  Special  Judge  was  also  persuaded  to  acquit 
the  Respondents  on  the  ground  that  the  evidence  produced  by  the 
prosecution did not connect them with the commission of the alleged 
offence.  Perusal  of  the  impugned  judgment  reveals  that  he  recorded 
the  said  finding  on  the  basis  of  certain  selected  portions  of  the 
deposition of PW-26 Abdul Ghafoor who carried out the special audit 
Crl. Appeal No.70/2009 
 
11 
of  the  branch.  He  conveniently  ignored  Audit  Report  Exh.PW-25/A 
and 
the  following  portion  of  his  examination-in-chief  which 
Respondents No. 2 to 4 could not rebut during cross-examination: 
 
“We had invited the account holders to confirm their balance and on 
scrutiny of their passbooks, it was revealed that the balance record in 
the passbooks were different from the balance on the bank accounts 
and so the total amount of misappropriation of accounts came out to 
be  Rs.46,16,776/-  Manager  Muhammad  Aslam,  Saif-ur-Rehman 
Loan Clerk, Hasnain Asghar Cashier, Muhammad Nawaz Clerk, all 
were  involved  in  the  fraudulent  withdrawal  of  funds  from  the  bank 
who misappropriated the amount deposited with the bank by account 
holders.  Ghazanfar 
Inspector  Cooperative 
Makhdoompur  Pahoran  was  responsible  for  approving  bank  loans 
for cooperative societies, and he prepared bogus loan applications on 
behalf  of  the  societies  and  procured  loans  from  the  bank.  Account 
No.35  was  maintained  by  Aslam  Shah  account  holder  who  in 
collusion with the Bank Manager withdrew Rs.9,80,000/- from such 
account,  whereas  there  was  no  corresponding  balance  in  such 
account.” 
then  serving  Sub 
22. 
This is not all. The learned Special Judge did not consider 
the  evidence  furnished  by  the  other  28  witnesses  and  a  plethora  of 
documents they adduced. It is important to note that on 21.12.2005 the 
learned  Special  Judge  dismissed  an  application  under  Section  249-A 
Cr.P.C.  filed  by  Respondent  Ghazanfar  Ali  expressly  holding  that 
sufficient  material  supporting  the  prosecution  case  was  already 
available on record. The said order was never challenged. 
23. 
In  view  of  what  has  been  discussed  above,  Crl.  Appeal 
No.70/2009  is  allowed.  The  impugned  judgment  is  set  aside  and  the 
case  is  remanded  to  the  Special  Court  which  shall  proceed  with  the 
trial from the stage when it was passed and conclude the same within 
the shortest possible time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
     Judge 
*M.Khalid* 
 
 
 
 
 
     
            
(TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH) 
       JUDGE 
