Judgment  Sheet
IN THE L.zTHGRtr HIGH COURT
BAHAWALPUR BENCH BAHAWALPUR.
JUDICI,{L DEPARTMBNT
C.R. No. 173-D  of 2014
GhularnAkbar&6others
Versus
Shazia Wazir
@W
Date of hearing:
Lt.01.2017
Petitioner  by:
Mr. Mukhtar Tahir Ahrnad Kamboh, Advocate.
Respondent  by:
Mr. Muharnrnad  Asim Khan, Advocate.
MUJAIIXD M
-
Tersely
the facts culminating  into instant civil revision.and necessary
;  for its adjudication are that respondent was owner in
possession of la'd measuring g kanal situated in Mauza
obatta Tehsil Khanpur, District Rahim yar  Khan.
Purportedly,  she sold away the same vide mutation  of sale
No. 978 attesred on g.03. 1997 (Ex.p-2) in consideration of
Rs.50,000 to petitioner No.r Ghulam Akbar, (petitioner
No.1),  who vide mutation of sare No.1750 and Mutation of
tamleek  No.1754, both attested on rg.06.2006,  further
transferred  his property in favour  of petitioners.No.3  and 4 to
7 respectively. on 24.09.2009  respondent lady filed a suit for
declaration  to the effect that she was owner in possession  of
suit property and impugned mutation of sale Ex.p-2  was
based on fraud, collusion, without any consideration and as
C.R. No. 173-D  of 2014lBWp.
such in-effecti'ue upon her rights.  She claimed  that she had
not sold awat' this property to petitioner No.l. She also
assailed  subse,luent mutations  of sale Ex.p-3 and Ex.p-4
being in- effective upon her vested rights.
2. 
The present  petitioners  contested  the suit mainry on
the grounds  that respondent with her free will sold away the
suit property to petitioner  No.1 and at the time of attestation
of mutation of srale, her father was also present  and possession
was also delivered to hirn (petitioner/vendee).  To resolve the
controversy in between the parties, ten issues were  framed.
Both the parties led evidence in support of their respective
pleas.  Vide judgment  dated 02.03.20rr passed  by the leamed
civil Judge  Khanpur  suit of respondent  was dismissed.
Therefore,  she f;led an appeal which was accepted by the
learned  Addl. District Judge  Khanpur,  vide judgment and
decree  dated I:;.02.2014 rnainly on the ground  that'at  the
time of entry a.nd attestation of mutation  of sale, she was
minor. Feeli'g erggrieved by the impugned  judgment and
decree passed by the rearned Addr. District Judge Khanpur,
,  the petitioners  ha.re assailed the same through  the instant civil
revision maintaining  that same is against  facts,  law, result of
misreading and non-reading of evidence and as such not
sustainable  under the law.
3. 
Arguments  heard.  Record perused.
4. 
The initial onus of disproving the varidity of sale
transaction  lies crn the respondent, who as pw-1 deposed that
she has leased  r)ut 8 kanal land to respondents  No.r and
three years prior to date of evidence,  he stopped  payment  of
lease money.  Sr:bsequently, she came to know about the
impugned mutation  of sale. she categoricalry stated that she
had never appea;:ed  before the revenue  officer  for attestation
of mutation of sale and she had neither received  any sale
ul
C.l{. No. 173-D  of 2014/BWP.
consideration, nor aiilxed her signature/thumb mark on
iirpugned  mutation  of sale. She further deposed  that neither
her Identity Ciard  number  was incorporated in the impugned
mutation  of sale nor her photograph  was pasted on it, to
establish  her identity (and presence before  revenue  officer).
During cross-examination  she stated that in the year 1997  she
was aged 16117 years  and student of 8th class. PW-2 Abdul
:r,asheed  also nodded in favour of respondent.  As such in
view of case la.w reported  as 2012 SCMR i373 (Supreme
Courl of Pakistan)  Noor Muhammad and others versus
Mst. Azmat-e-Bibi; 2007 \'LR 1770 (Lahore) Qasim Ali
Versus Sher Muhammad;  2005 CLC 180 (Peshawar  ) Fida
Hussain and others versus Abdul Aziz, the onus  shifted
towards petitioners/beneficiaries  of transaction  to establish
that mutation of sale was validly  attested. Admittedly,
petitioner No.l was tenant of respondent,  as such under
Article I25 ol Qanun-e-Shahadat  Order 1984  also onus  lies
on petitioners  to prove termination of such relationship,  on
the basis of alleged sale.
DW-l Ghulam Akbar (petitioner  No.l) in his
5. 
examination  in chief supported  the version  taken in written
statement.  During cross-examination  he conceded  that neither
photograph  of'respondent  nor her Identity Card was appended
with the mutation  and at the time of attestation of Mutation
of sale Revenue  Officer asked from the respondent her age
but he was rtot memorizing  her reply in this context. He
showed his lack of knowledge that at the time of attestation
of impugned nrutation  of sale,  respondent  was of l3ll4 years.
DW-2 Noor lvluhammad a close relative of petitioners  and
attesting witness of  mutation  supported the case of
petitioners. In c:ross-examination  he conceded  that at the time
of attestation  of mutation, respondent  was in veil and he had
C.R. No. 173-D  of 2014/BWP.
not seen her fa.ce and at that time her age was 16117 years.
During cross examination  he further  deposed  that petitioner
No.1 was not. his relative, whereas petitioner No.l has
admitted that DW-2 was his close relative.  As such it is
established  that DW-2  is not a truthful witness.
6. 
Ex.P-Z, is copy of impugned  mutation of sale.
Ex.D-2 is copy of jamabandi for the year 200l-2002.  Ex.D-3
is copy of Khasra Girdawari  for crop of Kharif 2006 in which
petitioner No.l is recorded in column of possession as co-
sharer.
7. 
In the instant case neither Revenue  Officer nor
revenue Patwari has come in witness box to establish  that
mutation  of sale was validly attested in favour of petitioner
No.1. In case reported  as PLD 2003  SC 678 (DB Judgment)
Muhammad Ikram and another versus  Altaf Ahmad and
2015 MLD 17'36 (Peshawar)  Zahir Shah t..rus Mst.
Fatehoon and 9 others, it has been laid down that non-
production of s;uch witnesses was fatal to the case of
beneficiarv of nutation.
r8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners  while referring
the above noticed revenue record and relying on case law
reported  as PLJ 2008 S.C. 775 (Appellate  Jurisdiction) Mehr
Khan, 
vs. Mst. Basaee,  etc., 2007 SCMR 614
Muhammad Amir and others  vs. Mst. Beevi and others,
has maintained that mutation of sale stood incorporated in
record of rights  and as such carries presumption of truth. On
the other hand counsel for the respondent referring  case law
reported as 2012 SCMR 1373 supra has maintained  that
mutation  of sale itself did not create title and beneficiary  of
such transaction is under legal obligation to prove that
transferor  did part with the ownership of property voluntarily.
Learned counsel for the respondent has further  maintained
C.R. No. 173-D  of 2014/BWP.
that from the testirnony of DWs and omission of revenue
officer to inco4rorate  GNIC number of respondent, it is weli
established that respondent was below  r 8 years of age at the
time of attestation  of rnutation  and as such she was not
competent  to r;ell the land. section  11 of contract  Act rg72
deals with conrpetence  of a person  to enter  into a contract and
same  is reproduced for ready  reference:-
"11. Who are competent to contract -  Every person is
competent to contract who is of the age of majority according
to the law to rvhich he is subject,  and who is of sound mind,
and is not disqualified  from contracting by any law to which
he is subject."
In plecedent  2008 SCMR 1031 Muhammad  Ali
through  L.Rs versus  Manzoor Ahmad, while  interpreting
Sec.1 1 of contract Act 1872, it has been held that agreement
by person under legal disability  (a minor) wouid be void ab-
initio and even incapable of rectification  or confirmation,
after attaining age of majority as law forbids such transaction.
In A.I.R 19i9 Privy Council, it has been held that where a
minor purports  to contract, his alleged contract is void  and not
merely  voidable. In 33 Indian Cases 133 and A.I.R. 196l
Patna 2I, it ha.s been authoritatively laid down that a minor
cannot make any valid contract.  In 2016 CLC Note  147,
{(Peshawar (D.l.Khan Bench)} and 2003 YLR 874 Lahore
(D.B.) Faqir Nluhammad  vs. Zahoor Ahmad and 6 others,
also similar vi'lrv has been  expressed. Case law reported as
2000 MLD 25 l(Lahore)  (D.B.) Noor Muhammad  and
another versulr Muhammad  Ishaq and another,2003  yLR
1870 (Lahore) Nluhammad  Aslam and 2 others vs. Ameer
Muhammad Khan and others, PLJ 2004 Lahore  133
(Rawalpindi B,:nch Rawalpindi)  Muhammad  Aslam and 2
others versus Amcer Muhammad Khan(deceased)
C.R. No. 173-D of 2014/BWP.
through L.Rs and 13 others and 2001 CLC 551 (Lahore)
Musaddaq ,{li Khan and 6 others versus Sharif  Rahat
Qureshi  and 10 others also support this legal preposition.  In
PLD 1996 l.ahore 483 (D.8.), it has been held that any
contract or transaction  entered into with minor was void ab-
initio,  as mirror could not give consent to create any binding
contract. Even recording of presence of father of minor  by
Revenue Officer, or signature of father on mutation sheet
would not prove that he had sold land in dispute and also for
the interest and welfare of minor. It was fuither  held that in
order to prove genuineness of oral transaction reflected
through mutation of sale, particularly  when same was relating
to property  of rninor and female, vendee must prove  by
positive evidence that transaction  was entered into with free
will and coor3eflt of minor and that in case of minor,  sale was
for her benefit  and welfare  and consideration  had passed on
and in proof  thereof,  there was something  in black and white
and that in case of a female even if  she was major,
independent advice was available  at the time of entering into
transaction.  'fhe facts of the case in hand are identical and as
such the precedent  is aptly applicable.  In view of principle
laid down in above rich case law, it is consistent  and settled
law that minor is incompetent  to sell property.  As such
learned  Addl. District  Judge has rightly concluded  that
impugned  mutation of sale is not valid  one and is in-effective
upon the rights of the respondent.  The findings  of learned
Addl. District Judge, in this respect are un-exceptional one
and call for no interference  bv this Court in its revisional
jurisdiction.
9. 
The impugned mutation  of sale was attested  on the
basis of fratid, without any consideration and suffered from
legal disability of vendor being minor  as such it was void
C.R. No. 173-D of 2014/BWP.
transaction  in view of case law PLD 1964 S.C. 329
Muhammad  Akbar vs. Mohammad  Yusaf Shah and
others, PLD 1975 S.C. 624, Mst. Hameeda Begum  Vs.
Murad Begum  and as per settied law there is no limitation to
assail  the void transaction. In precedent  2016 SCMR 1417,
Peer Bakhsh  Vs. Mst. Khan Zadi and others, it has been
iaid down that limitation did not run against a void
transaction.  Thus the learned Addl. District  Judge  has rightly
concluded that suit filed by the respondent  is well in time.
10.  As a sequel of above discussion  and keeping in
consideration  the peculiar facts and circumstances of this
case, the findings of learned  Addl. District Judge on crucial
issues are based on proper appreciation  of evidence and same
do not suffer  flrom misreading  and non-reading of evidence.
The leamed  Appellate  Court has rightly, justly exercised the
jurisdiction  vested with it, to protect the rights of minor and
struck down sale transaction  based on fraud, without  any
consideration.  r\s such the instant  revision petition, being
devoid of any:nerits,  stands dismissed. ov \
(Muj ahi d Mu staqeem Ahme d)
Judge
D F'OII R
/. G.M.Rhatti/
/i'' ,h-t-t  4
