 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Stereo. H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH 
MULTAN 
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
Criminal Appeal No.359 of 2013 
Allah Ditta   
versus  
The State etc. 
 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
The State 
Date of hearing 
 
 
The Appellant by    
The Complainant by  
The State by  
 
======= 
versus  
Allah Ditta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.04.2018 
Mr. Mudassar Altaf Qureshi, 
Advocate 
 
 
 
 
Miss. Asma Khan, Advocate 
Mr. Muhammad Ali Shahab, 
Deputy Prosecutor General. 
 
 
Asjad Javaid Ghural, J.      Through  the  afore-titled  criminal  appeal 
under Section 410 Cr.P.C., appellant Allah Ditta has challenged the vires of 
judgment dated 05.07.2013 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Vehari in 
case  FIR  No.451  dated  09.09.2011,  in  respect  of  offences  under  Sections 
302,  324  &  34  PPC,  registered  at  Police  Station,  Luddan  District  Vehari 
whereby he was convicted and sentenced as under:- 
Under Section 302(b) PPC  
Death  and  to  pay  the  compensation  of  Rs.50,000/-  under  Section 
544-A Cr.P.C. to the legal heirs of deceased Ghulam Farid and in 
default  thereof  to  further  undergo  simple  imprisonment  for  six 
months. 
Under Section 324 PPC  
Rigorous  imprisonment  of  10-years  and  to  pay  the  fine  of 
Rs.50,000/-  and  in  default  thereof  to  further  undergo  simple 
imprisonment for three years. 
Under Section 337-F(v) PPC  
Imprisonment of 05-years and to pay Daman. 
 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
2 
2. 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 for confirmation or otherwise of 
death sentence of appellant Allah Ditta shall also be decided through this 
common judgment. 
3. 
The  prosecution  story  unfolded  in  the  crime  report  (Ex.PA) 
registered on the complaint of Muhammad Waryam (PW-11) is that in the 
preceding  season  of  harvesting  wheat  crop,  Allah  Ditta  (appellant)  and 
Ghulam  Farid  (deceased)  had  been  jointly  working  as  laborer on thresher 
machine  and  during  the  said  period,  Allah  Ditta  had  withheld  seven 
mounds of wheat out of his total labour outcome.  Ghulam Farid had been 
making repeated demands for the return of his wheat from Allah Ditta but 
he refused and extended threats to kill him, if he again made such demand.  
On 09.09.2011 at about 5:00 p.m., the contractor of WAPDA had installed 
an electric pole in the land of Muhammad Nadeem (PW-10) near the house 
of  Allah  Ditta  due  to  which  Muhammad  Nadeem  and  Allah  Ditta  had 
exchanged  hot  words  whereupon  Ghulam  Farid  intervened  and  forbade 
them.  In  the  meanwhile,  Muhammad  Latif,  armed  with  Sota  and 
Muhammad  Sharif  empty  handed  (both  since  acquitted),  had  come  there.  
Muhammad  Latif  raised  Lalkara  to  teach  a  lesson  to  Ghulam  Farid  for 
demanding  wheat  and  restraining  Muhammad  Nadeem  to  install  the 
electric  pole.    At  the  very  moment,  Muhammad  Mehram  and  Irshad  Ali 
(PW-12) had also come there.  In their view, Allah Ditta made a fire shot, 
which landed at the left side of belly of Ghulam Farid.  He repeated the fire 
shot, which hit at the right shin of Muhammad Nadeem.  All three accused 
persons succeeded to run away towards the village while raising Lalkaras.  
The  complainant,  Muhammad  Mehram  and  Irshad  Ali  attended  Ghulam 
Farid, who had succumbed to the injuries at the spot.   
 
Motive  behind  the  occurrence  was  that  Ghulam  Farid  had  to  take 
seven  mounds  of  wheat  from  Allah  Ditta  and  Muhammad  Nadeem  had 
restrained him from installing the electric pole.   
4. 
Irshad Hussain, SI (PW-13) had visited the place of occurrence on 
the  same  day  at  6:00  p.m.,  recorded  the  statement  of  the  complainant 
(Ex.PG) and sent the same to the police station for the registration of case.  
He prepared injury statement Ex.PJ and inquest report Ex.PK and escorted 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
3 
the  dead  body  of  deceased  Ghulam  Farid  to  the  mortuary.    He  also 
examined  injured  Muhammad  Nadeem,  prepared  his  injury  statement 
Ex.PL and sent him to the hospital.  He inspected the place of occurrence, 
prepared unscaled site plan Ex.PM, secured two empties of 30-bore pistol 
alongwith  blood  stained  earth  from  the  place  of  occurrence  and  took  the 
same  into  possession  vide  recovery  memo  Ex.PH.    On  the  same  day  he 
recorded the supplementary statement of the complainant to the effect that 
Allah Ditta was armed with pistol 30-bore instead of gun 12-bore.   During 
investigation,  appellant  led  to  the  recovery  of  a  pistol  30-bore  (P-3)  on 
22.09.2011, which was taken into possession vide recovery memo Ex.PD.  
He  recorded  the  statements  of  witnesses  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C.  and 
after completion of investigation, he got prepared report under Section 173 
Cr.P.C.  He did not arrest Muhammad Latif and Muhammad Sharif as they 
were not involved in this occurrence, however he submitted second report 
under Section 173 Cr.P.C. on 14.11.2011.  
5. 
Dr.  Muhammad  Anwar  (PW-8)  had  conducted  medico  legal 
examination of injured Muhammad Nadeem on 09.09.2011 and observed a 
lacerated  wound  at  the  inner  side  of  middle  1/3rd  leg  1  cm  x  1  cm  going 
inward  through  and  through  at  the  outer  side  of  the  leg.    There  was  no 
tattooing, blackening  and  no  corresponding  hole  in  Dhoti.    It  was  a  fresh 
injury.  
 
He  had  also  conducted  autopsy  on  the  dead  body  of  deceased 
Ghulam Farid on 10.09.2011 and observed the following injury:- 
 
 
“A  lacerated  wound  (inlet)  at  the  front  of  left  side  of  abdomen  5  cm 
above  umbilicus,  wound  measured  1  cm  x  1  cm  x  going  inward  to 
abdominal cavity crosses the structures in front through and through with 
an outlet at the upper outer most 1/4th of right buttock, 1.5 cm x 1.5 cm.  
Corresponding hole for this injury was present on the Qameez which was 
encircled  signed  and  stamped.    X-rays  of  the  abdomen  were  taken  and 
were  sent  to  Radiologist  for  expert  opinion  regarding  fire  arm  injury.  
Injury No.1 was ante-mortem, kind of weapon was fire arm.  
 
All  the  organs  of  thorax  and  abdomen  were  healthy,  however  the 
peritoneum,  small  intestine  and  the  abdominal  main  blood-vessels  to 
lower limb were ruptured.  The cause of death was due to hemorrhage and 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
4 
shock with injury No.1, which was sufficient to cause death individually.  
The probable duration between injuries and death was immediate whereas 
between death and post mortem examination about 24-hours.   
6. 
At  the  commencement  of  the  trial,  the  learned  trial  Court  had 
framed  a  charge  against  the  appellant  and  his  co-accused  to  which  they 
had pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.  
7. 
The  prosecution  had  produced  13-witnesses  besides  the  report  of 
Chemical  Examiner  (Ex.PO),  report  of  Serologist  (Ex.PP)  and  the  report 
of  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency  (Ex.PQ).    The  appellant  and  his       
co-accused,  in  their  statements  recorded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  had 
denied  and  controverted  all  the  allegations  of  fact  leveled  against  them, 
they neither opted to make their statements under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C., 
nor had they produced any evidence in their defence.  
8. 
Learned  trial  Court,  upon  conclusion  of  the  trial  had  acquitted       
co-accused  Muhammad  Latif  and  Muhammad  Sharif  whereas  convicted 
and  sentenced  the  appellant  as  stated  above,  hence  the  aforementioned 
criminal appeal as well as the connected Murder Reference.  
9. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submits  that  the  appellant  is 
innocent  having  nothing  to  do  with  the  alleged  occurrence;  that  the 
occurrence  had 
taken  place 
in 
the  appellant’s  house  where 
the 
complainant party had in fact aggressed the appellant’s party; that if there 
was  a  dispute  between  Muhammad  Nadeem  (PW-10)  and  the  WAPDA 
employees  for  installation  of  the  electric  pole  outside  the  house  of  the 
appellant  then  what  prompted  the  complainant  party  to  enter  into  the 
house of appellant Allah Ditta and caused fire arm injuries to the deceased 
as well as to the injured witness; that all the three claimed eye witnesses 
had  narrated  the  facts  contrary  to  each  other  with  regard  to  the  place  of 
occurrence;  that  the  post  mortem  examination  on  the  dead  body  of  the 
deceased had been conducted with the delay of 24-hours, which shows the 
real possibility that it was an unseen occurrence and the eye witnesses had 
been  planted  subsequently  in  order  to  falsely  implicate  the  appellant  and 
his co-accused in this case; that the complainant party, while armed with 
fire  arm  weapons,  had  in  fact  trespassed  into  the  house  of  the  appellant, 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
5 
launched murderous assault upon him and during grappling, the fire shot 
of  their  own  weapon  had  hit  the  deceased;  that  the  prosecution  has  put 
forward  two  motives  but  failed  to  prove  any  one  of  the  same  through 
independent  piece  of  documentary  or  oral  evidence;  that  the  weapon  of 
offence  allegedly  recovered  at  the  instance  of  the  appellant  remained 
inconsequential as the same had been deposited into the office of Ballistic 
Expert  after  the  appellant’s  arrest  together  with  the  crime  empty  secured 
from the place of occurrence; that the prosecution has miserably failed to 
prove the charge against the appellant beyond shadow of reasonable doubt 
and  the  learned  trial  court,  while  passing  the  impugned  judgment  of  the 
appellant’s  conviction,  had  erred  in  law  and  facts  of  the  case,  which 
warrants interference by this court.   
10. 
Conversely,  learned  Deputy  Prosecutor  General  appearing  for  the 
State  assisted  by  learned  counsel  for  the  complainant  has  submitted  that 
the matter was promptly reported to the police within the shortest possible 
time,  which  excludes  the  possibility  of  consultation  prior  to  the 
registration of case and also rule out the possibility of non-presence of the 
eye  witnesses  at  the  venue  of  occurrence;  that  it  was  a  day  light 
occurrence and there was no question of misidentification of the assailant; 
that  all  the  three  eye  witnesses  including  an  injured  witness  i.e. 
Muhammad  Nadeem  (PW-10),  had  made  quite  natural  and  consistent 
statements with regard to the mode and manner of the occurrence and the 
specific  role  of  causing  fire  arm  injury  by  the  appellant  to  the  deceased; 
that  the  appellant  had  himself  admitted  the  occurrence  in  his  statement 
recoded  under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.;  that  the  minor  discrepancies  in  the 
prosecution  evidence,  as  pointed  out  by  the  defence,  are  natural  and 
cannot  be  considered  as  material;  that  there  was  no  occasion  for  the 
complainant to falsely implicate the appellant in this case for the murder 
of  his  real  brother  by  replacing  them  with  the  actual  culprits;  that  the 
motives has well been stated and established by each of the eye witnesses 
in their deposition before the learned trial court; that the report of Ballistic 
Expert with regard to the weapon of offence recovered at the instance of 
the appellant has been received with positive result being wedded with the 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
6 
crime  empty  secured  from  the  place  of  occurrence;  that  the  medical 
evidence  lends  full  support  to  the  ocular  account;  that  the  impugned 
judgment  entailing  the  conviction  and  sentence of  the  appellant  does  not 
warrant interference by this court.     
11.  We have heard learned counsels for the appellant, learned Deputy 
Prosecutor General appearing for the State assisted by learned counsel for 
the complainant and have perused the record with their able assistance. 
12. 
The  prosecution’s  mainstay  was  on  the  testimony  of  Muhammad 
Waryam  (PW-11/complainant),  brother  of  deceased  Ghulam  Farid, 
Muhammad  Nadeem  (PW-10),  maternal  nephew  of  the  complainant  and 
Irshad  Ali  (PW-12),  a  cousin  of  the  said  witnesses.    They  were  closely 
related  to  each  other  as  well  as  to  the  deceased.    The  complainant  while 
appearing in the witness box had deposed that on 09.09.2011 at about 5:00 
p.m.,  an  altercation  took  place  between  Muhammad  Nadeem  and  Allah 
Ditta.  In  the  meanwhile,  Muhammad  Latif,  armed  with  Sota  and 
Muhammad Sharif (both since acquitted) empty handed, had come there, 
Muhammad  Latif  raised a  Lalkara to teach  a  lesson  to  Ghulam  Farid  for 
demanding  wheat  and  restraining  Muhammad  Nadeem  to  install  the 
electric pole whereupon Allah Ditta made a fire shot, which landed at the 
left  side  of  belly  of  Ghulam  Farid  and  all  the  three  accused  persons 
decamped towards the village. Muhammad Nadeem (PW-10) had deposed 
that on the aforesaid day and time, the WAPDA employees were installing 
electric  pole  in  the  field, he  reprimanded  them  not  to  install  the  same  in 
his  field  and  he  was not the  need of  electricity  and asked  them  to  install 
the  same  in  the  field  of  a  person,  who  was  in  need  of  the  electricity,  he 
had  a  quarrel  with  appellant  Allah  Ditta  over  the  installation  of  electric 
pole  by  the  WAPDA  employees,  Ghulam  Fareed  had  intervened  upon 
which  appellant  Allah  Ditta  had  made  two  fire shots  with  his pistol,  one 
fire shot hit at the belly of deceased Ghulam Fareed whereas the other at 
his shin.  Ghulam Fareed succumbed to the injuries whereas he fell down 
in  injured  condition,  Muhammad  Mehram,  Muhammad  Waryam  and 
Irshad  Ali  shifted  him  to  Rural  Health  Centre,  Luddan.  Irshad  Ali       
(PW-12)  had  made  consistent  statement  to  that  of  injured  Muhammad 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
7 
Nadeem  (PW-10).  Muhammad  Waryam  (PW-11)  had  not  supported 
Muhammad  Nadeem  in  his  examination-in-chief  as  the  complainant  had 
not  uttered  even  a  single  word  with  regard  to  the  injury  sustained  by 
injured  Muhammad  Nadeem,  which  shows  that  he  had  not  seen  the 
occurrence with his own eyes and he had been planted and maneuvered to 
depose against the appellant.  He had not only failed to mention the injury 
sustained  by  injured  Muhammad  Nadeem  but  also  mentioned  that  the 
appellant  was  carrying  a  pistol  12-bore  at  that  time  instead  of  pistol         
30-bore as narrated by the other claimed eye witnesses.  Furthermore, the 
complainant’s  claim,  as  stated  above,  was  that  they  had  shifted  the  dead 
body of the deceased within ten minutes from the place of occurrence to 
their house whereas Irshad Hussain, SI (PW-13) had stated that he visited 
the place of  occurrence  on  the  same  day,  examined the  dead body  there, 
prepared  his  injury  statement  (Ex.PJ)  and  inquest  report  (Ex.PK)  and 
escorted  the  dead  body  to  the  mortuary  through  Muhammad  Abbas, 
constable.  The scaled site plan (Ex.PB) and the inquest report also shows 
contradiction with regard to the shifting of the dead body from the place 
of  occurrence  wherein  it  was  mentioned  that  the  dead  body  of  the 
deceased  was  lying  at  the  place  of  occurrence  i.e.  courtyard  of  the 
appellant’s house. 
13.  Another  important  factor  relevant  to  the  discussion  is  that  the 
complainant’s  claim  was  that  the  occurrence  had  taken  place  inside  the 
house of the appellant, the dead body of the deceased was lying in front of 
the room in the courtyard of the house of appellant Allah Ditta and injured 
Muhammad  Nadeem  was  lying  on  the  ground  in  injured  condition  near 
the  deadbody  of  the  deceased,  they  had  shifted  the  dead  body  of  their 
brother  Ghulam  Farid  within  ten  minutes  to  their  house.    Muhammad 
Nadeem (PW-10) had stated in cross-examination that the altercation had 
taken place out of the house of the appellant, he had received injury at his 
right shin out of the appellant’s house and the deceased had received fire 
arm injury out of the house of appellant Allah Ditta, who was standing in 
his field, again said in the field where the electricity pole was going to be 
installed.  The  material  contradiction  as  to  the  place  of  occurrence  has 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
8 
fallen  the  proceedings  of  investigation,  conducted  by  Irshad  Hussain,  SI 
(PW-13) to the ground.  It depicts that either both the said witnesses were 
not  present  at  the  time  and  place  of  occurrence  or  they  had  made  false 
statement  in  order  to  suppress  some  real  facts  from  the  court  for  the 
reasons best known to them.   
 
Though Muhammad Nadeem had stamped injuries on his person to 
establish his presence at the venue of occurrence yet it cannot be lost sight 
of  the  fact  that  Dr.  Muhammad  Anwar  (PW-8)  had  not  observed  any 
corresponding  hole  on  ‘Dhoti’  of  the  said  injured  witness  and  that  his 
statement  could  not  be  corroborated  from  the  testimony  of  one  of  the 
material  witnesses  i.e.  the  complainant/eye  witness  with  regard  to  the 
injury sustained by him during the occurrence.  It is notable that Irshad Ali 
(PW-12)  had  supported  the  injured  witness  but  his  testimony  has  been 
found to be not worth reliance as he was a chance witness being resident 
of  Mouza  Mustafabad  whereas  the  occurrence had taken place  at  Mouza 
Qadirwah  and  no  reason  whatsoever  could  be  brought  on  record  to 
establish  his  presence  at  the  venue  of  occurrence  at  the  relevant  time 
especially  when  he  had  admitted  in  his  cross-examination  that  he  and 
Mehram  Ali  were  at  a  distance  of  10/12  karmas  from  the  place  of 
occurrence having intervening crop of Bajra, cotton and the outer wall of 
the appellant’s house with the height of five feet.  In this scenario, he was 
unable to see that who had made the fire shot landing at which part of the 
body of the deceased or the injured witness. The story narrated by the said 
witnesses  seems  to  be  fabricated  and  maneuvered  subsequently  just  to 
support  the  injured  witness.    It  is  also  well-settled  principle  by  now  that 
once  there  appears  a  single  doubt  as  to  the  presence  of  the  claimed  eye 
witness at the crime scene, it would be sufficient to discard his testimony 
as a whole.  A reference may be made to case titled “Mst. RUKHSANA 
BEGUM  and  others  versus  SAJJAD  and  others”  (2017  SCMR  596), 
wherein it has been held as under:- 
“A  single  doubt  reasonably  showing  that  a  witness/witnesses’ 
presence  on  the  crime  spot  was  doubtful  when  a  tragedy  takes 
place would be sufficient to discard his/their testimony as a whole.  
This  principle  may  be  pressed  into  service  in  cases  such 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
9 
witness/witnesses are seriously inimical or appears to be a chance 
witness  because  judicial  mind  would  remain  disturbed  about  the 
truthfulness  of  the  testimony  of  such  witnesses  provided  in  a 
murder  case,  is  a  fundamental  principle  of  our  criminal  justice 
system.”  
 
14. 
By  taking  the  case  in  broader  aspect,  we  have  observed  that  the 
electricity  pole  was  going  to  be  installed  outside  the  house  of  appellant 
Allah Ditta in the field of Muhammad Nadeem and in case of altercation 
between  Muhammad  Nadeem  and  the WAPDA  employees  what  was the 
purpose  of  the  complainant  party  to  invite  trouble  for  themselves  by 
entering  into  the  house  of  the  appellant.   This  shows that  the occurrence 
had not taken place as narrated by the prosecution and something has been 
suppressed from the court for some unknown reasons.  The story narrated 
by the prosecution is not coincide with the real facts as emerged from the 
facts  and  circumstances of the  case.   We do  not  believe that the  claimed 
eye  witnesses  had  narrated  the  true  picture  of  the  occurrence  and,  thus, 
their veracity is under heavy clouds.  
15. 
The  prosecution  has  unfolded  two  motives  in  the  crime  report,  as 
stated  in  the  preceding  paragraph  i.e.  the  appellant’s  4/5  months  earlier 
dispute with the deceased on account of giving seven mounds of wheat as 
labour  proceed  to  the  deceased  as  well  as  on  the  day  of  occurrence,  his 
dispute over the installation of electricity pole with Muhammad Nadeem.  
The  prosecution  was  under  legal  obligation  to  prove  the  motives,  either 
anyone  or  both  of  them,  through  independent  piece  of  oral  as  well  as 
documentary evidence other than the words of mouth of the claimed eye 
witnesses,  who  had  appeared  before  the  learned  trial  court  to  state  the 
mode and manner of the occurrence.   None of the claimed eye witnesses 
had  seen  appellant  Allah  Ditta  and  deceased  Ghulam  Fareed  while 
quarrelling  over  the  dispute  of  demanding  wheat  by  the  deceased.  
Likewise, if the  appellant  had a  dispute  with the WAPDA  employees on 
the  installation  of  electric  pole  in  the  land  of  Muhammad  Nadeem       
(PW-10), there was no occasion to exchange hot words, to enter into the 
appellant’s house and then to take the extreme step of killing the deceased 
on the basis of nothing.  The trite principle of law is that when a specific 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
10 
motive  is  put  by  the  prosecution,  the  same  has  to  be  proved  through 
independent source of evidence and in case of failure, the prosecution has 
to face the consequences and not the  accused. Reliance is placed on case 
titled  “NOOR  MUHAMMAD  versus  THE  STATE  and  another  (2010 
SCMR 97) wherein it has been held as under:-   
“Thus, the prosecution has failed to prove the motive.  It has been held in 
the case of Muhammad Sadiq v. Muhammad Sarwar 1979 SCMR 214 that 
when motive is alleged but not proved then the ocular evidence required to 
be  scrutinized  with  great  caution.    In  the  case  of  Hakim  Ali  v.  The  State 
1971  SCMR  432  it  has  been  held  that  the  prosecution  though  not  called 
upon to establish motive in every case, yet once it has set up a motive and 
failed to establish it, the prosecution must suffer consequences and not the 
defence.  In the case of Ameenullah v. State PLD 1976 SC 629 it has been 
held  that  where  motive  is  an  important  constituent  and  is  found  by  the 
Court  to  be  untrue,  the  Court  should  be  on  guard  to  accept  prosecution 
story.” 
 
16.  Dr. Muhammad Anwar (PW-8) had conducted autopsy on the dead 
body of deceased Ghulam Farid on 10.09.2011 at about 9:00 p.m. with the 
delay  of  about  16-hours  and  observed  a  lacerated  wound  (inlet)  at  the 
front of  left  side  of  abdomen  1  cm  x  1  cm  x  going  inward to  abdominal 
cavity crosses the structures in front through and through with an outlet at 
the  upper  outer  most  1/4th  of  right  buttock.  The  corresponding  hole  was 
present on the Qameez.  The X-rays of the abdomen were taken and were 
sent to Radiologist for expert opinion regarding fire arm injury.  It was an 
ante-mortem  injury  having  been  caused  with  fire  arm  weapon.  The 
duration  between  injuries  and  death  was  immediate  whereas  between 
death  and  post  mortem  examination  within  24-hours.    The  delay  of         
14-hours  in  conducting  the  post  mortem  examination  of  the  deceased 
indicates  the  real  possibility  that  the  time  had  been  consumed  by  the 
police  as  well  as  the  complainant  for  cooking  up  a  false  story  and  to 
manage  the  eye  witnesses.  We  seek  guidance  in  this  regard  from  case 
titled  “FAQEER  MUHAMMAD  versus  SHAHBAZ  ALI  and  others” 
(2016  SCMR  1441).  The  relevant  dictum  from  page  No.1443  is  hereby 
reproduced:-   
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
11 
“The  Post-mortem  Examination  Reporting  pertaining  to  the  deadbody  of 
Iftikhar  Ahmed  deceased  clearly  establishes 
that 
the  post-mortem 
examination had taken place after about 24 to 30 hours of the death of the 
deceased  which  factor  clearly  indicated  that  time  had  been  consumed  by 
the  local  police  and  the  complainant  party  in  cooking  up  a  story  for  the 
prosecution and in procuring and planting eyewitnesses.”   
 
 
17. 
Irshad  Hussain,  SI  (PW-13)  had  secured  two  crime  empties  of 
pistol 30-bore at the time of his first visit of the place of occurrence.  The 
said  investigating  officer  had  not  mentioned  the  date  of  arrest  of  the 
appellant,  however  it  is  shown  that  during  investigation,  appellant  Allah 
Ditta led to the recovery of a pistol 30-bore (P-3) with two live bullets (P-
4/1-2)  on  22.09.2011.    The  empty  bullets  were  sent  to  the  office  of 
Ballistic  Expert  on  06.10.2011  after  27-days  of  the  occurrence  and  after 
14-days of the recovery of weapon of offence from the appellant whereas 
the  weapon  of  offence  was  deposited  in  the  office  of  Ballistic  Expert  on 
25.10.2011  after  more  than  one  month  of  its  alleged  recovery  from  the 
appellant.    The  report  of  Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency  (Ex.PQ)  has 
been  received  with  the  positive  result.    In  the  crime  report,  it  had  been 
mentioned that the appellant was armed with pistol 12-bore but at the very 
moment  when  the investigation officer  had secured  empties of  pistol 30-
bore  from 
the  place  of  occurrence, 
the  complainant  had  made 
supplementary  statement  mentioned  the  weapon  of  offence  as  pistol  30-
bore with the appellant just to bring the same in line with the prosecution 
case.  Anyhow,  the  dispatch  of  crime  empties  to  the  office  of  Punjab 
Forensic Science Agency after arrest of the appellant with the delay of 27-
days of its securing, renders it to be legally unacceptable and, thus, in the 
circumstances  the  recovery  of  weapon  of  offence  from  the  appellant 
remained  inconsequential.  Reliance  is  placed  on  case  titled  “NAZEER 
AHMED  versus  The  STATE”  (2016  SCMR  1628)  wherein  it  has  been 
held as under:- 
“the  crime-empty  secured  from  the  place  of  occurrence  was  sent 
to the office of Forensic Science Agency after recovery of the gun 
rendering such recovery to be legally unacceptable----" 
 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
12 
18. 
The appellant, in his statement recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C., 
had taken a specific plea that Muhammad Nadeem (PW-10) and Ghulam 
Farid  (deceased),  being  armed  with  pistols,  had  launched  murderous 
assault  upon  him  when  he  was  present  in  his  house,  they  grappled  with 
him  and  during  the  scuffle,  the  pistol  of  them  went  on  and  hit  the 
deceased. The appellant had neither opted to appear under Section 340(2) 
Cr.P.C.  nor  had  he  produced  any  proof  or  piece  of  evidence  to  establish 
his  plea.    However,  one  thing  is  clear  that  when  the  place  of  occurrence 
was the appellant’s house and the altercation of Muhammad Nadeem had 
taken  place  with  the  WAPDA  employees  in  the  fields  adjacent  to  the 
appellant’s  house  then  what  constrained  the  complainant  party  to  enter 
into his house where the appellant had taken an extreme step of killing the 
deceased.  The aforesaid statement of the appellant shows that in fact the 
complainant had aggressed the appellant and what actually happened just 
before  the  occurrence,  could  not  be  ascertained  from  the  evidence 
available on record, which remained shrouded in mystery.  
19.  Having scanned the entire prosecution evidence, we could not find 
any  iota  of  evidence  to  connect  the  appellant  with  the  murder  in  issue.  
The claimed eye witnesses could not make consistence statement and we 
have  found  certain  material  contradictions,  which  were  sufficient  to 
change  the  fate  of  the  case.  The  complainant  had  himself  disputed  the 
place of occurrence in his statement before the learned trial court contrary 
to the other eye witnesses by shifting the dead body of the deceased from 
the place of occurrence  within ten  minutes.    The  contradictory  statement 
of  the  complainant  as  well  as  the  injured  witness  Muhammad  Nadeem 
with regard to the place of occurrence i.e. inside or outside the appellant’s 
house as well as injury sustained by Muhammad Nadeem (PW-10) during 
the  occurrence  renders  them  to  be  false  witnesses.    Irshad  Ali  (PW-12) 
was a chance witness being resident of some other place and he could not 
establish  any  reason  whatsoever  to  be  present  there  at  the  relevant  time, 
which  renders  him  to  be  not  a  truthful  witness.  The  post  mortem 
examination  on  the  dead  body  of  the  deceased  had  been  conducted  with 
considerable  delay  of  16-24  hours,  which  is  another  factor  showing  the 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
13 
real possibility that no one had seen the occurrence with one’s own eyes 
and the time had been consumed in order to manage the eye witnesses and 
for  cooking  up  a  false  story  for  the  prosecution.    Though  the  report  of 
Punjab  Forensic  Science  Agency  has  been  received  with  positive  result 
yet it cannot be lost sight of the fact that the crime empty had been sent to 
the  aforesaid  office  for  expert  opinion  after  the  appellant’s  arrest,  which 
renders  it  to  be  legally  unacceptable.  Furthermore,  the  complainant’s 
divergent  stance  with  regard  to  the  kind  of  weapon  by  itself  speaks 
volume.    In  the  instance  case,  the  prosecution  has  tried  to  take  the 
advantage  of  the  statement  of  appellant  recorded  under  Section  342 
Cr.P.C. but when the prosecution has failed to discharge its onus to prove 
the  case,  even  the  admission  of  an  accused  in  his  statement  of  accused 
under  Section  342  Cr.P.C.  for  killing  the  deceased,  the  capital  sentence 
cannot  be  maintained.    Co-accused  have  already  been  acquitted  of  the 
charge  and  no  appeal  against  their  acquittal  has  been  preferred  by  the 
complainant  or  the  State,  which  shows  their  satisfaction  over  the 
innocence  of  acquitted  accused  persons.  We  do  not  find  any  iota  of 
evidence  to  connect  the  appellant  with  the  murder  in  issue.    It  is  well-
settled principle of law that the prosecution has to stand on its own legs to 
prove  the  charge  against  the  accused  and  the  benefit  of  doubt,  even 
slightest,  shall  favour  the  accused.    What  to  speak  of  a  single  doubt,  the 
case in hand is replete with doubts, which is sufficient to tilt the scale of 
justice  in  favour  of  the  appellant.  Reliance  is  placed  on  case  titled 
“MUHAMMAD  AKRAM  versus  THE  STATE”  (2009  SCMR  230) 
wherein at page No.236, it has been held as under:- 
“It  is  an  axiomatic  principle of  law  that  in  case  of  doubt,  the  benefit  of thereof 
must accrue in favour of the accused as matter of right and not of grace. It was 
observed by this Court in the case of Tariq Pervaiz v. The State 1995 SCMR 1345 
that  for  giving  the  benefit  of  doubt,  it  was  not  necessary  that  there  should  be 
many  circumstances  creating  doubts.    If  there  is  circumstance  which  created 
reasonable  doubt  in  a  prudent  mind  about  the  guilt  of  the  accused,  then  the 
accused  would  be  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  doubt  not  as  a  matter  of  grace  and 
concession but as a matter of right.” 
 
20. 
The nutshell of above discussion is that  Criminal Appeals No.359 
of  2013  filed  by  appellant  Allah  Ditta  is  allowed,  his  conviction  and 
Crl. Appeals No.359 of 2013 
Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 
 
 
 
14 
sentence  awarded  by  the  learned  trial  court  are  set  aside  and  he  is 
acquitted of the charge by giving the benefit of doubt to him.  He shall be 
released  from  jail  forthwith,  if  not  required  to  be  detained  in  connection 
with any other case. 
21.  Murder Reference No.51 of 2013 is answered in the NEGATIVE 
and  the  Death  Sentence  awarded  to  appellant  Allah  Ditta  is  not 
confirmed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asif* 
 
 
 
 
  (Syed Muhammad Kazim Raza Shamsi)             (Asjad Javaid Ghural) 
 
       Judge 
   Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
