JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, MULTAN BENCH, 
MULTAN  
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 13 of 2009 
(Muhammad Anwar v. The State) 
 
 
DATE OF 
HEARING 
Appellant 
by: 
JUDGMENT 
20.11.2018 
 
Prince Rehan Iftikhar Sheikh, Advocate 
State by: 
Mr. Ansar Yasin, Deputy Prosecutor General  
Mr. Shahzad Saleem Khan Balouch, Advocate 
Complainant 
by: 
 
 
TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH, J.  – Through this appeal the 
Appellant,  Muhammad  Anwar,  has  assailed 
judgment  dated  
23.11.2006 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Sahiwal, 
in  case  FIR  No.  569/2004  dated  12.11.2004  registered  at  Police 
Station  Harappa,  District  Sahiwal,  for  offences  under  Sections 
302/109/148/149  PPC  whereby  he  was  convicted  and  sentenced  for 
the  murder  of  his  wife  Nasreen  Bibi  and  another  woman  named 
Rasoolan Bibi.   
2. 
Brief  facts  of  the  case  are  that  on  12.11.2004  Bashir 
Ahmad (PW-8) made a statement before Nisar Ahmad/SI (PW-15) to 
the  effect  that  he  was  a  resident  of  Chak  No.  4/10-L  and  an 
agriculturist by profession. On the same day, i.e. 12.11.2004, at about 
8:00  a.m.  when  he  went  to  his  fields  he  found  dead  bodies  of  two 
unknown  women  lying  in  the  drain.  A  five-month-old  baby  girl  was 
by  their  side  who  was  crying.  One  of  the  deceased  was  aged  41/42 
years  while  the  other  was  young  and  appeared  to  be  around  21/22 
years  old.  The  Complainant  raised  alarm  which  inter  alia  attracted 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
2 
 
 
 
PW-7  Noor  Ahmad  and  PW  Mureed  Hussain  son  of  Ghulam 
Muhammad  (given  up)  to  the  spot.  They  got  announcements  made 
from  the  mosques  in  their  village  and  the  surrounding  areas  to  call 
people to the aforesaid place for the identification of the deceased but 
nobody  could  identify  them.  At  9:05  a.m.  Nisar  Ahmad/SI  (PW-15) 
recorded  the  statement  of  Complainant  Bashir  Ahmad  (Exh.  PG/1) 
and  despatched  it  to  the  police  station  through  Muhammad  Abbas 
1114/C  on  the  basis  of  which  FIR  No.  569/2004  (Exh.PG)  was 
registered at 9:45 a.m.  
3. 
The  investigation  of  this  case  was  also  entrusted  to  Nisar 
Ahmad/SI (PW-15). He reached the crime scene, took the dead bodies 
in  his  custody  and  despatched  them  for  autopsy  under  the  escort  of 
Muhammad  Aslam  688/C  (PW-5).  Then  he  prepared  rough  site  plan 
of  that  place  Exh.  PS  and  recorded  the  statements  of  the  witnesses 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. During spot inspection he collected blood-
stained  earth  from  the  points  where  the  corpses  were  lying  and 
secured  them  vide  Recovery  Memos  Exh.PJ  &  Exh.PK.  He  found 
there six empties P-3/1-6, lead of a cell phone P-4 and baby’s feeder 
P-5 which he took into possession vide Recovery Memos Exh.PM & 
Exh.PN.  On  the  same  day  he  entrusted  the  infant  to  Munir  Ahmad 
(PW-9)  against  acknowledgement  Exh.PP.  After  the  postmortem 
examination  was  done  Muhammad  Aslam  688/C  (PW-5)  produced 
before  him  stitched  dead  bodies  of  both  the  deceased  and  their  last 
worn  clothes.  Nisar  Ahmad/SI  (PW-15)  secured  the  said  clothes 
through  Recovery  Memo  Exh.PQ  and  handed  over  the  corpses  to 
Muhammad  Iqbal,  Sanitary  Supervisor,  Municipal  Committee, 
Sahiwal,  against  receipt  Exh.PR  for  their  last  rites.  He  also  had  the 
announcements  made  through  loudspeakers  in  the  nearby  villages 
calling upon the people if they could identify the deceased. However, 
despite  his  best  efforts  they  could  not  be  identified  and  were 
eventually  buried.  On  10.1.2005,  Muhammad  Mansha  (PW-11), 
Muhammad Siddique (PW-12) and Abdul Ghaffar (PW-13) appeared 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
3 
 
 
 
before Nisar Ahmad/SI who showed them the photographs of the dead 
bodies from which they identified them as Nasreen Bibi and Rasoolan 
Bibi. He recorded  their statements under  Section 161  Cr.P.C. On  the 
same  day  Muhammad  Ijaz  (PW-10)  joined  the  investigation  and  got 
his statement recorded in which he nominated Appellant Muhammad 
Anwar,  Muhammad  Sarwar  (since  acquitted),  Mst.  Rashidan  Bibi 
wife  of  Sharif,  Abdul  Aziz  son  of  Bagh  Ali  and  Salamat  Ali  son  of 
Nawab  Din  along  with  four  unknown  persons  for  the  murders. 
Muhammad  Ijaz  (PW-10)  also  alleged  that  all  was  done  on  the 
instigation  of  Murad  Ali  son  of  Khushi  Muhammad  and  Allah  Ditta 
son of Burra. On 15.11.2004, Nisar Ahmad/SI got prepared scaled site 
plan from Draftsman Saeed Akhtar (PW-6). On 15.3.2005, he arrested 
Abdul  Aziz  and  Salamat  Ali. The  Appellant and  Muhammad  Sarwar 
approached  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Sahiwal,  for  pre-
arrest  bail.  He  arrested  them  after  their  bail  applications  were 
dismissed on 30.5.2005. Mst. Rashidan Bibi could not be apprehended 
and  was  declared  a  proclaimed  offender.  On  11.6.2005,  during  the 
course  of  investigation  Nisar  Ahmad/SI  allegedly  recovered  pistol 
.30-bore  P-1  and  two  live  bullets  P-2/1-2  at  the  instance  of  the 
Appellant  which  he  took  into  possession  vide  Recovery  Memo 
Exh.PF.  Kamran  Yousaf  (PW-16),  who  was  then  posted  as  SP, 
Investigation, also investigated this case for a short period. The police 
found that the Appellant and Muhammad Sarwar were involved in the 
occurrence  while  four  other  accused,  namely,  Abdul  Aziz,  Salamat 
Ali,  Murad  Ali  and  Allah  Ditta  were  innocent.  Report  under  Section 
173  Cr.P.C.  was  submitted  accordingly.  The  learned  Additional 
Sessions  Judge  indicted  the  Appellant  and  Muhammad  Sarwar  on 
29.12.2005. Both of them denied the charge and claimed trial. 
4. 
In  order  to  prove  its  case  the  prosecution  examined  16 
witnesses.  Noor  Ahmad  (PW-7)  and  Complainant  Bashir  Ahmad 
(PW-8)  testified  about  the  recovery  of  two  dead  bodies  of  females 
from  the  latter’s  field.  Munir  Ahmad  (PW-9)  deposed  that  Nisar 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
4 
 
 
 
Ahmad/SI  (PW-15)  gave  the  baby  girl  found  alongside  them  in  his 
care. Muhammad  Ijaz  (PW-10)  and  Abdul  Ghaffar  (PW-13) deposed 
that  the  Appellant  had  a  motive  to  kill  Nasreen  Bibi  and  Rasoolan 
Bibi.  Muhammad  Siddique  (PW-12)  overheard  a  conversation 
between  the  Appellant  and his  co-accused  in  which  he  confessed his 
guilt.  Haji  Munir  Ahmad  (PW-14)  furnished  the  evidence  of  the  last 
seen.  Muhammad  Mansha  (PW-11)  testified  about  the  extra-judicial 
confession  of  the  Appellant  and  Azmat  Ali  1075/C  (PW-2)  proved 
recovery  of  pistol  P-1  and  live  bullets  P-2/1-2  from  him.  Medical 
evidence  was  provided  by  Dr.  Afshan  Akram  (PW-1).  The 
Investigating Officers, Nisar Ahmad/SI (PW-15) and Kamran Yousaf, 
Deputy Director Intelligence Bureau (PW-16), gave the details of their 
investigation  and  the  evidence  they  collected  in  this  case.  The 
remaining  witnesses  were  formal  in  nature.  The  prosecution  also 
adduced reports of the Chemical Examiner (Exh.PS & Exh.PS/1), the 
Serologist (Exh.PT & Exh.PT/1) and the Forensic Science Laboratory 
(Exh.PV).  
5. 
After  the  prosecution  was  through  with  its  evidence  the 
learned  trial  court  recorded  the  statements  of  the  Appellant  and  co-
accused Muhammad Sarwar under Section 342 Cr.P.C. Both of them 
denied the allegations and professed innocence. They maintained that 
it  was  a  case  of  no  evidence.  The  occurrence  took  place  in  the  dark 
hours  of  the  night.  There  was  neither  any  direct  nor  circumstantial 
evidence  to  connect  them  with  it.  None  of  them  opted  to  get  their 
statements recorded on oath under Section 340(2) Cr.P.C. or examine 
any witness in their defence.  
6. 
On  the  conclusion  of  the  trial,  vide  judgment  dated 
23.11.2006, 
the 
learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  acquitted 
Muhammad Sarwar but convicted the Appellant under Section 302(b) 
PPC  and  sentenced  him  to  imprisonment  for  life  on  two  counts.  He 
also ordered him to pay compensation of Rs.50,000/- to the legal heirs 
of  each  deceased  under  Section  544-A  Cr.P.C.  In  the  event  of  non-
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
5 
 
 
 
payment  of  compensation,  the  Appellant  would  undergo  simple 
imprisonment  for  a  further  period  of  six  months  on  each  count.  The 
sentences  of  imprisonment  were  to  run  concurrently  and  benefit  of 
Section 382-B Cr.P.C. was extended to him. Through this appeal the 
Appellant has assailed his conviction and sentence before this Court. 
7. 
In  support  of  this  appeal  Prince  Rehan  Iftikhar  Sheikh, 
Advocate,  contended  that  it  was  a  case  of  no  evidence.  The  learned 
trial Court had not appraised the prosecution evidence properly which 
had  caused  grave  miscarriage  of  justice.  He  argued  that,  firstly,  the 
Appellant had no motive to murder Nasreen Bibi  and Rasoolan Bibi. 
The motive alleged by the prosecution was false and even that was not 
proved.  Secondly,  the  last  seen  evidence  furnished  by  Haji  Munir 
Ahmad  (PW-14)  was  untrustworthy  and 
the  prosecution  had 
concocted  it  to  strengthen  its  case.  Thirdly,  the  Appellant  had  no 
reason  to  make  any  extra-judicial  confession  before  Muhammad 
Mansha  (PW-11)  and  the  one  attributed  to  him  was  false.  Even 
otherwise, it  had  no  legal  value  as  it  was  stated  to  have  been  jointly 
made  by  him  and  co-accused  Muhammad  Sarwar  (since  acquitted). 
Fourthly, 
the 
testimony  of  eavesdropper  Muhammad  Siddique     
(PW-12) also lacks credibility. He was a chance witness and failed to 
justify  his  presence  outside  the  house  of  Abdul  Aziz  at  the  relevant 
time.  Fifthly,  pistol  P-1  and  live  bullets  P-2/1-2  were  not  recovered 
from  the  Appellant  and  the  police  had  foisted  them  on  him.  Sixthly, 
the medical evidence was of no avail to the prosecution as it was only 
confirmatory and could not be used to identify the culprits. Lastly, the 
learned  trial  Court  had  acquitted  co-accused  Muhammad  Sarwar  on 
the  same  evidence  against  which  the  prosecution  had  not  filed  any 
appeal.  Since  the  Appellant’s  case  had  no  distinguishing  feature  the 
trial  Court  erred  in  convicting  him.  The  learned  counsel  prayed  that 
this appeal be accepted and the Appellant be acquitted of the charge.  
8. 
On the other hand, the learned Deputy Prosecutor General 
assisted  by  Mr.  Shahzad  Saleem  Khan  Balouch,  Advocate, 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
6 
 
 
 
controverted  the  above  contentions  and  supported  the  impugned 
judgment. He contended that the Appellant was involved in anti-social 
activities  and  viewed  Nasreen  Bibi  and  Rasoolan  Bibi  deceased  as 
hurdle so he killed them to get them off his way. He maintained that 
the  prosecution  had  proved  its  case  against  him  through  credible 
circumstantial  evidence.  The  PWs  had  no  enmity  or  ill-will  against 
him. As such, there was no reason for them to falsely implicate him in 
this case. He prayed that this appeal be dismissed and the appellant’s 
conviction be upheld.  
9. 
I  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and 
examined the record with their able assistance. 
10. 
Admittedly, 
it  was  an  unwitnessed  occurrence.  On 
12.11.2004 at about 8:00 a.m. Bashir Ahmad (PW-8) discovered dead 
bodies of two unknown women in a drain within the territorial limits 
of  Police  Station  Harrapa,  District  Sahiwal,  with  a  five-month-old 
baby  girl  around  them.  He  raised  alarm  at  the  ghastly  sight  which 
attracted  Noor  Ahmad  (PW-7)  and  other  villagers  to  the  spot.  They 
got  announcements  made  from  the  mosques  in  their  village  and  the 
surrounding  areas  to  call  people  for  their  identification  but  nobody 
could  identify  them.  Bashir  Ahmad  (PW-8)  informed  the  police 
whereupon  Nisar  Ahmad/SI  (PW-15)  came  to  the  spot.  He  recorded 
his  statement  Exh.PG/1  and  despatched  the  dead  bodies  to  the 
mortuary  for  autopsy.  On  the  same  day  he  entrusted  the  infant  to 
Munir Ahmad (PW-9) against acknowledgement Exh.PP. Inasmuch as 
the deceased could not be identified, after their postmortem he handed 
over 
their  corpses 
to  Muhammad  Iqbal,  Sanitary  Supervisor, 
Municipal Committee, Sahiwal, for their last rites and burial which he 
did.  It  was  about  two  months  later,  i.e.  on  10.1.2005,  Muhammad 
Mansha  (PW-11),  Muhammad  Siddique  (PW-12),  Abdul  Ghaffar 
(PW-13) and PWs Muhammad Umar, Muhammad Amin, Muhammad 
Yasin,  Sardar  Ali  and  Sooba  (not  produced)  appeared  before  the 
Investigating  Officer,  Nisar  Ahmad/SI  (PW-15)  and  from  the 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
7 
 
 
 
photographs  that  he  had  retained  identified  the  dead  bodies  as  of 
Nasreen  Bibi  and  Rasoolan  Bibi.  On  the  same  day  Muhammad  Ijaz 
(PW-10)  joined  the  investigation  and  got  his  statement  recorded  in 
which he nominated Appellant Muhammad Anwar and six others for 
the murders. Perusal of the record reveals that the prosecution neither 
produced 
the  photographer  nor  got  exhibited 
the  aforesaid 
photographs  in  evidence.  More  importantly,  in  their  depositions 
Muhammad  Mansha  (PW-11),  Muhammad  Siddique  (PW-12)  and 
Abdul  Ghaffar  (PW-13)  did  not  state  that  they  had  identified  the 
deceased  women.  In  this  view  of  the  matter,  in  my  opinion,  the 
prosecution has failed to conclusively establish their identity.  
11.  
The  prosecution  relies  on  the  motive,  the  last  seen 
evidence,  extra-judicial  confession, 
the  medical  evidence  and 
recovery  of  pistol  .30-bore  P-1  and  two  live  bullets  P-2/1-2  to  bring 
home guilt to the Appellant.  
12.  
The  prosecution  produced  Muhammad  Ijaz  (PW-10)  and 
Abdul  Ghaffar  (PW-13)  to  prove  the  motive.  They  alleged  that  the 
Appellant  and  Rasoolan  Bibi  were  members  of  an  organized  group 
which was engaged in human trafficking. Nasreen Bibi learnt about it. 
When  the  Appellant  discovered  that  he  gave  her  beating  and  turned 
her  out  of  his  house.  Nasreen  Bibi  went  to  her  brother,  Muhammad 
Ijaz. The  Appellant  followed her on the  pretext of  reconciliation and 
after  giving  false  explanations  to  his  in-laws  brought  her  back  and 
killed  Nasreen  Bibi  and  Rasoolan  Bibi  both.  Perusal  of  the  record 
shows that Muhammad Ijaz (PW-10) and Abdul Ghaffar (PW-13) did 
not have  any  personal knowledge that  the Appellant  was involved in 
illicit  human  trade.  Their  testimony  is  essentially  based  on  the 
statement  of  Nasreen  Bibi  which  is  not  supported  by  any  direct  or 
indirect  evidence.  Even  during  the  course  of  investigation  the  police 
did  not  make  any  effort  to  verify  it.  In  his  cross-examination  Nisar 
Ahmad/SI (PW-15) admitted: 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
8 
 
 
 
 
“I  have  not  visited  the  place  where  Mst.  Nasreen  Bibi  had  resided 
and also did not inquire about the information which was narrated by 
Nasreen Bibi deceased to Ijaz from anywhere… About the motive of 
occurrence as alleged by Ijaz he did not produce any evidence in this 
respect except his verbal statement.” 
The  baby  girl  found  near  the  dead  bodies  of  the  deceased  women 
would not advance the prosecution case because her identity was also 
not  established.  It  is  not  known  whether  she  was  the  daughter  of 
Rasoolan  Bibi  or  anybody  else.  For  all  these  reasons  I  hold  that  the 
motive has not been proved.  
13.  
Haji Munir Ahmad (PW-14) furnished evidence of the last 
seen.  He  deposed  that  about  1½  years  prior  to  the  day  when  his 
testimony  was  recorded  he  along  with  PW  Muhammad  Afzal  (not 
produced)  was sitting  at a diesel sale point  in village 183/9L when  a 
Toyota van came there for refueling. The driver purchased  diesel for 
Rs.300/-  and  gave  the  salesman  a  currency  note  of  Rs.1000/-.  The 
latter  went  to  the  office  to  fetch  the  change.  In  the  meantime,  two 
persons alighted from the van out of whom one was bearded while the 
other  was  fat.  PWs  Haji  Munir  Ahmad  and  Muhammad  Afzal  heard 
one of the women in the van weeping. They went near it and saw 6/7 
passengers in it who told them that they were going to a funeral. The 
next  morning  there  was  an  announcement  from  the  mosque  that  two 
women  were  found  murdered  near  the  drain  close  to  the  village.  He 
further  stated  that  he  and  Muhammad  Afzal  went  to  the  spot  and 
observed  one  of  the  deceased  was  the  same  woman  they  had  seen 
weeping in the van on the preceding night. About 3/4 months later the 
two  of  them  went  to  Police  Station  Harrapa  where  they  found  those 
men  whom  they  had  seen  in  the  van  which  included  the  Appellant. 
The  testimony  of  Haji  Munir  Ahmad  (PW-14)  smacks  of  concoction 
and is liable to be rejected for more than one reason. First, he has not 
mentioned  the  precise  date  and  time  when  he  came  across  the 
Appellant. Secondly, he is a chance witness and has failed to explain 
his presence  at  the  diesel sale point  at  the  relevant time. Thirdly, the 
Appellant  was  previously  not  known  to  Haji  Munir  Ahmad.  He 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
9 
 
 
 
identified him about 3/4 months after his first sight. It is improbable if 
not impossible to recognize a previously unknown person after such a 
long time when one had had only his fleeting glimpse. Lastly, he did 
not  join  the  investigation  and  during  cross-examination  contradicted 
himself  in  material  particulars.  It  is  well-settled  that  testimony  of  a 
witness  whose  statement  has  not  been  recorded  during 
the 
investigation  is  not  credible.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Dilshad  v.  The 
State  (1995  PCr.LJ 248),  Akbar v. The  State  (1996  MLD  1311)  and 
Muhammad  Idrees  v.  The  State  (2011  PCr.LJ  552).  The  following 
excerpt is of vital significance: 
 
“It  is  correct  that  when  I  heard  the  announcement  from  the 
loudspeaker in the village about the murder of two ladies… I did not 
join  the  investigation  and  tell  the  story  of  the  alleged  seeing  of  the 
ladies along with the accused to the police. It is correct that I did not 
identify the  dead bodies  of the two women nor  I  pointed out  to  the 
police about the same ladies.” 
14.  
The  above-mentioned  portion  of  the  deposition  was 
confirmed by Nisar Ahmad/SI when he said: 
 
“No one appeared before me and made any statement in this respect 
that he had seen the women along with others prior to the occurrence 
night. If anyone made statement, I would have incorporated the same 
in  the  case  diary.  Till  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  occurrence  at 
the time of burial of the dead-bodies no one had identified the dead 
bodies  or  made  statements  before  me.  It  is  correct  that  till 
10.01.2005  no  evidence  in  any  respect  against  the  accused  was  on 
record  [when  the  deceased  women  were  allegedly  identified  and 
Muhammad  Ijaz  (PW-10)  implicated  the  Appellant  and  his  co-
accused in this case].”  
15.  
According  to  the  prosecution,  the  Appellant  made  extra-
judicial  confession  before  Muhammad  Mansha  (PW-11),  who  was  a 
cousin  of  PW  Muhammad  Ijaz.  The  said  witness  categorically 
admitted 
that 
the  Appellant  and  his  co-accused, 
including, 
Muhammad  Sarwar  (since  acquitted),  Salamat  Ali  and  Abdul  Aziz, 
jointly  made  the  alleged  confession.  Criminal  jurisprudence  has  by 
now well settled that a joint extra-judicial confession is inadmissible. 
Reliance  is  placed  on  The  State  v.  Kamal  Khan  alias  Maloo  and 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
10 
 
 
 
another  (1993  SCMR  1378)  and  Abdul  Razzaq  v.  The  State  (2009 
YLR 756).  
16. 
Muhammad Siddique (PW-12) testified that he along with 
PW  Sarfraz  (not  produced)  overheard  a  conversation  between  the 
Appellant  and  his  co-accused  in  which  he  admitted  his  guilt. 
According to him, he heard it while passing through the street outside 
the house of Abdul Aziz. The said witness lacks credibility. He was a 
chance witness and failed to justify his presence there at the relevant 
time.  Secondly,  it  does  not  appeal  to  a  prudent  mind  that  a  person 
would talk so loudly about his crime that the people may hear him in 
the street. Thirdly, he  unequivocally  admitted  that he  did  not see  the 
Appellant’s  face  and  recognized  him  by  voice.  Courts  have  always 
held such identification doubtful. In Ahmed Sher and another v. The 
State (PLD 1995 FSC 20), the Federal Shariat Court held as under: 
 
“Identification  by  voice  (i.e.  where  the  witnesses  had  not  seen  the 
face of the accused because the accused had muffled his  face or on 
account of darkness but had heard the voice of the accused) has been 
considered to be a weak piece of evidence. Malik Rab Nawaz Noon, 
learned  counsel  for  the  Appellants,  has  relied  upon  three  reported 
judgments which support  his  contention  that identification by  voice 
through an identification test is a weak piece of evidence and should 
be supported by other evidence. In the case of Hamzo v. State 1972 
PCr.LJ 478, a Division Bench of erstwhile High Court of Sindh and 
Balochistan  had  held  that  the  evidence  of  the  witness  who  had 
claimed  identification  of  the  accused  by  voice,  in  an  occurrence 
taking place when the night was cloudy and the moon-light was dim, 
was  a  very  weak  piece  of  evidence  and  required  support  by  other 
strong  circumstantial  evidence  and  that  conviction  could  not  be 
based on identification by voice only. In the case of Abdul Rashid v. 
State (1973 PCr.LJ Lah. 428) a Division Bench of the Lahore High 
Court considered the evidence of a witness relating to identification 
of the accused, who had heard them for a very short period when the 
incident had taken place on the basis of voices as incredible in view 
of  the  admission  of  the  witness  that  she  had  not  seen  the  accused 
since her childhood and, therefore, she could not be so familiar with 
their voices as to be able to recognize either of them. A Single Judge 
of  the  Sindh  High  Court  also  considered  identification  by  voice  as 
doubtful in the case of Misri v. State reported in 1984 P Cr.LJ 2832.” 
A learned Division Bench of this Court held the same view in the case 
reported as Ayyub v. The State (1994 PCr.LJ 1057). 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
11 
 
 
 
17.  
Dr.  Afshan  Akram  (PW-1)  provided  medical  evidence  in 
the  instant  case.  On  12.11.2004,  she  conducted  autopsy  on  two 
unknown  women  at  the  DHQ  Hospital,  Sahiwal,  whose  dead  bodies 
were brought by Muhammad Aslam 688/C (PW-5). One of them was 
aged about 35 years while the other was 45 years old. She noted four 
1 cm x 1 cm x deep firearm injuries (with corresponding exit wounds) 
on the  first  woman  and two  similar  injuries  (with  corresponding  exit 
wounds) on the other. The prosecution heavily relies on her evidence 
to  seek  corroboration  of  its  case.  I  am  afraid,  it  is  of  no  avail  to  it 
because  in  the  instant  case  the  identity  of  the  culprit(s)  could  not  be 
established. It is trite that medical evidence can only furnish details of 
the  injuries  sustained  by  a  person,  living  or  dead,  and  the  kind  of 
weapons  used  in  the  occurrence  but  it  cannot  identify  the  culprits. 
Reliance  is  placed  on  Akbar  Ali  v.  The  State  (2007  SCMR  486), 
Rahimullah  Jan  v.  Kashif  and  another  (PLD  2008  SC  298),  Altaf 
Hussain  v.  Fakhar  Hussain  and  another  (2008  SCMR  1103), 
Muhammad Tasaweer  v. Hafiz Zulkarnain and 2 others (PLD 2009 
SC 53), Haji Paio Khan v. Sher Biaz and others (2009 SCMR 803), 
Muhammad Aslam v. Sabir Hussain and others (2009 SCMR 985), 
and Mursal Kazmi alias Qamar Shah and another v. The State (2009 
SCMR 1410). 
18.  
The  prosecution  alleged  that  pistol  .30-bore  P-1  (along 
with  two  live  bullets  P-2/1-2)  was  recovered  from  the  Appellant 
which  he  used  for  the  commission  of  offence.  Again,  this  evidence 
does  not  buttress  its  case.  To  start  with,  the  alleged  recovery  was 
made  in  violation  of  Section  103  Cr.P.C.  Secondly,  the  report  of  the 
Forensic Science Laboratory Exh.PV only certified that the aforesaid 
pistol  was  in  working  condition.  It  did  not  say  whether  the  crime 
empties P-3/1-6) wedded with it or not. Lastly, the Appellant was not 
confronted with report Exh.PV when his statement under Section 342 
Cr.P.C. was recorded. It is trite that examination of an accused under 
section  342  Cr.P.C.  is  not  a  mere  formality  but  a  legal  requirement 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
12 
 
 
 
whose  primary  purpose  is  to  apprise  him  of  all  the  incriminating 
material that has been brought against him during the trial and provide 
him  an  opportunity  to  explain  his  position  with  respect  to  it.  If  any 
piece of  evidence  is not put to  him, the same  cannot be used against 
him.  In  Muhammad  Shah  v.  The  State  (2010  SCMR  1009),  the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan held:  
 
“It  is  well  settled  that  if  any  piece  of  evidence  is  not  put  to  the 
accused  in  his  statement  under  section  342,  Cr.P.C.  then  the  same 
cannot be used  against him for his  conviction.  In this case both  the 
Courts  below  without  realizing  the  legal  position  not  only  used  the 
above portion of the evidence against him, but also convicted him on 
such piece of evidence, which cannot be sustained.” 
The  above  view  was  reiterated  in  Qaddan  and  others  v.  The  State 
(2017 SCMR 148), Muhammad Saddique v. The State (2018 SCMR 
71) and Imtiaz alias Taj v. The State and others (2018 SCMR 344).  
19.  
In a case based on circumstantial evidence the prosecution 
is  obligated  to  show  that  different  pieces  of  evidence  brought  on  the 
record  are  inter-linked  so  as  to  make  a  single  chain  whose  one  end 
touches  the  dead  person  and  the  other  clenches  the  neck  of  the 
accused. Further, the evidence must be of a quality to be incompatible 
with  the  innocence  of  the  accused.  Any  missing  link  in  the  chain 
would  destroy  the  entire  prosecution  case.  In  Hashim  Qasim  and 
another v. The State (2017 SCMR 986) the Apex Court ruled: 
 
“In cases of circumstantial evidence, there are chances of procuring 
and fabricating evidence. Therefore, Courts are required to take extra 
care  and  caution  to  narrowly  examine  such  evidence  with  pure 
judicial  approach  to  satisfy  itself,  about  its  intrinsic  worth  and 
reliability,  also  ensuring  that  no  dishonesty  was  committed  during 
the  course  of  collecting  such  evidence  by  the  Investigators  …. 
circumstantial evidence may sometimes appear to be conclusive but 
it must always be narrowly examined, if only because this count  of 
evidence  may  be  fabricated  in  order  to  cast  suspicion  on  another. 
Therefore,  it  is  all  the  more  necessary  before  drawing  inference,  if 
the accused’s guilt from  circumstantial evidence to be sure and that 
there  are  no  other  co-existing  circumstances,  which  weaken  or 
destroy  the  inference  then,  in  that  case  alone  it  may  be  relied  upon 
otherwise, not at all.” 
Crl.Appeal No.13/2009 
13 
 
 
 
20.  
In the instant case, there is hardly any evidence to connect 
the  Appellant  with  the  commission  of  offence.  It  is  also  noteworthy 
that  while  extending  benefit  of  doubt  the  learned  trial  Court  has 
acquitted  co-accused  Muhammad  Sarwar  on  the  same  evidence.  The 
prosecution  has  not  filed  any  appeal  against  his  acquittal.  Since  the 
Appellant’s  case  is  not  distinguishable  from  him,  his  conviction  is 
also liable to be set aside.  
21.  
For what has been discussed above, this appeal is allowed. 
The impugned judgment is set aside and the Appellant is acquitted of 
the charge. He is in jail. He shall be released forthwith if not required 
to be detained in any other case.  
 
     
            
(TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH) 
       JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*M.Khalid* 
 
 
