Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR.  
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
WRIT PETITION NO.1092 OF 2017.  
Mst. Ashfan Shahid  
 
Vs.  
 
ADJ and others 
Sr. No. of order/ 
Date of order/ 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties 
proceeding 
 
 
 
 
proceeding 
 
 
 
or counsel, where necessary. 
30.04.2018  Ch.  Riaz  Ahmed,  Advocate  alongwith 
the 
petitioner.  
Raja  Muhammad  Sohail  Iftikhar,  Advocate  for 
the respondent No.3.  
 
 
By  filing  instant  writ  petition  in  terms  of  Article 
199  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan,  1973,  the  petitioner  has  assailed  the  judgment 
dated 31.01.2017 passed by learned Addl. District Judge, 
Bahawalpur,  by  which  appeal  of  the  respondent  No.3 
was allowed and present petitioner was ordered to hand 
over  the  custody  of  her  sister’s  daughter  (bhanji)  Laiba 
Chaudhary,  also  known  as  Faria  Tahreem  (minor)  to 
respondent/real father of the minor.   
2. 
Brief  facts  giving  rise  to  this  family  litigation, 
culminating  into  this  writ  petition  and  necessary  for  its 
fair adjudication are that Ishfaq Ahmad-respondent No.3 
(respondent) was married  with  Sabahat  Chaudhary  real 
sister  of  petitioner  and  out  of  this  wedlock  Laiba 
Chaudhary, (minor) was born in the year 2012 and to the 
bad 
luck  of  the  minor  and  the  family,  Sabahat 
Chaudhary  died  immediately  after  giving  birth  to  the 
minor.  Thereafter  the  minor  was  brought  up  by  her 
maternal  grandmother,  but  unfortunately,  she  also  died 
in  the  year  2014  and  after  her  death  minor  was  being 
brought up by the petitioner, real maternal aunt (khala), 
W.P. No.1092 of 2017 
 
2 
homeopathic doctor by profession. The petitioner moved 
an  application  before  learned  Guardian  Judge  for  her 
appointment  as  guardian  of  the  minor,  whereas  the 
respondent  also  moved  an  application  under  Section  25 
of the Guardian and Wards Act, 1890 for custody of the 
minor.  Both 
the  parties  contested 
these  petitions 
respectively.   To resolve the controversy in between the 
parties,  learned  Judge  Family  Court,  framed  following 
issues:- 
“1.  Whether the petitioner is entitled to obtain the 
custody of minor? OPA Afshan Shahid.  
2. 
whether  the  respondent  is  entitled  to  obtain 
the custody of minor from the petitioner OPR 
Ashfaq.  
3.  Whether the petitioner has no cause of action 
and  the  petition  in  hand  is  liable  to  be 
dismissed with special costs? OPR.  
4.  Whether the respondent has no cause of action 
and  the  petition  in  hand  is  liable  to  be 
dismissed with special costs? OPA.  
5. 
Relief?” 
3. 
After  recording  of  evidence  of  the  parties  and 
hearing  arguments,  vide  consolidated  judgment  and 
decree dated 20.07.2016 learned Judge Family Court has 
allowed  the  application  of  the  petitioner  and  dismissed 
the cross-application of the respondent.  
 
Being  aggrieved  of  the  aforementioned  judgment 
and  decree,  the  respondent  filed  an  appeal,  which  was 
allowed  vide  impugned 
judgment  dated  31.01.2017 
passed  by  learned  Addl.  District  Judge,  Bahawalpur, 
while observing as under:- 
“…The evidence available on record reveals that the 
appellant  Ashfaq  Ahmad  is  real  father  of  minor 
Laiba  Chaudhry/Faria  Tehreem  and  admittedly  the 
W.P. No.1092 of 2017 
 
3 
is 
living  with 
appellant  has  not  contracted  second  marriage  after 
the  death  of  his  wife  Sabahat  Chaudhry.  Said 
Sabahat Chaudhry died at the time of birth of minor 
and was the real sister of respondent Afshan Shahid. 
It appears that right after the birth the custody of the 
minor was with her maternal grandmother who has 
also  expired  in  2014.  The  respondent  has  three 
children  and  elder  son  of  the  respondent  was  aged 
about  16  years  at  the  time  of  recording  of  evidence 
and  admittedly  the  minor 
is  not  within  the 
prohibitory  degree  and  the  minor  girl  could  not  be 
left at the mercy of her cousins (sons of respondent) 
when the respondent herself is away in her medical 
practice. Even otherwise the handing over of custody 
of  the  minor  to  the  respondent  would  disintegrate 
the  family  of  appellant  as  two  children  are  living 
with  the  appellant  and  the  minor  daughter  Faria 
Tehreem/Laiba  Chaudhry 
the 
respondent  and  the  children  would  be  complete 
estranged  to  each  other  by  the  passage  of  time  and 
there  would  be  no  intimacy  between  them.  The 
disintegration  and  living  away  from  the  father  and 
other  real  brother  and  the  mental  and  physical 
capability of minor may be effected with the passage 
of time which cannot be measured or compensated in 
terms of money and it would not be in the welfare of 
minor  in  the long run  to  stay  away  from  real close 
family  members.  There  is  nothing  available  on 
record  that  the  appellant  has  any  such  habit  on  his 
part  which  is  detrimental  to  the  minor  and  even 
there  is  nothing  which  could  suggest  that  the 
appellant is in any manner is unable to maintain the 
minor  and  provide  him  the  basic  necessities  of  life. 
The  sisters  of  the  respondent  are  also  available  at 
home who would also be in the better position to look 
after and take care of the minor besides the appellant. 
No discredit is on the part of appellant which makes 
him  disentitle  for  the  custody  of  her  real  daughter 
Faria Tehreem…” 
4. 
Feeling 
dissatisfied, 
disgruntled 
and 
in 
dis-greement  with  the  above 
judgment  passed  by 
learned Addl. District Judge, Bahawalpur, the petitioner 
has  assailed  the  same  by  filing  instant  writ  petition 
mainly on the grounds of against facts, law and as such 
the same is not sustainable.  
W.P. No.1092 of 2017 
 
4 
5. 
It  has  been  maintained  by  learned  counsel  for  the 
petitioner  that  the  judgment  handed  down  by  learned 
Addl.  District  Judge  is  against  facts,  law  and  issue-wise 
findings were not recorded and as such the same is liable 
to  be  set-aside.  Reliance  has  been  placed  on  case 
“Asadullah  Khan  vs.  Abdul  Karim”  (1997  CLC  1334 
Karachi).  Regarding  merits  of  the  case,  it  has  been 
argued  with  hardihood,  temerity,  vehemence  and  vigor 
by learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is 
maternal aunt of the minor, the minor is being properly 
brought  up  by  her  from  the  very  date  of  her  birth, 
presently  the  minor  is  admitted  in  “Nursery”  class  in 
Enterprise  School  System,  Bahawalpur  campus,  the 
petitioner  is  running  clinic  alongwith  her  husband  and 
as  such  having  sufficient  source  of  income  to  properly 
bring  up  the  minor.  In  support  of  this  contention, 
reliance has been placed on case “Mst. Naseem Akhtar vs. 
District  Judge,  Multan  and  others”  (2009  SCMR  1052)  & 
“Sardar  Hussain  and  others  vs.  Mst.  Parveen  Umer  and 
others” (2004 PSC 760 Supreme Court of Pakistan).  
6.  Whereas  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  has 
defended 
the 
impugned 
judgment  while  humbly 
submitting that the same is based on proper appreciation 
of  evidence  and  following  the  para-meters  set  down  by 
the Superior Courts for custody of the minor. In support 
of  his  submissions,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent 
has  referred  recent  case  reported  as  “Nasir  Raza  vs. 
Additional District Judge, Jhelum and another” (2018 SCMR 
590).  
W.P. No.1092 of 2017 
 
5 
7. 
In  the  light  of  above  submissions  of  learned 
counsel  for  the  parties,  I  have  examined  the  record  and 
the judgment impugned herein.  
8. 
The facts of this case are almost admitted and it is 
an  exceptional  case,  in  which  the  parties  have  not 
levelled  any  false  accusation  against  each  other  to 
establish  their  entitlement  or  dis-entitlement  of  its 
opponent  for  custody  of  the  minor.  As  concluded  by 
both the learned courts below, the financial status of both 
the  parties  is  sound,  they  belong  to  well-educated  and 
established  families  and  of  course  in  such  scenario  the 
task of the Court to answer the crucial question that with 
whom the welfare of the minor lies is a little bit difficult. 
From  the  testimony  of  the  petitioner  (PW-1)  and  her 
father (PW-2), it is established that the petitioner and her 
husband are running homeopathic clinic and as such are 
of busy in their professional engagements. The statement 
of  PW-2  that  the  petitioner  is  running  clinic  for  whole 
day  negates  the  petitioner’s  plea  that  she  is  running 
clinic  just  for  three  hours  in  evening.  Of  course,  the 
petitioner has two grown up sons Abu Bakar and Hamza 
and  one  daughter.  There  is  no  evidence  on  record  that 
when  the  petitioner  and  her  husband  are  busy  in  clinic, 
who  look  after  the  minor.  In  such  circumstances, 
unsupervised/unchecked  company  of  Laiba  Chaudhary 
minor  with  two  of  her  grown  up  cousins,  admittedly 
“ghayr  mahram”  under  the  Islamic  Law,  cannot  be 
patronized and approved by this Court, so as to live with 
maternal aunt and any immature choice of the minor  of 
five years cannot be given precedence over the merits of 
the case.  
W.P. No.1092 of 2017 
 
6 
9.  Whereas  the  respondent  has  two  other  issues 
Taimor  Ashfaq  and  Aziz  Maheen  from  his  deceased 
wife, who are living with him and being brought up and 
looked  after  by  him  and  their  paternal  aunt  (phupoo) 
Naseem  Bibi  aging  fifty  years.  Whereas  Zainab  Bibi, 
issueless widow, paternal aunt of the respondent is also 
residing  under  the  same  roof  and  as  such  these  minors 
are being brought up by the respondent and two family 
elders,  having  love  and  affection  for  the  minors  under 
joint family system. In the present case, the minor is not 
only  being  deprived  of  love  and  affection  of  her  real 
father, but also from the company of loving, affectionate 
brother  and  sister.  Of  course  it  is  quite  easy  to  permit 
both  the  parties  to  continue  the  custody  of  the  minors 
with  them,  but  any  such  casual  approach  as  of  the 
learned  Judge  Family  Court,  cannot  be  treated  as 
judicious  or  sagacious  one,  while  exercising  parental 
jurisdiction  in  guardian  matters  and  in  the  long  run  its 
result  will  be  very  drastic  and  tragic,  as  the  family  will 
remain scatter, instead of stringing it together like beads 
and  to  my  view,  learned  Addl.  District  Judge,  while 
allowing the appeal of the respondent resorted to second 
option.  Reliance  is  placed  on  case  “Tariq  Mehmood  and 
others vs. Additional District Judge and others” (2016 MLD 
1767 Lahore) & “Abdul Majeed vs. Additional District Judge 
Talagang and 2 others” (2009 CLC 1143 Lahore).  
10.  The  judgment  impugned  herein  is  in  line  with 
Nasir  Raza’s  case  referred  supra  (2018  SCMR  590)  and 
for  ready  reference  the  principle  laid  down  therein  is 
reproduced hereunder:- 
 “7.  We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
parties  and  gone  through  the  record.  There  is  no 
denial  of  the  fact  that  the  father  is  the  natural 
W.P. No.1092 of 2017 
 
7 
guardian  of  the  children.  On  account  of  their 
respective ages, the right of Hizanat of the minors no 
longer  vests  in  their  maternal  grandmother.  The 
petitioner, who is real father of the children, is ready 
and  willing  to  look  after  the  children  and  has  the 
financial resources to fulfil their material needs and 
educational  requirements.  He  has  neither  returned 
to his job abroad nor remarried keeping in view the 
welfare and best interest of his children. His mother, 
a younger sister of respondent No.2, is also available 
in  the  house  to  help  him  look  after  and  raise  the 
children. Therefore, prima facie, the best interest and 
welfare  of  the  minors  lies  in  handing  over  their 
custody  to  the  petitioner,  the  real  father.  There  is 
nothing  on  record  to  suggest  and  it  has  not  even 
been alleged that he is unfit, unable or unwilling to 
perform his duties as a guardian of his children. In 
our  opinion,  it  would  be  unjust  and  unfair  to 
deprive  the  children  of  the  company,  love  and 
affection of their real father. Specially so, where the 
father  does  not  suffer  from  any  legal  disability  that 
may deprive him from his legal right to have custody 
of his children.” 
11.  When  confronted  with  well  reasoned  judgment 
delivered  by  learned  Addl.  District  Judge,  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioner  could  not  point  out  any 
illegality,  perversity,  mis-reading  or  non-reading  of 
evidence or material irregularity, or jurisdictional defect 
in  it.  The  resume  of  above  discussion  is  that  it  is  in  the 
interest  and  welfare  of  the  minor  that  her  custody  be 
handed over to her real father, so that she may enjoy love 
and affection of her father and also company of her elder 
brother  and  sister.  Consequently,  the 
instant  writ 
petition, being devoid of merits, is dismissed. 
 
(Mujahid Mustaqeem Ahmed) 
Judge 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 Khalid 
Judge 
