 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
        Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
  
 
 
Customs Reference No. 33395 of 2017. 
 
Director Intelligence & 
Investigation-FBR. 
Vs. 
Shamraiz Khan & others. 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Hearing: 
07.06.2018. 
Applicant/ 
Department by: 
Respondents/ 
Taxpayer  by: 
 
Mr. Izharul Haq Sheikh, Advocate.  
Mr. Mukthar Ahmad Awan, Advocate.  
          Shahid Jamil Khan, J:-  The Customs Reference, by department, 
is  to  assail  order  dated  04.05.2017  passed  by  the  Single  Bench  of 
Customs  Appellate  Tribunal,  Lahore  (“Appellate  Tribunal”)  pleading 
that constitution of the Single Bench was not in accordance with law.  
2. 
Learned  counsel  for  applicant-department  submitted  that  the 
appeal, filed before Appellate Tribunal, was entrusted, by the Chairman, 
to  a  Division  Bench,  which  could  not  be  decided  by  a  Single  Bench, 
unless conditions under subsection (4) of Section 194-C of the Customs 
Act, 1969 (“Act of 1969”) were fulfilled. He referred to a judgment by 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  Collector  of  Customs,  Customs  House, 
Karachi  v.  Syed  Rehan  Ahmed  (2017  SCMR  152),  to  argue  that 
entrustment  of  a  case  under  Section  194-C  (4),  as  a  matter  of  course, 
without application of mind, has been deprecated and the law laid down 
in  Director,  Intelligence  and  Investigation  (Customs  and  Excise), 
Faisalabad and another v. Bagh Ali (2010 PTD 1024) was upheld.  
3. 
Learned  counsel  for  respondent  opposed  the  submissions.  He 
placed on record copy of order sheet, which confirms the fact that appeal 
was entrusted by the Chairman to Bench-II, for adjudication. However, 
on 14.03.2017, a note was written by both Members for entrustment of 
Customs Reference No. 33395 of 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
case  to  one  of  them  as  value  of  appeal  was  not  exceeding  five  million 
rupees. Upon this note, the case was assigned to the Technical Member, 
who passed the impugned order.  
Learned  counsel  for  respondent  submitted  that  the  condition  of 
value  of  duty/taxes,  not  exceeding  five  million  rupees,  was  fulfilled, 
therefore,  the  case  was  rightly  entrusted  by  the  Chairman  under  the 
subsection  (4)  to  one  of  the  Members  of  the  Division  Bench.  It  was 
contended  that  requirement  of  notification  by  the  Federal  Government 
for  constitution  of  Single  Bench  was  necessary  under  subsection  3(a) 
and under the subsection (4). 
4. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
5.  We  agree  with  the submission by  learned  counsel for  respondent 
that  a  Notification  for  constitution  of  Single  Bench  is  necessary  only 
under  subsection  3(a)  of  Section  194-C,  as  has  already  been  held  by  a 
Division  Bench  of  this  Court  vide  order  dated  14.04.2015,  passed  in 
Customs Reference No.09 of 2010 titled “M/s. Infomax Pakistan (Pvt.) 
Ltd. v. The  Customs Appellate Tribunal etc.”, relevant part of which  is 
reproduced:- 
“2. 
The  cases  relate  to  orders  passed  by  Single  Member  of  the 
Tribunal,  which  have  been  originally  entrusted  to  a  single  member 
Bench.  Section  194C(3A)  of  the  Customs  Act,  1969  provides  that  “the 
Chairman  may  constitute  as  many  Benches  consisting  of  a  single 
member  as  he  may  deem  necessary  to  hear  such  cases  or  class  of 
cases  as  the  Federal  Government  may,  by  order  in  writing”.  However, 
this  has  to  be  done  subject  to  order  in  writing  by  the  Federal 
Government. 
3. 
On  Court  query,  learned  Standing  Counsel,  who  has  sought 
instructions  from  the  Registrar  of  the  Tribunal,  submits  that  no  such 
notification  or  order  in  writing  for  delegating  the  authority  issued  by  the 
Federal  Government,  notifying  the  cases  to  be  assigned  to  a  Single 
Member Bench, is available on record. 
4. 
In  view  of  the  fact  that  no  notification  identifying  such  cases  or 
class  of  cases  by  the  Federal  Government  is  available,  all  the  cases, 
which  have  been  decided  by  a  Single  Member  Bench  of  the  Tribunal 
without  observing  the  aforesaid  procedure,  are  remanded  for  fresh 
adjudication. These matters will be heard and decided after giving fresh 
notices  to  the  concerned  parties  and  hearing  them  by  the  Appellate 
Tribunal,  which  is  formed  in  accordance  with  due  process  of  law.  The 
learned  Appellate  Tribunal  will  dispose  of  the  matters  expeditiously, 
preferably within four months from receipt of this order.” 
Customs Reference No. 33395 of 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
6. 
To examine subsection (4) of Section 194-C, it is reproduced for 
ready reference:- 
“(4) 
The  Chairman  or  any  other  member  of  the  Appellate  Tribunal 
authorised, in this behalf by the Chairman may, sitting singly, dispose 
of  any  case  which  has  been  allotted  to  the  bench  of  which  he  is  a 
member where:- 
(a)  the  value  of  the  goods  confiscated  without  option  having  been 
given  to  the  owner  of  the  goods  to  pay  a  fine  in  lieu  of 
confiscation under section 181; or 
(b)  [* * *] 
  (c)  in any disputed case, the difference in duty or tax involved or the 
duty  or  tax  involved,  or  the  amount  of  fine  or  penalty  involved 
does not exceed [five] million rupees.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
The  subsection  (4)  authorises  the  Chairman  himself  or  any  other 
Member of Appellate Tribunal to dispose of a case, sitting singly, where 
value of the case is not exceeding five million rupees or where goods are 
confiscated  without  option  to  pay  fine  in  lieu  of  confiscation  under 
Section 181.  
The  language  of  subsection  (4)  does  not  suggest  that  Division 
Bench shall request Chairman for entrustment of the case to one of the 
Members of Bench. A collective reading of this subsection shows that it 
is  contemplating  a  situation  where  the  Division  Bench,  to  whom  case 
was  allotted, is  nonfunctional due to  absence or  non-availability  of  one 
Member for any reason. Under this situation, the Chairman may himself 
(if  he  is  Member  of  the  Division  Bench)  dispose  of  the  case,  sitting 
singly, provided one of the conditions under clause (a) or (c) is fulfilled.  
If  a  case  fulfilling  these  conditions,  is  allotted  to  any  other  Bench,  the 
Chairman may authorise any of its available members to dispose of the 
case,  sitting  singly.  The  words  “sitting  singly”  denote  that  constitution 
of  Single  Bench,  under  the  subsection  (4)  is  not  necessary.  Word 
“authorised” is used instead of allotment of a case. It means the case is 
already allotted to the Bench, which is nonfunctional, thus cases falling 
under  the  clauses  (a)  and  (c)  may  be  authorised  for  decision  by  any  of 
the available members of that Bench. The rationale, as it appears, is that 
the  cases  covered  by  the  clauses  (a)  and  (c)  may  be  heard  and  decided 
expeditiously, even if the Division Bench is nonfunctional.  
Customs Reference No. 33395 of 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
7. 
Learned  counsel  for  applicant-department  rightly  placed  reliance 
on  the  judgment  by  Hon’ble  Apex  Court  in  Syed  Rehan  Ahmed’s  case 
(supra), operative part of which is reproduced hereunder:- 
We would like to observe at this stage that the phrase “any case 
“6. 
which has been allotted to the bench of which he is a member” appearing 
in  section  194-C(4)  of  the  Act  is  of  immense  importance  which  clearly 
suggests that there must have existed a Bench constituted under section 
194-C(2)  of  the  Act  consisting  of  two  members  (or  Chairman  and  a 
member),  out  of  which  the  Chairman  or  a  member  authorized  by  the 
Chairman, may sit singly and dispose of a case already allotted to such 
Bench.  To  hold  otherwise  would  be  to  render  the  aforesaid  phrase 
redundant  and  superfluous.  This  is  precisely  why  subsection  (2)  of 
section  194-C  has  been  made  subject  to  subsection  (4),  the  latter  of 
which  purports  to  create  an  exception  to  the  former.  Further,  such 
decision  by  the  Chairman  to  allow  himself  or  any  other  member  of  a 
Bench to sit singly to dispose of cases falling within the ambit of section 
194-C(4) should not  be as a matter of  course or  right, rather should be 
done upon proper application of mind by the Chairman who shall himself 
make such decision, and not delegate it to any other officer to undertake 
as  an  administrative  action.  The  Chairman  is  obliged  to  examine  the 
circumstances warranting the decision of letting him or another member 
of a Bench to dispose of a matter sitting singly before taking such step. 
This is precisely what has been held by the learned Lahore High Court in 
the case of Bagh Ali (supra) as relied upon by the learned counsel which 
to our mind is good law.” 
 
[emphasis supplied]    
The  excerpt  from  Bagh  Ali’s  Case  (supra)  is  also  reproduced 
below:- 
“9.  …. 
 
Thus,  considering  and  construing  section  194-C(3)(4)  of  the 
Customs Act,  1969  and  section 46(9)  of  Sales  Tax  Act,  1990,  from  the 
plain  reading  thereof,  it  is  abundantly  clear  that  the  Single  Member 
Bench  of  the  Tribunal  has  the  jurisdiction  to  decide  certain  class  of 
cases,  but  the  jurisdiction  is  dependent  and  circumvented  by  certain 
conditions,  especially  with  reference  to  subsection  4,  of  entrustment  / 
allocation  by  the  Chairman,  which  authority  of  the  Chairman  is 
circumscribed that such matter/case should have been earlier allotted to 
a  Bench  of  which  the  Single  Member  should  be  a  part/a  Member.  The 
words  “of  which  he  is  a  member”  appearing  in  the  section  are  of 
immense  and  fundamental  importance  for  the  interpretation  thereof, 
which  necessarily  means  that  he  should  be  a  member  of  that  Bench, 
which composes and comprising of more than one Member Bench. If the 
noted expression is interpreted otherwise, this part of the section shall be 
rendered  redundant  and  superfluous,  which  law,  fault  and  misstep 
cannot  be  attributed  to  the  legislative  instrument,  especially  when  the 
words  are  quite  lucid,  lambert,  lucent  and  refulgent.  In  our  view,  it  is 
specifically  and  expressly  the  Chairman  who  has  been  empowered  to 
meet certain exigencies, such as, where the case as entrusted and being 
heard  by  the  Bench  of  more  than  one  member,  but  due  to  certain 
circumstances,  which  may  be  innumerable,  such  as,  one  of  the 
Customs Reference No. 33395 of 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
members, going for a long leave, retirement, being posted to some other 
seat  of  the  Tribunal,  demise  of  a  member,  member  technical  being 
repatriated to the  department  etc.  and the  matter  being  a part-heard  or 
even otherwise,  the  Chairman of  the  Tribunal  could exercise the  power 
of entrusting the case, keeping in view the expediency and exigency for 
the hearing by a Single Member, but, while exercising this authority, such 
Bench shall obviously be that Single Member Bench, who (the Member) 
was the member of that Bench, comprising of two members, to which the 
matter  was  originally  allocated;  this  authority  of  the  Chairman  is  not  a 
routine, incidental and ministerial in nature, rather from the very spirit of 
the law, it requires a proper application of mind to decide the first place 
whether  a  particular  matter  should  be  so  sent  or  not;  in  such  a  matter 
capable  of  being  handled  singly  by  the  Member  (Judicial)  or  Member 
(Technical) on account of its nature and the question involved therein; in 
any  case,  such  an  authority,  at  very  inception  when  a  case  is  initiated 
with the Tribunal or during the pendency thereof, cannot be delegated to 
the  Registrar  on  account  of  the  rule  that  where  an  authority  has  been 
conferred upon a particular person / officer, it has to be exercised by him 
alone and cannot be further delegated, this principles has the nexus with 
the  maxim  delegatus  non  potest  delegare.  Any  other  interpretation 
placed  to  the  requisite  section,  in  our  view,  would  militate  against  the 
clear  intent  of  the  legislature  and  also  the  rules  of  interpretation  /  law 
noted  above,  which  is  not  permissible.  The  pleas  of  the  respondents’ 
side regarding the principle of “substantial compliance” or “procedural in 
nature” are not attracted to the maters, as it is the question regarding the 
conferment of jurisdiction unto the Single Member Tribunal in the specific 
manner  ordained  by  law,  and  mentioned  earlier,  the  authority  of  the 
Chairman in this behalf is not exercisable as a matter of course, routine 
and in a  clerical  way,  but  is dependent  upon  the  due application  of  the 
mind by the Chairman as to which case should be allotted to the Single 
Member Bench keeping in view the various aspects of the case, some of 
which have been highlighted above.”  
[emphasis supplied] 
 
8. 
Re-examination  of  the  facts  of  this  case,  in  the  light  of  law 
discussed above, leads to irresistible conclusion that the note as well as 
entrustment  of  case  to  one  of  the  Members  of  the  Division  Bench  was 
not  within  the  spirit  of  subsection  (4),  therefore,  is  declared  without 
lawful authority. Since the entrustment  of case to learned Single Bench 
is not in accordance with law, therefore, impugned order is held to have 
been passed without jurisdiction.  
9. 
In  view  of  above,  instant  reference  application  is  allowed.  The 
impugned  order  is  set-aside  and  the  appeal  shall  be  deemed  pending 
before the incumbent Division Bench, which shall proceed to decide the 
same strictly in accordance with law.  
Customs Reference No. 33395 of 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
10.  Office  shall  send  a  copy  of  this  judgment  under  the  seal  of  the 
Court to the learned Customs Appellate Tribunal as per Section 196 (5) 
of the Customs Act, 1969. 
 
 
(Muhammad Sajid Mehmood Sethi)     
                         Judge        
 
 
 
        (Shahid Jamil Khan) 
                               Judge 
             
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
                       
   Judge         
                               Judge 
 
* Mian Farrukh* 
 
