 
 
          Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
   
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
 
 
 
          WP No.154537 of 2018     
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
Petitioners By: 
Respondents By: 
 
 
 
Nazia Bibi etc. 
Versus 
Additional District Judge, Ferozewala etc. 
    J U D G M E N T  
11.9.2018 
Chaudhary  Aurangzeb  Gujjar,  Advocate  for 
Petitioners  in  WP  No.154537/18  and  for 
Respondents  No.2  to  5  in  WP  No.194641/ 
2018. 
Mr.  Imran  Muhammad  Sarwar,  Advocate  for 
Respondent No.3 in WP No.154537/18 and for 
Petitioner in WP No.194641/2018. 
Ayesha  A.  Malik  J:  This  judgment  decides  upon  the  issues 
raised in WP Nos.154537/2018 and 194641/2018 as both the petitions 
raise  common  questions  of  law  and  facts  arise  out  of  the  same 
impugned  judgment  dated  11.1.2018  passed  by  Respondent  No.1, 
Additional District Judge, Ferozewala.   
2. 
Facts  of  the  case  are  that  Petitioner  No.1  filed  a  suit  for 
recovery  of  maintenance  allowance  for  herself  as  well  as  for  three 
minors. The suit was decreed on 21.5.2014 such that  each minor was 
given  Rs.7000/-  per  month  as  maintenance  along  with  10%  yearly 
increase.  Subsequently,  the  Petitioner  No.1  filed  an  application  for 
enhancement  of  maintenance  of  the  minors  on  14.6.2016  which  was 
rejected vide order dated 17.3.2017 for the reason that it is not open to 
the  applicant,  decree  holder  now  to  contend  that  maintenance 
allowance  has  not  been  correctly  assessed  or  determined.  If  it  were 
permissible,  there  will  be  no  end  or  finality  to  the  judgment  and 
decree dated 21.5.2014 which had become final. The Petitioner No.1 
then  filed  a  second  application  seeking  enhancement  of  maintenance 
WP No.154537/2018 
2 
allowance from Rs.7000/- to Rs.300,000/- per child per month, which 
was  dismissed  vide  order  dated  26.7.2017  for  the  reason  that  neither 
the petitioners assailed the judgment passed by learned trial court nor 
challenged their earlier filed petition dismissed by learned transferor 
court and now again despite availing efficacious, proper remedy filed 
the petition in hand which in no sense maintainable. On 25.9.2017 the 
Petitioner No.1 filed an appeal before Respondent No.1 against order 
dated  26.7.2017  who  vide  judgment  dated  11.1.2018  partially 
accepted  the  appeal  and  enhanced  the  monthly  maintenance  of  the 
minors  from  Rs.7000/-  to  Rs.12,000/-  per  head  per  month  plus  10% 
yearly  increase.  The  Petitioners  are  aggrieved  by  the  fixation  of 
maintenance of Rs.12000/- per month per minor. Hence this petition.  
3. 
The case of the Petitioners is that Respondent No.3 was capable 
of  paying  far  more  than  Rs.12,000/-  per  month  per  child  which  is 
reflected  from 
the  documentary  evidence  produced  with 
the 
application  which  included  Respondent  No.3’s  tax  returns  and 
property  documents.  It  is  their  case  that  the  court  should  have  given 
proper consideration to the evidence while fixing maintenance. 
4. 
Respondent No.3 who is the Petitioner in WP No.194641/2018 
is aggrieved by the impugned judgment on account of the fact that the 
same  has  been  passed  in  a  time  barred  appeal,  which  as  per  the 
contention  of  the  learned  counsel,  Respondent  No.1  could  not  have 
condoned the delay. Learned counsel also argued that the conduct of 
the  Petitioners  by  repeatedly  filing  enhancement  applications  shows 
that she did not have a genuine requirement of enhancement but only 
wants to harass Respondent No.3. With respect to the amount fixed by 
the  court  at  Rs.12,000/-  per  child  per  month,  learned  counsel 
submitted  that  this  amount  is  arbitrary,  without  due  consideration  of 
the  relevant  facts  or  record;  that  the  court  did  not  take  into 
consideration the monthly income of Respondent No.3 nor did it take 
into  consideration  the  fact  that  Respondent  No.3  is  married  and  has 
WP No.154537/2018 
3 
six  children,  hence  he  is  not  able  to  pay  Rs.12,000/-  per  month  per 
child.  
5. 
In terms of the impugned judgment dated 11.1.2018 passed by 
Respondent No.1 on the question of condonation for delay, the  court 
accepted the contention of the Petitioner No.1 that she was not aware 
that the District and Session Court was open in August, hence she did 
not  file  the  appeal  .  The  court  also  found  that  since  the  real  issue  is 
with  reference  to  the  welfare  of  the  minors  and  Respondent  No.3  is 
responsible  to  provide  for  the  upbringing  of  his  children.  The  court 
condoned  the  delay  and  proceeded  to  hear  the  appeal  against  order 
dated 26.7.2017. In this regard, since the ultimate consideration is the 
welfare of the minors, there appears to be no reason to interfere with 
the discretion exercised by the court while condoning the delay as the 
same was done with due consideration of the facts and the law.  
6. 
The real issue in this case is the manner in which maintenance 
allowance  to  be  paid  by  the  father  is  fixed  by  the  court.  The 
Petitioners  prayed  for  enhancement  of  maintenance  at  the  rate  of 
Rs.300,000/- per month per child on account of the financial status of 
Respondent  No.3.  In  the  reply,  Respondent  No.3  explained  that  he 
was unable to pay the amount sought by the Petitioners as the demand 
is not  justifiable.  The  Judge  Family  Court  considered  the  application 
for  enhancement  of  maintenance  and  dismissed  the  same  on  the 
ground  that  the  suit  was  decreed  on  21.5.2014  and  it  was  never 
challenged by the Petitioners before any forum, hence  the minors are 
not  entitled  to  enhancement  of  maintenance.  It  is  noted  that  this 
decision  of  the  Judge  Family  Court  is  flawed  and  totally  contrary  to 
the  law.  It  is  settled  law  that  an  application  for  enhancement  of 
minor’s  maintenance  allowance  may  be  filed  subsequent  to  a 
judgment and decree. Reliance is placed the case cited at Muhammad 
Iqbal  v.  Mst.  Nasreen  Akhtar  (2012  CLC  1407)  wherein  the  Court 
held that: 
WP No.154537/2018 
4 
 
 
On  the  issue  whether  a  suit  for  enhancement  of 
maintenance  is  maintainable  under  the  Schedule,  the 
answer is that the same is maintainable. The Schedule 
provides  for  the  matter  over  which  the  family  court 
should  have  jurisdiction.  Maintenance  is  provided  at 
serial No.3. As such there is no bar on filing a suit for 
enhancement  of  maintenance.  There  are  bound  to  be 
changes  in  the  circumstances  and  changes  in  the 
requirements  of  the  children.  Naturally,  as  the 
children  will  grow  their  needs  will  also  grow.  Reliance 
is placed on a case titled Arab Mir Muhammad Vs Mst. 
Iram Iltimas and 4 others (1999 CLC 1668). It is noted 
the 
that 
maintenance 
fixed 
throughout the growing period of the minor or that the 
5%  increase  should  be  considered  sufficient.  A  father 
is legally bound to maintain the minor in terms of the 
requirement of the minor and the cost of living. 
is  an  unrealistic  approach 
allowance 
remain 
should 
that 
this 
Hence  the  Petitioners  could  claim  enhancement  of  the  decreed 
maintenance  allowance.  Notwithstanding  the  same,  the  Appellate 
Court  while  considering  the  appeal  of  the  Petitioners  enhanced  the 
maintenance from Rs.7000/- to Rs.12,000/- per month per child, with 
10%  annual  increase.  The  reason  given  was  the  financial  status  of 
Respondent  No.3  and  the  daily  growing  requirements  of  the  minors. 
However there is no discussion on their enhanced requirements of the 
minors  nor  is  there  any  discussion  on  the  earning  capacity  of 
Respondent  No.3.  A  bare  reading  of  the  order  shows  that  the  court 
assumed  that  Rs.12000/-  per  child  was  sufficient.  There  is  no 
discussion on the ages of the minors, on the needs of the minors nor 
any finding on the enhanced claim for the minors.  
7. 
As  per  settled  law,  maintenance  with  respect  to  the  muslim 
children  shall  be  governed  by  the  injunctions  of  Islam  and  in  other 
cases  as  per  applicable  personal  law.  The  august  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  has  considered  this  issue  in  “Humayun  Hassan  v.  Arslan 
Humayun and another” (PLD 2013 SC 557) and held as follows: 
 
4. 
There  can  be  no  cavil  with  the  proposition  that  the 
maintenance issue(s), in relation to Muslim relatives shall be 
governed  and  regulated  by  the  principles/injunctions  of 
WP No.154537/2018 
5 
Islam  i.e.  as  per  the  personal  law  of  the  parties.  In  this 
context,  according  to  section  369  of  the  Muhammadan  Law 
by  D.F.  Mullah,  maintenance  means  and  includes  food, 
raiment and lodging. However, it may be observed that from 
the  very  language  of  the  above  section,  such  definition  is 
neither  conclusive  nor  exhaustive,  and  in  our  view  it 
undoubtedly  has  a  wider  connotation  and  should  be  given 
an  extended  meaning,  for  the  purposes  of  meeting  and 
catering for the present days social, physical, mental growth, 
upbringing and well being of the minor, keeping in mind the 
status  of  the  family,  the  norms  of  the  society  and  his 
educational  requirement,  which  has  now  attained  utmost 
importance; 
and 
commensurating  with  the  means  and  the  capacity  of  the 
father to pay. Anyhow, the same jurist in section 370 of the 
book  has  elucidated  the  liability  of  the  father  to  pay  the 
maintenance to his children as follows:- 
 
corresponding 
obviously 
but 
to 
“370. Maintenance of children and grandchildren.---(1) 
A father is bound to maintain his sons until they have 
attained  the  age  of  puberty.  He  is  also  bound  to 
maintain his daughters until they are married. But he 
is  not  bound  to  maintain  his  adult  sons  unless  they 
are  disabled  by  infirmity  or  disease.  The  fact  that  the 
children are in the custody of their mother during their 
infancy  (section  352)  does  not  relieve  the  father  from 
the  obligation  of  maintaining  them.  But  the  father  is 
not bound to maintain a child who is capable of being 
maintained out of his or her own property.  
 
(2) 
If the father is poor, and in capable of earning by 
his  own  labour,  the  mother,  if  she  is  in  easy 
circumstances,  is  bound  to  maintain  her  children  as 
the father would be. 
 
in 
the  word 
interpreting 
If  the  father  is  poor  and  infirm,  and  the  mother 
(3) 
also  is  poor,  the  obligation  to  maintain  the  children 
lies  on  the  grandfather,  provided  he  is  in  easy 
circumstances.” 
 
Again 
“maintenance”  some 
reasonable  standard  must  be  adopted.  Whilst  it  is  not 
confined  merely  to  food,  clothing  and  lodging,  it  cannot,  by 
any stretch of imagination, be extended to incorporate within 
it education at higher levels ad infinitum. What is necessary 
to decide in this connection is to find out as to what amount 
of  education  has  to  be  attained  by  the  child  concerned, 
having  regard  to  the  status  and  other  circumstances  of  his 
family,  to  enable  it  to  earn  a  complete  livelihood  by  honest 
and decent means. Thus it may not be sufficient to say that 
the  child  of  a  tradesman  can  maintain  itself  by  working  as 
coolly or by thieving. What is required is that the child must 
be  maintained  until  it  is  in  a  position  to  earn  its  own 
WP No.154537/2018 
6 
livelihood, in an honest ad decent manner in keeping with its 
family status. 
 
Hence a father is obligated to maintain his children and a reasonable 
standard  must  be  assumed  for  determining  quantum.  It  is  seen  that 
more  often  than  not  family  courts  and  appellate  courts  while 
exercising 
jurisdiction 
in  cases 
requiring  determination  of 
maintenance  tend  to  fix  the  quantum  of  maintenance  without 
discussing  the  factors  considered  or  the  reasons  for  concluding  so. 
Hence  one  has  to  wonder  on  what  basis  did  the  court  formulate  its 
opinion  whilst  fixing  maintenance.  It  goes  without  saying  that  a 
judicial order must be a speaking order where the reasons are clearly 
stated by the court. In this case the Appellate Court has not discussed 
the earning capacity of Respondent No.3 nor the requirements of the 
minors,  yet  enhanced  the  maintenance  from  Rs.7000/-  to  Rs.12000/- 
per month. 
8. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  the  court  while  considering  the 
quantum of maintenance will take into consideration the fundamentals 
being  the  minors  education,  status,  general  expenses  as  has  been 
clearly set out in PLD 2013 SC 557 (supra). The court must also take 
into  consideration  reasonable  probability  of  obtaining  education  and 
the  ability  to  take  care  of  the  minors  in  a  stable,  safe  and  healthy 
environment. Without due consideration of all these factors, the court 
cannot  conclude  positively  the  quantum  of  maintenance.  There  is  no 
hard  and  fast  formula  for  determining  quantum  of  maintenance  and 
the  main  consideration  for  the  Court  is  the  ability  of  the  father  to 
maintain the minors. A father is obligated under the law to take care 
of his minor children and the quantum has to be determined as per his 
earning, financial and social status and the ability that he may have to 
take care of the minors. This way merely stating that he is jobless will 
not  discharge  him  of  his  obligation.  The  basic  objective  for 
determining maintenance is to ensure that in all probability the minors 
WP No.154537/2018 
7 
are  maintained  by  the  father  in  dignified  manner  with  reasonable 
comfort and that the mother of the child is not left to bear the burden 
of taking care of the minors. 
9. 
Quantum  of  maintenance  requires  due  consideration  of  all 
factors on the basis of which the court can determine the actual need 
of  the  minor.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  for  the  court  to  first 
determine  the  expenses  incurred  or  likely  to  be  incurred  on  the 
minors. For this purpose the court must look into the living conditions 
of  the  minor  and  the  manner  and  means  by  which  the  mother  is 
maintaining  the  minors  which  will  include  factors  like  where  they 
reside, whether the mother is dependent upon her family, if so what is 
the  income  on  the  basis  of  which  the  minor  is  also  being  cared 
whether she has a job and whether she has any source of independent 
income.  Special  needs  of  the  minor  which  will  include  medical  or 
physical  needs  or  special  educational  needs  should  also  be  seen. 
Special needs will vary from case to case, if relevant, as it is unique to 
the  situation  and individual. Yet  for  the purpose of  maintenance  it  is 
the obligation of the father to fulfill these special needs. In the case of 
enhancement,  the  court  must  also  determine  as  to  what  extent  the 
maintenance already fixed meets the requirement and expenses of the 
minor  and  for  what  purpose, further  enhancement  is  required.  At  the 
same  time  the  court  must  determine  the  income  of  the  father  either 
through  proper  documentary  evidence  or  on  the  basis  of  the  social 
status and earning capacity of the father. In order to ensure that proper 
information  is  before  the  court,  it  may  always  require  the  father  to 
produce documents such  as his  salary  slips  or  any  bank statement or 
property  document  on  the  basis  of  which  he  is  able  to  show  his 
monthly  income  or  earning  or  his  financial  status.  In  this  regard,  the 
assets  owned  by  the  father  are  relevant  as  it  contributes  towards 
establishing the financial status of the father that has to be probed into 
by  the  court  and  based  on  attending  circumstances  the  court  can 
WP No.154537/2018 
8 
conclusively establish the means through which the father will be able 
to maintain the minors. It is also important to take into consideration 
any liability of the father, that is whether he is paying any bank loan 
or debt, whether he has remarried or has other children or whether his 
parents are dependent on him. In this way the court can determine the 
manner  in  which  the  income  of  the  father  is  spent  and  balance  the 
income  and  capacity  with  the  reasonable  requirements  of  the  minors 
seeking maintenance. 
10. 
In 
this 
regard, 
it 
is 
noted 
that  Section 
17(A)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
of the West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964 specifically provides in 
sub-section  4  that  for  the  purposes  of  fixing  maintenance,  the  court 
may  summon 
the 
relevant  documentary  evidence 
from  any 
organization, body  or  authority  to  determine  the  estate  and  resources 
of the defendant. The purpose of this provision is to facilitate the court 
to determine the financial position of the father. The court therefore is 
not  dependent  on  documents  or  information  provided  by  the  father 
and  can  call  for  relevant  documents  or  information  be  it  from  the 
relevant department or organization or as the case requires, in order to 
determine  the  income  of  the  father.  In  “Khadeeja  Bibi  and  others  v. 
Abdul  Raheem  and  others”  (2012  SCMR  671)  the  august  Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  held  that  even  on  the  question  of  determining  the 
annual increase in maintenance in the absence of any evidence on the 
point of annual increase the court should refrain from imposing such 
annual increase in the payment of maintenance to the minor, which is 
not  in  co-relation  to  the  income  of  the  father  and  the  capacity  of  the 
father with respect to income. Therefore where the court is required to 
look  into  the  future  need  of  the  minor  that  too  must  be  done  on  the 
basis of reasonable and likely increase that can be made based on age, 
needs and on the maintenance that is being fixed for the present day.  
11.  The  judgment  under  challenge  has  failed  to  make  any 
determination on the requirement and need of the minors and also on 
WP No.154537/2018 
9 
the  income  of  the  father.  Under  the  circumstances,  impugned 
judgment  dated  11.1.2018  passed  by  Respondent  No.1  has  not 
considered  the  evidence  properly  nor  has  any  determination  been 
made  on  the  income  of  the  father.  Under  the  circumstance,  both  the 
petitions are accepted, the impugned judgment dated 11.1.2018 to the 
extent  of  quantum  of  maintenance  is  set  aside  and  the  matter  is 
remanded  to  the  Appellate  Court  to  consider  all  relevant  facts  and 
documents  as  prescribed  in  this  judgment  and  make  a  proper 
determination  with  respect  to  fixation  of  the  maintenance  of  the 
minors,  after  hearing  both  the  parties  and  pass  a  speaking  order  in 
accordance with law.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Allah Bakhsh* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(AYESHA A.MALIK) 
                JUDGE 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
   JUDGE 
