Stereo. H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
W.P.No.16756 of 2016  
 
Begum Tahira Qureshi  
Vs. 
M.B.R., etc.  
 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of hearing 
18.01.2017 
Petitioner By: 
Mr. Ijaz Mehmood Ch., Advocate. 
Respondents By:  Mr. Arshad Ch., Advocate  
Mr. Faisal M. Buttar, A.A.G.  
Faisal Zaman Khan, J:- Through  this  petition  order  dated 
03.03.2016  passed by  respondent  No.1  in  R.O.R.No.1096/2015  has 
been  assailed,  whereby, 
the  order  passed  by  Additional 
Commissioner  (Revenue),  Gujranwala  Division  Gujranwala  has 
been set aside. 
2. 
Succinctly, the facts of the case are that a suit for pre-emption 
regarding land measuring 11-Kanals 14-Marlas situated in Phalwari, 
Tehsil  Shakargarh  (Property  in  dispute)  was  instituted  by  Nadir 
Ali, predecessor-in-interest of the petitioner which was decreed vide 
judgment  and  decree  dated  27.04.1983.  In  pursuance  thereof 
requisite  amount  was  deposited  with  the  treasury,  whereafter, 
possession  of  the  property  in  dispute  was  handed  over  to  the 
petitioner. After  the demise  of  Nadir  Ali (decree holder), petitioner 
when  approached  the  revenue  authorities  for  incorporation  of  her 
name  in  the  revenue  record,  it  surfaced  that  the  afore-noted  decree 
has  not  been  incorporated  in  the  revenue  record.  For  doing  the 
needful, an application was field by the petitioner before respondent 
 
 
 
 
W.P.No.16756 of 2016  
2 
No. 2, who declined the same vide order dated 20.01.2015. Feeling 
aggrieved  petitioner  preferred  an  appeal  before  the  Additional 
Commissioner  (Revenue),  Gujranwala  Division  Gujranwala,  which 
was accepted and a direction was issued to the revenue authorities to 
do  the  needful.  Feeling  aggrieved,  respondent  Nos.3  and  4  filed 
R.O.R.No.1096/2015,  which  was  accepted  through  the  impugned 
order, hence, this petition. 
3. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in view of the 
judgment  passed  by  the  Honourable  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan 
reported  as  Shahra  and  others  v.  Member,  Board  of  Revenue, 
Punjab, and others (2004 SCMR 117) the revenue authorities were 
duty  bound  to  incorporate  a  decree  passed  by  the  civil  court  of 
competent  jurisdiction  in  the  revenue  record  by  way  of  entering 
mutation and for this purpose no execution petition was required to 
be  filed.  He  while  referring  to  the  impugned  order  further  submits 
that respondent No.1 erred in law in refusing the said relief. 
4. 
Replying  to  the  above,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent 
Nos.3 and 4 submits that they are  bona fide purchasers of a part of 
property  in  dispute  sold  to  them  by  the  legal  heirs  of  the  original 
vendor  therefore  petitioner  needs  to  approach  the  civil  court  of 
competent jurisdiction for the redressal of her grievance. 
5. 
Learned Law Officer supports the impugned order. 
6. 
Arguments heard. Record perused. 
7. 
The  only  question  requiring  determination  by  this  Court  is 
that whether or not a decree passed by the civil court of competent 
jurisdiction  could  be  incorporated  in  the  revenue  record  without 
resorting to the execution proceedings. This question has been put to 
rest  by  the  Honourable  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  a  judgment 
reported  as  Ali  Ahmad  and  another  v.  Muhammad  Fazal  and 
W.P.No.16756 of 2016  
3 
another  (1972  SCMR  322),    operative  part of  which  is  reproduced 
as under: 
“In  support  of  the  petition,  Raja  Said  Akbar  Khan,  learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioners,  has  contended  that  as  the  decree 
was not executed for six years, the Revenue authorities had no 
jurisdiction  to  sanction  mutation  and  the  Member,  Board  of 
Revenue  and  the  other  authorities  were  perfectly  justified  in 
refusing  to  do  so.  The  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  has 
not  impressed  us.  A  valid  decree  was  passed  in  favour  of 
respondent  No.1  he  became  the  owner  of  the  property  on 
payment of the purchase price on the 26th October, 1960, and 
became  vested  with  right,  interest  and  title  in  the  land  from 
that date. He was entitled to get the mutation effected on the 
basis of title decree. Simply because it has barred by time, it 
has  not  lost  its  utility.  In  our  opinion,  the  view  of  the  High 
Court  is  correct  that  the  revenue  authorities  were  under 
obligation to sanction mutation on the basis of the decree. It 
was next contended that the respondent has taken possession 
under  a  collusive  decree  from  the  tenants  of  the  petitioners 
and  that  the  order  of  the  High  Court  is  likely  to  affect  the 
decision of the suit filed by the petitioners under section 9 of 
the Specific Relief Act. The apprehension of the petitioners is 
not  well  founded.  The  civil  court  will  decide  the  suit  on  its 
own  merit.  There  is  no  force  in  the  petition.  The  petition  is 
dismissed.”  
8. 
This view has further been followed by the Honourable Apex 
Court in a judgment reported as Allah Ditta v. Ghulam Muhammad 
and 3 others (2008 SCMR 102) in the following terms: 
The arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner 
“4. 
have no force and this petition has no merit. The Mutation in 
dispute No.283 dated 11.08.1976 was attested by the Assistant 
Collector 2nd Grade. In consequence of the Civil Court decree 
dated  20.07.1976,  which  was  passed  with  the  consent  of  the 
petitioner.  The  Revenue  Authorities  are  bound  to  act  under 
the  decree.  They  cannot  ignore  the  same  on  any  ground 
whatever. Similarly, the Land Reforms Authorities also cannot 
sit  over  the  judgment  and  decree  passed  by  a  Civil  Court. 
Respondent  No.2,  therefore,  had  no  lawful  authority  to  issue 
directions  for  ignoring  the  Civil  Court  decree  and  quashing 
the above said mutation in dispute, which was sanctioned only 
in pursuance of the said decree.” 
In  Abdul  Hameed  and  others  v.  Member  (Revenue),  Board  of 
Revenue and others (2005 SCMR 1617) it has been held that; 
W.P.No.16756 of 2016  
4 
“6. 
The careful examination of the above subsections would 
show that it is essential for the Revenue Officer to inquire into 
the correctness of all entries in the register of mutation except 
in  case  of  decree  of  Court.  The  Revenue  staff  cannot  go 
beyond the decree and is bound to give effect to it unless it is 
set aside or varied by competent Court and in case of failure, 
the  concerned  officials  can  be  held  guilty  of  contempt  of 
Court, which is gross misconduct.” 
In  case  of  “Shahra  and  others”  cited  supra  the  Honourable  Apex 
Court has held that:- 
The  objection  mutation  could  only  be  sanction  on  the 
“5. 
order  of  the  Execution  Court  also  does  not  have  any  legal 
basis. On the deposit of the pre-emption money as ordered in 
the pre-emption decree according to well-settled law, the pre-
emptor/decree-holder was vested with full ownership rights of 
the land subject-matter of the suit of pre-emption about which 
decree  was  passed, 
therefore,  as  regards  sanction  of 
mutation,  the  same  could  be  made  on  the  basis  of  decree 
without  resorting  to  Executing  Court  under  the  revenue 
laws.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
The  afore-referred  view  of  the  Honourable  Apex  Court  has  further 
been  followed  by  this  Court  in  judgments  reported  as  Munshi 
Muhammad  and  others  v.  District  Officer  (Revenue)  and  2  others 
(2015  YLR  2136),  Nazir  Ahmad  and  6  others  v.  Ghulam  Mustafa 
and  20  others  (2010  MLD  89)  and  Munsdhi  Muhammad  through 
L.Rs.  and  others  v.  District  Officer  (Revenue),  Gujranwala  and  2 
others (2009 CLC 1285). 
9. 
By  placing  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Honourable  Supreme 
Court of Pakistan in juxtaposition with the facts of the instant case, 
it  is  abundantly  clear  that  the  finding  rendered  by  respondent  No.1 
qua  the  non-incorporation  of  the  judgment  and  decree  of  the  civil 
court in the revenue record is erroneous. The revenue hierarchy was 
duty  bound  to  incorporate  the  decree  in  the  revenue  record 
especially  so  when  it  is not  disputed  by  either of the  parties  that in 
furtherance of judgment and decree dated 27.04.1983 passed by the 
learned Civil Judge, Shakargarh in favour of the predecessor of the 
W.P.No.16756 of 2016  
5 
petitioner  the  requisite  amount  was  deposited  with  the  treasury, 
whereupon, possession of the property in dispute was handed over to 
the  petitioner,  which  is  fortified  by  the  finding  rendered  by 
respondent No.1 in the impugned order (see Paragraph-5).  
10. 
In  the  afore-referred  circumstances  the  revenue  hierarchy 
could  not  have  directed  the  petitioner  to  approach  the  learned 
executing  court  for  execution  of  the  decree  in  favour  of  her 
predecessor especially  so  when  the decree  of pre-emption has been 
acted upon by way of deposit of requisite amount as a consequence 
to  which  possession  has  been  handed  over  to  the  petitioner, 
therefore, there was no legal impediment in the way of  the revenue 
hierarchy to implement the said decree by way of entering mutation 
in the revenue record and the refusal by them is a clear negation of 
the judgments of the Honourable Apex Court cited supra. 
11.  The  revenue  authority  could  have  directed  the  petitioner  to 
approach  the  learned  executing  court  provided  some  part  of  the 
decree  was  not  fulfilled,  however,  in  the  case  in  hand  since  all  the 
requisites  of  the  decree  were  completed  and  its  mere  incorporation 
in  the  revenue  record  was  required,  therefore,  the  view  taken  by 
respondent No.1 was incorrect. 
12. 
In  view  of  the  above,  this  petition  is  accepted  as  sequel  to 
which  the  impugned  order  is  set  aside.  A  direction  is  issued  to 
respondent No.2 to incorporate the decree in the revenue record. 
13.  As  regards  respondent  nos.3  and  4  that  they  are  bona  fide 
purchasers  for  a  valuable  consideration,  they  can  get  their  rights 
determined from the civil court of competent jurisdiction.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shafaqat Ali* 
 
 
 
           (FAISAL ZAMAN KHAN) 
 
                JUDGE 
