 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
        Judgment Sheet 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
Case No. Writ Petition No.233847 of 2018 
  
 
 
 
Ch.  Muhammad  Nawaz 
Hafeez.  
Versus 
Federation of Pakistan etc.  
 
JUDGMENT 
Date of Hearing: 
08.10.2018. 
Petitioner by: 
Khalid Ishaq, Advocate. 
Respondents by:  Rana  Amir 
Iftikhar,  Advocate 
for 
respondents No. 2 and 3. 
 
Shahid  Jamil  Khan,  J:-  Petitioner,  being  elected  Vice 
President of Cantonment Board Gujranwala (“the Board”), has 
assailed  special  agenda  for  No  Confidence  Motion  (“NCM”), 
against  the  petitioner,  carried  through  impugned  letter  dated 
08.09.2018 for tabling it in an Ordinary Board Meeting.      
2. 
Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  read  subsection  (3)  of 
Section  21  of  The  Cantonment  Act,  1924  (“Act  of  1924”)  to 
submit that a special meeting was required to be convened for the 
purpose  of  NCM against  an  elected  Vice President. By  referring 
to Notice dated 06.09.2018 (Annex-B), he supported the fact that 
the meeting, in which NCM was placed, was an Ordinary Board 
Meeting, already convened for 08.09.2018. 
 
Rana Amir Iftikhar, Advocate, representing the respondent 
Board, did not controvert the fact that the NCM was placed in an 
already  scheduled  Ordinary  Board  Meeting,  without  providing 
sufficient time to convene a Special Meeting for this purpose. He 
apprised; though the NCM was carried but the petitioner was not 
de-notified in view of interim relief granted. 
W. P. No. 233847 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
3.   On  Court’s  query,  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner 
submitted  that  the  Federal  Government,  under  Section  280,  is 
required to frame rules to carrying out the purpose of the Act of 
1924  and  every  Cantonment  Board  has  to  frame  by-laws  under 
Section 282 of this Act. Such rules, dealing with the meetings of 
the  Boards  or  by-laws,  are  not  found  to  have  been  framed.  He 
apprised that under some  Statues like Cooperative Societies Act, 
1925 and Companies Ordinance, 1984 (substituted by Companies 
Act, 2017), Federal Government framed skeleton by-laws (Model 
By-laws)  which  are  to  be  adopted  by  the  Statutory  Entities 
created  under 
these  Statutes,  with  necessary  amendments 
permissible under these Statutes.  
 
Responding  to  this  quarry;  Rana  Amir  Iftikhar,  Advocate 
for  the  Board  submits  that  there  are  some  by-laws  framed, 
however,  by-laws  relating  to  the  meetings  were  not  framed, 
which have been prepared and being sent to Federal Government 
for approval. 
4.   Heard. Record perused. 
5. 
In  presence  of  the  admitted  position  that  the  NCM  was 
placed before an already convened Board Meeting, the following 
referred  provision  from  Section  21  of  the  Act  of  1924  is 
examined:- 
 
“21. Term of office of vice-president. (1)………. 
(2)  …… 
(3) 
A vice-president may be removed from his office by the 
Central Government at any time during the term of his office if 
a  no-confidence  motion  is  passed  against  him  by  a  two-third 
majority  of  the  elected  members  of  the  Board  at  a  meeting 
specially convened  for  this  purpose,  and  on  such  removal 
the office shall become vacant.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
The  spirit  of  ‘specially  convened  meeting’  is  apparent  from  the 
words of law, which envisages sufficient notice to the parties for 
the  purposes  of  resolution  of  NCM.  Such  procedure  has  to  be 
W. P. No. 233847 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
regulated,  either  by  framing  rules  under  the  Section  280  or  by-
laws  under  the  Section  282,  absence  of  which  gives  room  to 
arbitrary  exercise  of  power  or  desecration,  like  has  happened  in 
this case. 
6. 
The  proposition,  whether  any  provision  of  law  is  self-
executing,  not  requiring  subordinate  legislation  to  carry  out  its 
purpose, was examined by this Court in  Nestle Pakistan Limited 
etc. v. The Federal Board of Revenue etc. (2017 PTD 686). After 
discussing Apex Court’s judgment in Hakim Khan and 3 others v. 
Government  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary  Interior  and  others 
(PLD  1992  S.C.  595)  and  a  passage  from  10th  Edn.  of  NS 
Bindra’s Interpretation of Statues, it was held:- 
“7.  …..It is recapitulated that a provision is self-executing if 
rights granted or duties imposed are enforceable in absence of 
any  supplementary  legislation;  in  other  words  if  manifest 
intention  is  found  in  language  of  the  provision  that  power 
conferred  should  go  into  immediate  effect  and  no  ancillary 
legislation  is  necessary,  then  the  provision  is  self-executing. 
The provision is not self-executing if it indicates  merely a line 
of  policy  or  principles,  without  giving  means  by  which  such 
policy or principles are to be carried into effect, or it is directed 
in the provision for framing of Rules through delegated powers 
to enforce the rights, duties or powers given therein.” 
Structuring  of  discretion,  even  under  a  self-executing  provision 
was held imperative keeping in view the law laid down by August 
Supreme Court of Pakistan. Relevant excerpt is also reproduced:- 
Nevertheless,  the  discretionary  powers,  even  under  a 
“9. 
self-executing  provision,  need to be structured to ensure just, 
fair and transparent exercise of discretionary powers, because 
it  has  so  been  ordained  by  Apex  Court  of  this  Country  in 
Amanullah  Case  (supra),  Government  of  NWFP  through 
Secretary  and  3  others  v.  Majee  Flour  Mills  (Private)  Limited 
(1997 SCMR 1804), and Muhammad Amin Muhammad Bashir 
Limited v. Government of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry 
of  Finance,  Central  Secretariat,  Islamabad  and  others  (2015 
SCMR 630), which in view of Article 189 of the Constitution is 
declared law of the land….” 
The  guidelines  as  enshrined  in  Aman  Ullah  Khan and others   v. 
The Federal Government of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry 
W. P. No. 233847 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
of Finance Islamabad (PLD 1990 S.C. 1092) were reiterated, to 
direct framing of rules to ensure transparency and to achieve high 
quality of justice, in following words:- 
 
“Doctrine of structuring discretion was explained in Amanullah 
Khan's case, in following words:--  
 
"structuring  discretion  only  means  regularizing 
it, 
organizing it, producing order in it so that decision will 
achieve the high quality of justice."  
 
Seven  instruments  were  highlighted,  which  are  useful  to 
structure  discretionary  power  i.e.  "open  plans,  open  policy 
statement, open rules, open findings, open reasons, open 
precedents and fair in formal procedure". Framing of Rules 
to  regulate  the  discretionary  power  was  emphasized.  The 
expression of Hon'ble Court is reproduced:--  
"the  wide-worded  conformant  of  discretionary  powers 
of  reservations  of  discretion,  without  framing  rules  to 
regulate  its  exercise,  has  been  taken  to  be  an 
enhancement of power  and it gives that impression in 
the  first  instance  but  where  the  authorities  fail  to 
rationalize  it  and  regulate  it  by  Rules,  or  Policy 
statement or precedents, the Courts have to intervene 
more often, than is necessary, apart from the exercise 
of  such  power  appearing  arbitrary  and  capricious  at 
times." 
[emphasis supplied] 
The  law  and  direction  in  the  Nestle  Pakistan’s  Case  (supra)  for 
structuring  of  discretion  through  rule  making,  ibid,  has  been 
upheld  by  the  August  Court  through  a  recent  judgment  in 
Commissioner  of  Inland  Revenue,  Sialkot  and  others  v.  Messrs 
Allah Din Steel and Rolling Mills and others (2018 SCMR 1328). 
7. 
As the NCM against the petitioner through impugned letter 
dated  08.09.2018  was  against  the  spirit  of  Section  21(3)  of  the 
Act  of  1924,  therefore,  is  declared  without  lawful  authority, 
rendering the consequent resolution as ineffective. 
Taking  notice,  during  proceedings,  of  the  fact  that 
necessary rules for regulating the business of Cantonment Boards 
are  not  framed,  the  Federal  Government,  through  Secretary 
W. P. No. 233847 of 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Defence,  is  directed  to  ensure  framing  of  Model  By-Laws  for 
running  the  affairs  and  business  of  the  Cantonment  Boards,  to 
bring certainty and uniformity in procedure and proceedings.  
The petition is allowed. 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
 
           
                      
(Shahid Jamil Khan) 
    Judge 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
Judge 
 
Sajjad 
 
