Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
C.M. in W.P.No.196881 / 2018 
 
 
 
 
Lawyers Foundation for Justice  
 
 
 
Vs.           Federation of Pakistan, etc. 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceedings 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order  with  signature  of  Judge,  and  that  of  parties  of 
counsel, where necessary  
27.08.2018  
 
 
 
 
C.M.Nos.7, 8 & 9 of 2018 
Mr. A.K. Dogar, Advocate for the petitioner. 
Ms.  Afshan  Ghazanfar,  Advocate  for  applicant  in 
C.M. No.7/2018 
Mr.  Sarfraz  Hussain,  Advocate  for  applicant  in 
C.M. No.8/2018 
Ch. Muhammad Younas, Advocate for applicant in 
C.M. No.9/2018.  
M/s.  Imran  Aziz  Khan  &  Tahir  Mehmood  Ahmad 
Khokhar, DAGs for Federation of Pakistan. 
  
This order shall govern C.M.Nos.7,8 & 9 of 
2018.  The  said  three  applications  have  been  filed 
under Order I Rule 10 CPC for the impleadment of 
applicants as parties to the main petition i.e., Writ 
Petition  No.196881  of  2018.  Through  C.M.  No.7 
of  2018  prayer  has  been  made  that  the  applicant, 
Iqbal  Ahmad,  be 
impleaded  as  “petitioner” 
whereas  the  claim  of  the  applicants  of  other  two 
applications 
is 
that 
they  may  be 
joined  as 
“respondents”. 
2. 
The  applicant, 
Iqbal  Ahmad, 
in  his 
application i.e. C.M. No.7 of 2018 has maintained 
that since the NAB is investigating into the matter 
with  respect  to  his  property,  he  has  interest  in  the 
proceedings  of  Writ  Petition  No.19688  of  2018 
and, therefore, may be impleaded as petitioner. On 
the other hand, the applicants in C.M.Nos.8 & 9 of 
2018, who are incidentally practicing advocates of 
 
W.P. No.196881 of 2018 
2 
this  Court,  are  seeking  their  impleadment  as 
“respondents” so  as  to  assist the  Court on  the  law 
point  raised  in  the  said  constitutional  petition.  In 
support  of  their  plea  reference  has  been  made  to 
the  case  of  “Syntron  Limited  v.  Huma  Ijaz  and 
others” (2014 SCMR 531).  
3. 
Heard.  The  relevant  provision  of 
law 
governing  the  controversy  involved  in  these  three 
applications is provided under Rule 10(2) of Order 
I  CPC.  This  law  provides  for  the  addition  of  (a) 
necessary  party,  and  (b)  proper  party.  Necessary 
parties  consist  of  persons,  who  “ought  to  have 
been  joined”  that  is,  persons  necessary  to  the 
constitution  of  the  suit/petition  without  whom  no 
decree/order  can  be  passed  at  all.  Now,  question 
arises  as  to  whether  in  the  given  facts  and 
circumstances  of  the  case,  the  present  applicants 
may be declared as necessary party. In the case on 
hands,  Lawyers  Foundation  for  Justice  through  a 
petition  under  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of 
the  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  i.e.  Writ 
Petition No.196881 of 2018 has sought declaration 
to  the  effect  that  after  promulgation  of  the 
Constitution  (Eighteenth  Amendment)  Act,  2010, 
the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 made 
in  pursuance  of  P.C.O.No.I  of  1999  has  ceased  to 
be  a  law  and  is  non-existent,  non-est  and  a  dead 
letter.  The  question  raised  in  the  constitutional 
petition  is  a  pure  question  of  law  and  can  be 
decided effectually and completely in the presence 
of  existing  respondents,  that  is,  (i)  Federation  of 
Pakistan,  Ministry  of  Law,  Justice,  Parliamentary 
Affairs  &  Human  Rights,  Cabinet  Block, 
Islamabad;  and, 
(ii)  National  Accountability 
Bureau,  Islamabad  through  its  Chairman.  The 
 
W.P. No.196881 of 2018 
3 
applicants are not necessary parties and, therefore, 
cannot  be  allowed  to  join  the  proceedings.  This 
view finds support from the case of “Syed Ahmed 
Saeed Kirmani v. Punjab Province and others”  
(1982 CLC 590) wherein it has been held that it is 
not  possible  to  implead  every  one,  who  has  been 
conferred certain advantage by a particular law in a 
general  way  which  benefit  may  be  lost  if  the  law 
be struck down for lack of validity. For, otherwise 
there     will be no end of parties.  
4. 
Before  proceeding  further,  we  pause  here 
and  examine  the  principle  settled  by  the  Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of “Syntron 
Limited v. Huma Ijaz and others” (2014 SCMR 
531)  referred  by  applicants‟  counsel.  In  that  case 
manufacturing  and  marketing  of  Woven  Poly-
Proplene  (“WPP”)  bags  was  questioned  through  a 
constitutional  petition  in  the  nature  of  public 
interest  litigation.  In  that  petition  M/s  Syntron 
Limited  filed  an  application  under  Order  I  Rule 
10(2)  CPC  to  be  joined  as  one  of  the  respondents 
as  according to  them,  decision  of  the  petition  was 
likely  to  affect  their  interest  as  they  were  one  of 
the  major  suppliers  of  WPP  bags  to  one  of  the 
respondents  of  the petition. The  Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court  of  Pakistan  taking  into  consideration  the 
above  said  facts  allowed  M/s  Syntron  Limited  to 
be  joined  as  respondent  in  the  proceedings  on  the 
ground that in case the writ petition was granted, in 
the terms of the prayer made therein, the interest of 
M/s Syntron was likely to be prejudiced.  The facts 
of  the  said  precedent  case  are  distinguishable  and 
thus  principle  settled  therein  cannot  be  applied  to 
the  applications  on  hands.  The  constitutional 
petition  (i.e.  W.P.  No.196881  of  2018)  before  us 
 
W.P. No.196881 of 2018 
4 
questions  the  validity  or  existence  of  the  National 
Accountability  Ordinance,  1999  and  as  such  the 
makers  of  that  law  are  necessary  party.  It  is  true 
that the decision of the Court on the constitutional 
petition is likely to affect everyone in whose case a 
similar  point  of  law  arises  but  this  does  not  give 
the  applicant  in  C.M.  No.7  of  2018  a  right  to 
intervene  in  the  proceedings  of  the  main  case 
before us  merely  because  it is likely  to  affect him 
in  some 
future  proceedings.  Similarly, 
the 
applicants  of  C.M.  No.8  &  9  of  2018  cannot  be 
allowed  to  join  the  proceedings  for  rendering 
assistance,  in  public  interest,  to  determine  the 
question  of  law  raised  before  us.  Thus, the  prayer 
made in the applications cannot be acceded to.      
5. 
Now  we  examine  as 
to  whether 
the 
applicants  may  be  joined  in  the  proceedings  by 
treating  them  as  “proper  party”.  Needless  to 
observe  here  that  proper  party  is  a  party  whose 
presence  before  the  Court  is  necessary  to  enable 
the Court to effectually and completely adjudicate 
upon  and  settle  all  questions  involved  in  the 
proceedings.  The 
term 
„questions 
involved‟ 
includes  all  matters,  material  to  a  proper  decision 
of the case but the object of making such persons/ 
parties  is  to    prevent  multiplicity  of  proceedings.  
The  Hon‟ble  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  the 
case  of  “Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan  v.  Abdul 
Wali  Khan”  (PLD  1975  S.C.463)  has  held  that 
person must, therefore, be a person whose interest 
is  likely  to  be  affected  even  though  no  relief  is 
claimed  against  him.  This  does  not,  therefore, 
extend  to  persons  who  have  no  interest  which  is 
likely to be affected by the proceedings, nor does it 
embrace  persons  only  generally  interested  in  
 
W.P. No.196881 of 2018 
5 
common  with  others  nor  can  persons  be  added  as 
party  so  as  to  set  up  a  new  cause  of  action  which 
does  not  concern  original  parties.  From 
the 
averments  made  in  the  applications  it  transpires 
that  the  applicants  intend  to  appear  in  the  main 
case  so  as 
to  assist 
the  Court  for  proper 
adjudication  of  the  question  of  law  raised  by  the 
writ  petitioner.  We  are  afraid  that  on  the  basis  of 
such  averments  a  person  cannot  be  held  proper 
party  nor  can  be  allowed  to  join  proceedings  as 
respondents. 
6. 
In  view  of  above,  these  applications  are 
dismissed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SHAHID WAHEED) 
 
  JUDGE 
(SHAHID JAMIL KHAN) 
 
JUDGE 
 
 
(ATIR MAHMOOD) 
 
JUDGE  
Approved for reporting 
JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.R.Shad* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.R.Shad* 
 
 
 
