Form No: HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, BAHAWALPUR BENCH, 
BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Election Appeal No.10 of 2018  
 
Sardar Arsalan Haider Leghari     Versus.  Mr. Sajid Mehmood,  
 
 
 
 
 
    Civil Judge etc  
 
Sr. No. Of 
Order/ 
Proceeding 
 
Date of 
Order 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties of 
counsel, where necessary.  
21.06.2018 Mr. Mumtaz Mustafa, Advocate for appellant. 
 
 
Mr. Muhammad Iqbal Mehr, AAG. 
Hafiza  Mehnaz  Nadeem  Abbasi,  Legal  Advisor, 
Election   Commission of Pakistan.  
 
 
Aggrieved  by  the  order  dated  19.06.2018  passed  by  the 
 
 
 
Returning  Officer,  PP-265-XI,  Rehim  Yar  Khan,  wherein  the 
appellant’s nomination papers were rejected on the ground that 
at  the  time  of  filing  of  nomination  papers  the  appellant  was  a 
citizen  of  Canada,  the  appellant  has  filed  the  instant  appeal 
under section 63 of the Elections Act, 2017 on the ground that 
by filing application on 21.05.2018 the appellant has renounced 
his Canadian citizenship. 
2. 
The learned counsel for the appellant mainly argues that 
the appellant has filed an application on 21.05.2018 before the 
Canadian  High  Commission,  Islamabad  by  surrendering  his 
original  citizenship  card,  Canadian  Passport  and  has  also  paid 
the fee of 100 Canadian Dollar. Hence, the appellant is entitled 
to  contest  the  election  and  is  not  disqualified  under  Article 
63(1)(c)  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan, 
1973. I have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the 
appellant and perused the documents attached with this appeal. 
3. 
There is no cavil to the proposition of law that in order to 
contest  the  election  of  the  Parliament  or  to  the  Provincial 
Assembly  or  be  a  Member  thereof,  a  person  must  possess  the 
qualifications  as  enumerated  in  Article  62  of  the  Constitution 
and  does  not  suffer  from  the  disqualifications  as  mentioned  in 
Article  63  of  the  Constitution.  The  election  process  can  be 
broadly divided into two segments, one the period between the 
date  of  nominations  of  the  candidates  till  the  day  before  the 
polling  which  can  be  termed  as  a  pre-poll  stage  while  the 
second  shall  start  with  the  day  of  the  polling  and  terminates 
with  the  declaration  of  the  result  of  the  election  and  can  be 
signified as post poll stage. At the pre-poll stage the significant 
disputes  which  may  arise  in  relation  to  the  election,  are  about 
the valid nominations of the candidates, inter-alia, involving the 
question  about  their  qualifications/disqualifications  etc.  As  far 
as the dispute about the valid nominations of the candidates are 
concerned,  section  62  of  the  Elections  Act,  2017  lays  down  a 
comprehensive  and  a  particularized  procedure  vis-à-vis  the 
scrutiny of the nomination papers which specifically envisages 
the  filing  of  objections  thereto  by  the  candidate,  his  election 
agent,  proposer,  seconder,  an  authorized  person  of  each 
candidate  or  even  a  voter.  Returning  Officer  is  not  only 
authorized of his own motion to examine the valid nomination 
of 
a 
candidate 
and 
to 
look 
into 
his 
qualifications/disqualifications  but 
is  also 
to  decide 
the 
objections while scrutinizing the nomination papers and for the 
determination thereof, the Returning Officer may also conduct a 
summary  inquiry  for  accepting  or  rejecting  the  nomination 
papers  as  he  may  deem  fit,  with  the  empowerment  to  require 
any  authority  or  organization  to  produce  any  document  or  the 
record  but  the  scope  of  such  inquiry,  however,  is,  short,  brief, 
concise and immediate and in any case shall be in contrast to a 
full  fledge  trial,  especially  when  there  shall  be  substantial  and 
genuine  controversy  about  the  facts  or  the  application  of  law 
which  is  dependent  upon  the  factual  resolution.  Against  the 
decision of Returning Officer, a candidate or the objector has a 
right to file an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal constituted 
for  this  purpose  under  section  63  of  Elections  Act  2017  and 
Appellate  Tribunal  shall  summarily  decide  an  appeal  under 
subsection  2  of  section  63  ibid,  within  such  time  as  may  be 
notified  by  the  commission,  on  the  basis  of  admitted/easily 
verifiable  material/record 
to  eminently  and  conclusively 
establish  the  qualification/  disqualification  of  the  candidate. 
Although, the appellant has  filed  an  application on 21.05.2018 
by renouncing his Canadian Citizenship but same is still in the 
process  and  admittedly,  no  certificate  has  been  issued  by  the 
Competent  Authority  to  the  effect  that  he  is  not  a  citizen  of 
Canada. As such, at the filing of his nomination papers, on the 
date  of  scrutiny  and  even  today,  the  appellant  was/is  still  a 
Canadian  citizen  because  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant 
is  unable  to  provide  any  document  from  Canadian  Authorities 
showing 
that 
the 
appellant’s 
application 
for 
surrendering/renouncing  Canadian 
citizenship  has  been 
accepted.  In  reported  judgment  titled  “Syed  Mehmood  Akhtar 
Naqvi  Vs.  Federation  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary  Law  and 
others (PLD 2012 S.C. 1089), the Hon’ble Supreme Court held 
as under:  
“ ………43. If  we  compare  Article  63(1) 
with  Article  63(A)  of  the  Constitution 
inserted by 18th Amendment, the intention of 
the  Legislature  becomes  clear  that  Article 
63(1) of the  Constitution  applied to  pre  and 
post-election 
disqualification,  whereas 
Article  63(A)  applied 
to  post  election 
disqualification 
on 
the 
ground 
of 
defection……………………… 
53.  As  regards  Mr.  Zahid  Iqbal,  MNA  vide 
order  dated  18.03.2012, 
learned  ASC 
appearing  for  Mr.  Zahid  Iqbal,  MNA  was 
directed 
to 
file  evidence/  documents/ 
certificate issued by the competent authority 
in  terms  of  British  Nationality  Act,  1981  to 
the  effect  that he  is not  a  citizen  of  UK  but 
he  failed  to  do  so  till  date  despite  giving 
time, thus  we  have no  option but to believe 
that  Mr.  Zahid  Iqbal,  MNA,  is  holding 
citizenship  of  United  Kingdom,  having 
Passport 
No. 
300997046 
of 
Britain………………………………… 
72.  From  bare  reading  of  the  said  letter 
dated 29.05.2012 by U.K. Border Agency, it 
appears that Mr. A. Rehman Malik has been 
registered  as  having  renounced  British 
Citizenship  on  29.05.2012.  This  aspect  of 
the matter has already been discussed in our 
short  order,  thus  need  not  be  discussed  in 
detail  again  but  suffice  it  to  say  that 
apparently  for  this  reason  realizing  legal 
position,  he  has  resigned  from  membership 
of the Parliament on 11.07.2012 and against 
the  vacant  seat  he  participated  in  the  fresh 
elections  and  was  declared  successful 
candidate vide notification dated 24.07.2012 
……………...”.  
Reliance  is  also  placed  on  judgment 
reported  as  “Syed  Anwar  Hasnat  Vs. 
Returning  Officer  PP-27,  Jhelum”  (2013 
CLC 1821).  
4. 
In  view  of  the  above  discussion,  the  appellant  is 
not entitled/qualified to contest the election under Article 
63(1)(c) because the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of  Pakistan  does  not  permit  a  person  who  has  acquired 
the Citizenship  of  another  State  to become  a  member  of 
Pakistan’s  Parliament or of a Provincial Assembly. 
5. 
On  Court’s  query,  the  appellant  has  also  candidly 
conceded  that  he  has  not  mentioned  in  his  nomination 
papers  or  in  attached  documents,  the  nationalities  of  his 
wife  as  well  as  his  children  who  are  also  citizens  of 
Canada. Hence, by not mentioning the nationalities of his 
wife  and  children,  the  defect  of  a  substantial  nature  has 
also accrued.  
6. 
In view of above, I find no infirmity or illegality in 
the  impugned  order  of  the  Returning  Officer  and 
consequently this appeal is dismissed in limine.  
  
                                                         (MASUD ABID NAQVI) 
                      
 
 
 
           Appellate Tribunal  
 
 
*rouf  
 
