 
                                        Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
     IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
                         JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
C.R.No.2081-2016 
Tajamal Abbas   Vs. Inamullah 
JUDGMENT 
Date of hearing 
 
   28.02.2018  
Petitioner by               Mr. Fawad Malik Awan, Advocate 
Respondent by            M/s. Rai Shahid Saleem Khan, Ehsan Ahmed  
   Bhindar,  Ziaullah  Khanand  Imran  Haider    
Bhatti, Advocates.  
 
           Ch.  Muhammad  Masood  Jahangir 
,J:-  The  present 
petitioner on 11.12.2013 approached the learned Civil Court, Jhang 
with  a  suit  for  permanent  injunction,  admitting  therein  that  he 
occupied  the  demised  house  being  tenant  and  his  ultimate  prayer 
was  that  respondent  be  restrained  from  snatching  its  possession 
through illegal means and during its proceedings on 24.03.2014, he 
at his own, made a statement as under:- 
 ضیارا  روا  ہے  گیا  ہو  مہنا  ضیار  کہ  ہے  نیبیا
 
حلف  بر
۔ضرحا  عیمد
   
’’47-36-57
 یوپیر  یدمز  کی  اہذٰ یعود سے  جہو  کی 
  مہنا ضیار
۔گا  ںودکر  لیخا  ہما
6 
  ردرا یں  
یہعومتد
 لتاعد ہضرحا للہا منعاا ۔گئے  لئے شیہحا ستخطد بتبا سا ۔ےوجا یامافر جرخا ہے نہ رکارد  
ستخطد بھی کے
 علیہ 
  
عامد ہے  تاکر تسلیم  کو مہنا ضیار سا  جو
 لابا  گیا  یاسنا  
 نبیا بھی  کو
 
                                                                                        
۔گئے لئے‘‘
شیہحا 
                         
 
Pursuant  thereto,  the  Court  then  and  there  passed  the  order  to  the 
 
following effect:- 
In  view  of  above  recorded  statement  of  the  parties 
recorded  above,  the  instant  suit  of  the  plaintiff  is  hereby 
C.R.No.2081 of 2016 
2 
dismissed  as  withdrawn.  However,  both  the  parties  will 
abide by and bound to comply with their statement. 
Admittedly,  the  petitioner  did  not  honour  his  words  and  the 
respondent/defendant  was  compelled  to  bring  an  execution  petition 
for  its  realization,  but  it  failed  being  incompetent  having  been 
rejected  by  the  learned  Executing  Court on  the very  first day  of  its 
hearing  on  31.01.2015.  On  appeal,  the  petitioner  did  not  turn  up, 
compelling the Appellate Court to set at naught the view of learned 
Executing  Court  and  it  did  so  on  15.08.2015  directing  the  learned 
Executing  Court  to  summon  the  present  petitioner  and  decide  the 
Execution  Petition  strictly  in  accordance  with  law.  The  present 
petitioner filed an application under Order XLI rule 21 of the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 before the same Court for recalling his ex-
parte  order  dated  15.08.2015,  which  was  allowed  and  appeal  of 
respondent was revived for its decision afresh, but again on merit it 
was allowed on 13.04.2016 and through instant Civil Revision it was 
attacked. 
2. 
The inaugural argument of Mr. Fawad Malik Awan, Advocate for 
petitioner that the suit was dismissed as withdrawn and decree sheet was 
not drawn and that consent of the parties also did not fall within definition 
of a decree under sub-section (2) of section 2 of the Code, 1908 and that 
execution proceedings could not be initiated was not tenable. Apart from 
Order XXI of Code ibid, section 36 thereof is the most relevant provision 
to  be  applied,  which  might  have  escaped  notice  of  Mr.  Fawad  and  it 
would be advantageous to go through it, which reads as follows:- 
36.  Application  to  Orders.—The  provisions  of  this 
Code  relating  to  the  execution  of  decrees  shall, so  far  as 
C.R.No.2081 of 2016 
3 
they are applicable, be deemed to apply to the execution of 
orders. 
 
A  bare  perusal  thereof  in  express  terms  makes  all  the  provisions 
relating to the execution of decree applicable also to the execution of 
orders.  Moreover,  the  Court  is  equipped  with  the  jurisdiction  not 
only to adjudicate upon disputes and pass an order rather it possesses 
ample powers to get its orders implemented, otherwise machinery of 
the  Courts  working  under  the  mandate  of  law  would  become 
dormant.  It was not a case of simple withdrawal of the suit, rather 
same was decided as per undertaking given by the petitioner and he 
was  specifically  bounded  to  comply  with  it,  hence  there  was  no 
occasion for him to fall back or reneged. An undertaking made by a 
party before the Court of law has to be given sanctity while applying 
the  principle  of  estoppel  as  well  to  respect  moral  and  ethical  rules 
and if retraction therefrom is allowed as a matter of right, then it will 
definitely result into distrust of the public litigants over the Judiciary 
and  would  damage  the  sacred  image  of  the  Courts  that  they  are 
infertile  to  make  implementation  of  orders  passed  by  them  in  the 
judicial  proceedings.  Reliance  can  be  placed  upon  Farzana  Rasool 
and 3 others Vs. Dr. Muhammad Bashir  and others (2011 SCMR 
1361). It is again well established that  conduct of a party is always 
considered  to  be  relevant  in  the  Court  of  law,  the  latter  has  to  take 
exception  to  the  conduct  of  litigant  like  in  case  in  hand.  The 
petitioner voluntarily opted to surrender himself before the Court of 
law to evict the rented premises, then it becomes final and absolute 
for him to vacate it and any retraction cannot be permitted because 
C.R.No.2081 of 2016 
4 
sanctity  to  the  judicial  proceedings  has  to  be  safe  guarded  at  any 
cost.  Full  Bench  of  this  Court  in  a  case  reported  as    Mst.  Kishwar 
Sultan  Jehan  Begum  Vs.  Aslam  Awais  Arw  3  others(PLD  1976 
Lahore 580), observed as under:- 
An  undertaking  given  to  the  Court  by  a  party  or  his 
counsel  has  exactly  the  same  force  as  an  order  made  or 
an injunction granted by a Court; once an undertaking is 
given  in  the  Court  by  a  party  or  on  his  behalf  by  his 
counsel he becomes bound to fulfill the same.  
Whereas,  in  a  case  cited  as  Izhar  Alam  Farooqi,  Advocate  and 
another Vs. Sheikh Abdul Sattar Lasi and others (2008 CLD 149) , 
the apex Court observed as follows:- 
It  is  true  that  a  Court  which  has  the  jurisdiction  to 
adjudicate the dispute and pass an order has also implicit 
power  to  have  the  order  implemented  and  mere  an 
erroneous  order  passed  by  the  Court  of  competent 
jurisdiction does not render the order without jurisdiction. 
 
Moreover, this Court in the judgment syled as Khawar Saeed Raza 
Vs.  Wajahat  Iqbal  (2003  CLC  1306)  clinched  the  identical 
controversy in hand while concluding as under:- 
Compromise is admitted which became part of the order, 
which  stipulated  the  withdrawal  of  the  suit  by  the 
respondent.    Under  section  36  Civil  Procedure  Code, 
1908, the provisions of the Code relating to the execution 
of decree are also applicable to orders. Even if there was 
no  decree  in  existence  an  order  disposing  of  the  suit  in 
terms  of  the  compromise  is  very  much  there,  binding 
upon  and  operative  qua  the  parties.  In  Kilachand 
Devchand and Co. V. Ajodhuaprasad  Sukhamnand  and 
others  AIR 1934 Bombay 452, it was  observed that  if the 
Court  had 
jurisdiction 
to  make 
the  order 
it  had 
necessarily the power and jurisdiction to enforce the same 
and the law does not allow its machinery to be clogged in 
this  respect.  Likewise  in  Ranjit  Singh  Hazari  and  others 
C.R.No.2081 of 2016 
5 
V.  Juman  Meah  and  another  PLD  1961  Dacca  842 
section 36 of the Civil Procedure Code was considered by 
the  learned  Division  Bench  of  the  then  High  Court  of 
Dacca  (East  Pakistan)  and  it  was  observed  that  the 
provisions  regarding execution of decree  were  applicable 
to orders as well.  
 
Hence, apart from reasoning of the learned Addl. District Judge, the 
above referred precedents also support his view. Reliance of learned 
counsel  for  the  petitioner  on  the  case  law  cited  as  Shaukat  Ali  Vs. 
Muhammad Sharif (2013 CLC 1558) and Messrs Singer Pakistan 
Ltd. Through Director Personal and Administration and another Vs. 
Nasir  Ali  Meer  and  another  (2015  MLD  267)  is  not  apt,  because 
scope  of  section  36  of  Code  ibid  was  absolutely  not  considered 
therein.  Even  otherwise,  each  case  has  to  be  dealt  with  keeping  in 
view its own peculiar facts and circumstances.  
4. 
As  a  result  of  the  above,  impugned  order  of  the  learned 
Addl.  District  Judge,  Jhang  do  not  call  for  any  interference  by  this 
Court  and  petition in  hand being  devoid of  merit  as  well as  force  is 
accordingly dismissed with costs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
          (Ch. Muhammad Masood Jahangir) 
 
               Judge 
 
                                                                Approved for reporting. 
 
 
  
                                                       Judge 
 
 
 
 
Syed Zameer 
