 
 
 
          Judgment Sheet 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
    
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT AT LAHORE 
 
 
 
 
          WP No.126184 of 2017     
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Habib Akram 
Versus 
Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of Parliamentary 
 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
Petitioner By: 
Respondents By: 
 
Affairs, Islamabad etc. 
    J U D G M E N T  
in  WP  Nos.126184/17 
30.5.2018 
Mr.  Saad  Rasool,  Mr.  Hasan  Majeed,  Mr. 
Aitzaz  A.  Chaudhary,  Mr.  Shan  Saeed 
Ghumman  and  M.  Ali  Salimi,  Advocates  for 
Petitioners 
and 
215470/18.  
Mr.  Muhammad  Asif,  Advocate  for 
Petitioner in WP No.177513/18. 
Mr.  Muhammad  Zikria  Sheikh,  DAG  along 
with  Ameen  Ullah,  Section  Officer,  Ministry 
of Parliamentary Affairs, Islamabad. 
the 
 
Chaudhary  Umer  Hayat,  Director  Legal, 
Election  Commission  of  Pakistan  along  with 
Hafiz  Adeel  Ashraf,  Assistant  Law  Officer, 
ECP. 
 
Ayesha  A.  Malik  J:  The  instant  Petition  along  with  WP 
Nos.215470/18  and  177513/18  have  been  filed  in  public  interest  to 
safeguard  the  constitutional  as  well  as  statutory  rights  of  the  citizens 
of Pakistan with reference to general elections.  
2. 
 The Petitioners have challenged the vires of Form A and Form 
B  (“Impugned  Forms”)  appended  with  the  Election  Act,  2017 
(“Act”) being the nomination form for participation in the election to 
an  assembly  and  the  statement  of  assets  and  liabilities  under  the  Act 
on  the  ground  that  the  Impugned  Forms  were  drafted  by  Parliament 
who is not competent to enact the same as the competent authority is 
Respondent No.3, Election Commission of Pakistan (“ECP”). In this 
WP No.126184/2017 
2 
regard, reliance is placed on the case cited as Workers’ Party Pakistan 
through Akhtar Hussain, Advocate, General Secretary and 6 others v. 
Federation  of  Pakistan  and  2  others  (PLD  2012  SC  681).  Learned 
counsel  for  the  Petitioners  argued  that  the  conduct  of  elections  is 
governed  under  Article  213  to  226  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973  (“Constitution").  The  sole  responsibility 
to organize and conduct elections and to make all arrangements as are 
necessary so as to ensure honest, just and fair elections is of the ECP. 
Article  218  and  219  of  the  Constitution  enumerates  the  duties  of  the 
ECP  and  this  Article  has  been  interpreted  in  the  case  cited  at  PLD 
2012 SC 681 (supra) such that Parliament cannot abridge the powers 
of  the  ECP  and  that  the  ECP  has  exclusive  powers  to  conduct  the 
elections.  Learned  counsel  further  argued  that  in  terms  of  the 
judgment  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan,  drafting  of 
nomination  forms  falls  within  the  ambit  of  the  ECP  and  it  no  longer 
requires the assent of the President of Pakistan. Learned counsel also 
argued  that  historically  in  all  elections  carried  out  in  Pakistan,  the 
ECP  has  made  the  nomination  forms  and  this  is  the  first  time  that 
Parliament  has  taken  it  upon  itself  to  draft  the  nomination  forms.  In 
this regard, Mr. Saad Rasool, Advocate argued that Article 222 of the 
Constitution  provides  for  the  law  making  power  of  Parliament  with 
reference to election matters. In terms of the stated Article, Parliament 
can make laws for the purposes of elections, however the said Article 
is subject to the Constitution and in terms of the proviso to the Article, 
no  such  law  shall  have  the  effect  of  taking  away  or  abridging  any 
power of the ECP. Hence it is his case that the Parliament cannot draft 
the  nomination  forms  as  it  falls  within  the  exclusive  mandate  of  the 
ECP. Reliance is placed on Election Commission of Pakistan through 
its Secretary v. Javaid Hashmi and others (PLD 1989 SC 396), PLD 
2012  SC  681  (supra)  and  Workers’  Party  Pakistan  through  General 
Secretary and 6 others v. Federation of Pakistan and 2 others (PLD 
WP No.126184/2017 
3 
2013  SC  406).  Mr.  Muhammad  Asif,  Advocate  argued  that  the 
nomination forms must include information and details of income tax 
paid, citizenship  of  any  other  country, criminal  record  and  the  assets 
and  liabilities  of  all  dependents  of  the  candidate.  He  argued  that 
information  in  the  nomination  forms  should  be  maximized  for  the 
sake  of  transparency  and  democracy  and  to  encourage  informed 
decision making by the voter.  Hence collectively the Petitioners pray 
that  the  Impugned  Forms  be  declared  unconstitutional  for  being  in 
violation  of  Articles  218,  219  and  222  of  the  Constitution  and  for 
being an infringement on the constitutional authority of the ECP.  
3. 
The second challenge to the Impugned Forms is with respect to 
the  lack  of  sufficient  information  and  for  omitting  mandatory 
declarations  required  under  Article  62  and  63  of  the  Constitution  as 
well  as  under  the  law  and  as  per  the  dicta  of  the  superior  courts  of 
Pakistan.  Learned  counsel  argued  that  the  Impugned  Forms  fail  to 
provide  for  mandatory  declarations  as  provided  in  Article  63  of  the 
Constitution with specific reference to Article 63(i)(n) and 63(i)(o) of 
the Constitution wherein the declaration includes the disclosure of the 
liabilities  of  the  candidate,  his  spouse  and  his  dependents.  Mr.  Saad 
Rasool  argued  that  the  Constitution  specifically  states  that  the 
declarations will be made with reference to dependents whereas under 
the  Act,  Sections  60,  110  and  137  and  the  Impugned  Forms 
specifically  uses  the  term  dependent  children.  Consequently  the 
requirement of the Constitution for declaring liabilities with reference 
to dependents has been done away with by reducing the declaration to 
the  extent  of  dependent  children.  Learned  counsel  also  raised  an 
objection  on  the  lack  of  information  with  respect  to  the  educational 
qualification, 
income 
tax  and  agriculture 
tax  payments,  dual 
nationality  and  information  as  to  whether  any  criminal  offences  are 
pending  against  a  candidate  or  were  pending  against  a candidate. He 
argued  that  the  contribution  and  expenditures  undertaken  by  the 
WP No.126184/2017 
4 
candidate  during  the  election  campaign  also  requires  a  declaration 
which is missing in the Impugned Forms. Learned counsel argued that 
these  disclosures  and  information  are  crucial  for  demonstrating  the 
legitimacy and bonafides of a candidate, his credibility, his economic 
resources  and  also  reflects  on  the  honesty  and  truthfulness  of  the 
candidate.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Rai  Hassan  Nawaz  v.  Haji 
Muhammad  Ayub  and  others  (PLD  2017  SC  70).  Learned  counsel 
further  argued  that  family  business  and  resources,  payment  of  taxes, 
educational  qualifications,  dual  nationality  are  all  vital  and  basic 
information which every voter has a right to obtain in order to enable 
him  to  decide  how  to  cast  his  vote.  Furthermore  he  stated  that  the 
declarations  in  the  Impugned  Forms  are  neither  testified  on  oath  nor 
under  solemn  affirmation,  hence  it  will  become  difficult  to  hold  any 
candidate responsible and liable for any mis-declaration. In support of 
his arguments counsel for the Petitioners has provided a comparative 
chart showing the difference between the 2008, 2013 and 2018 forms 
which  as  per  his  contentions  clearly  demonstrates 
that  vital 
information is missing from the Impugned Forms.  
4. 
In  response  to  the  notices  issued  by  this  Court,  report  and 
parawise  comments  have  been  filed  on  behalf  of  Respondent  ECP. 
Chaudhary  Umer  Hayat,  Director  Legal,  Election  Commission  of 
Pakistan  appeared  and  stated  that  historically  the  ECP  has  always 
made the nomination forms and in terms of PLD 2012 SC 681 (supra) 
and PLD 2013 SC 406 (supra), this falls squarely within the mandate 
of the ECP. However, without adhering to the mandate of the law, the 
Parliamentary  Committee  on  Electoral  Reforms  opted  to  draft  the 
Impugned  Forms.  In  this  regard,  the  ECP  voiced  its  opinion  and 
complained through letter dated 18.5.2017 wherein it is requested that 
the ECP, in the very  least, be heard by the Parliamentary Committee 
for  Electoral  Reforms  before  any  draft  is  prepared.  However,  this 
request  was  not  adhered  to.  He  further  argued  that  the  ECP  is  not 
WP No.126184/2017 
5 
satisfied  with  the  disclosure  element  in  the  Impugned  Forms  as 
mandatory  provisions  of  the  law  have  been  ignored  and  information 
which  is  vital  and  fundamental  for  just  and  fair  elections  have  not 
been provided for in the Impugned Forms. In this regard, he supported 
the  arguments  made  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioners  and 
agreed  with  the  contents  of  the  comparative  chart  provided  by  the 
learned  counsel  for  the  Petitioners.  He  further  clarified  that  the  ECP 
can rectify the disclosure requirements within one week, if required.   
5. 
Report and parawise comments have been filed on behalf of the 
Federation of Pakistan. Mr. Muhammad Zikria Sheikh, learned DAG 
argued  that  no  malafide  can  be  attributed  to  the  legislature.  The 
drafting  of  the  Impugned  Forms  was  a  consultative  process,  with  all 
the  political  parties  over  period  of  three  years  and  ultimately  with 
every one‟s consensus, Forms A and B were drafted as the nomination 
forms for the election and statement of assets and liability, as required 
under the provisions of the Act. He argued that the nomination papers 
are an integral part of the election process and the current Form A and 
B  ensures  that  all  necessary  and  relevant information is  available  for 
the  voter  so  as  to  establish  the  credibility  of  the  candidates  in  a 
transparent way. He stated that the same matter was challenged before 
the  Hon‟ble  Islamabad  High  Court  in  WP  Nos.476/2018  and 
696/2018,  of  which  the  learned  counsel  before  this  Court  was  the 
counsel  in  WP  No.476/2018  and  the  Hon‟ble  Islamabad  High  Court 
has  passed  its  order  dated  25.5.2018  which  has  not  been  disclosed 
before this Court.  He argued that due to non-disclosure the malafide 
of  the  Petitioners  is  apparent  and  this  Court  should  dismiss  their 
petitions  with  costs.  He  further  argued  that  the  Petitioners  have  no 
vested right and there is nothing wrong with the nomination forms. He 
stated  that  every  effort  should  be  made  to  save  the  law  and  that  the 
law  should  not  be  struck  down  by  this  Court.  He  placed  reliance  on 
Mehr  Zulfiqar  Ali  Babu  and  others  v.  Government  of  Punjab  and 
WP No.126184/2017 
6 
others  (PLD  1997  SC  11),  Dr.  Tariq  Nawaz  and  another  v. 
Government  of  Pakistan  through  the  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Health, 
Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and another (2000 SCMR 1956), 
Engineer  Iqbal  Zafar  Jhagra  and  another  v.  Federation  of  Pakistan 
and  others  (2013  SCMR  1337)  and  Lahore  Development  Authority 
through  D.G  and  others  v.  Ms.  Imrana  Tiwana  and  others  (2015 
SCMR 1739). 
6. 
There are two questions before the Court; (i) who is competent 
under the Constitution to draft the nomination forms and whether the 
Impugned  Forms  as  drafted  by  the  legislature  are  ultra  vires  to  the 
Constitution;  (ii)  whether  the  Impugned  Forms  fail  to  provide  for 
mandatory information and declarations as required under the law and 
whether there  are substantial  deficiencies  in  the  Impugned  Forms.  In 
this context it is also in issue as to whether there is reduced disclosure 
in  the  Impugned  Forms  such that it violates  Article 62  and  63 of the 
Constitution.  
Constitutional Competence  
 
7. 
To  answer  the  first  question,  the  relevant  constitutional 
provisions  are  Articles  218,  219  and  222  of  the  Constitution  which 
read as follows: 
218.  Election Commission.— (1) For the purpose of election to both Houses 
of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), Provincial Assemblies and for election to such 
other  public  offices  as  may  be  specified  by  law,  a  permanent  Election 
Commission shall be constituted in accordance with this Article. 
    (2)   The Election Commission shall consist of 
the  Chairman  of 
the  Commissioner  who  shall  be 
Commission; and  
four members, one from each Province, each of whom shall be a 
person  who  has  been  a  judge  of  a  High  Court  or  has  been  a 
senior civil servant or is a technocrat and is not more than sixty-
five years of age, to be appointed by the President in the manner 
provided  for  appointment  of  the  Commissioner  in  clauses  (2A) 
and (2B) of Article 213. 
the 
  (a)  
  (b) 
 
     (3)  It shall be the duty of the Election Commission to organize and conduct 
the  election  and  to  make  such  arrangements  as  are  necessary  to  ensure  that  the 
election is conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law, and that 
corrupt practices are guarded against. 
 
WP No.126184/2017 
7 
219.   Duties  of  Commission.---  The  Commission  shall  be  charged  with  the 
duty of--- 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
preparing  electoral  rolls  for  election  to  the  National  Assembly, 
Provincial Assemblies and local governments, and revising such 
rolls periodically to keep them up-to-date;} 
organizing and conducting election to the Senate or to fill casual 
vacancies in a House or a Provincial Assembly; and  
appointing, Election Tribunals; 
the  holding  of  general  elections  to  the  National  Assembly, 
Provincial Assemblies and the local governments; and  
such other functions as may be specified by an Act of Majlis-e-
Shoora (Parliament); 
 
 
 
Provided that till such time as the members of the Commission are first 
appointed  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (b)  of  clause  (2)  of 
Article 218 pursuant to the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, and 
enter  upon  their  office,  the  Commissioner  shall  remain  charged  with  the  duties 
enumerated in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this Article. 
 
to 
222.  Electoral 
(Parliament) may be law provide for ---- 
 
the  Constitution,  Majlis-e-Shoora 
laws.---Subject 
(a)   
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
the  allocation  of  seats  in  the  National  Assembly  as  required  by 
clauses (3) and (4) of Article 51; 
the  delimitation  of  constituencies  by  the  Election  Commission 
[including delimitation of constituencies of local governments]; 
the preparation of electoral rolls, the requirements as to residence 
in  a  constituency,  the  determination  of  objections  pertaining  to 
and the commencement of electoral rolls; 
the  conduct  of  elections  and  election  petitions;  the  decision  of 
doubts and disputes arising in connection with elections; 
matters  relating  to  corrupt  practices  and  other  offences  in 
connection with elections; and  
all  other  matters  necessary  for  the  due  constitution  of  the  two 
Houses, the Provincial Assemblies and local governments;   
 
but no such law shall have the effect of taking away or abridging any of 
the powers of the Commissioner or the Election Commission under this 
Part. 
 
8. 
The  basic  argument  is  that  the  drafting  of  nomination  papers 
falls  within  the  scope  and  competence  of  the  ECP.  In  this  regard 
reliance has been placed on PLD 2012 SC 681 (supra) in which it has 
been held as follows: 
38. 
 
39. 
The  Constitution  provides  a  comprehensive  mechanism  to  ensure 
minimal deviation from these dictates. It identifies and regulates one of 
the  key  aspects  of  democracy,  the  election  process.  In  Article  218,  the 
Constitution  constitutes  the  Election  Commission  and  empowers  it  to 
organize and oversee the election process and to ensure, inter alia, that it 
is conducted “honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law and that 
corrupt practices are guarded against”. 
The  phrase  “the  election  is  conducted  honestly,  justly,  fairly  and  in 
accordance  with  law,  and  that  corrupt  practices  are  guarded  against”  as 
used in Article 218(3) of the Constitution informs the content and scope 
of powers conferred by it on the Election Commission.  
WP No.126184/2017 
8 
 
40. 
A  bare  reading  of  Article  218(3)  makes  it  clear  that  the  Election 
Commission  is  charged  with  the  duty  to  „organize‟  and  „conduct  the 
election‟.  The  language  of  the  Article  implies  that  the  Election 
Commission is responsible not only for conducting the election itself, but 
also for making all necessary arrangements for the said purpose, prior to 
the  Election  Day.  By  conferring  such  responsibility  on  the  Election 
Commission,  the  Constitution  ensures  that  all  activities  both  prior,  on 
and  subsequent  to  Election  Day,  that  are  carried  out  in  anticipation 
thereof,  adhere  to  standards  of  justness  and  fairness,  are  honest,  in 
accordance  with  law  and  free  from  corrupt  practices.  This  Court  in 
Election Commission of Pakistan v. Javid Hashmi and others (PLD 1989 
SC 396), observed that “(generally speaking election is a process which 
starts  with  the  issuance  of  the  election  programme  and  consists  of  the 
various  links  and  stages  in  that  behalf,  as  for  example,  filing  of 
nomination  papers,  their  scrutiny,  the  hearing  of  objections  and  the 
holding  of  actual  polls.  If  any  of  these  links  is  challenged  it  really  (is) 
tantamount to challenge the said process of election”.  It interpreted that 
the phrase „conduct the election‟ as having “wide import” and including 
all stages involved in the election process. These observations subject all 
election related activities that take place between the commencement and 
the  end  of  the  election  process  to  the  jurisdiction  conferred  on  the 
Election  Commission  under  Article  218(3).  The  Election  Commission 
therefore  has  to  test  all  election  related  activities  that  are  carried  out  in 
the  relevant  period,  both  individually  and  collectively,  against  the 
standards enumerated therein. 
 
 
9. 
In terms of the dicta of the  august Supreme Court of Pakistan, 
while  interpreting  Article  218  and  219  of  the  Constitution  in  the 
Workers‟ Party Case, the primary function of the ECP is to organize 
and conduct the election and for the purposes therein, it can make all 
necessary  arrangements  so  as  to  ensure  that  elections  are  conducted 
honestly,  justly  and  fairly,  in  accordance  with  law  and  that  corrupt 
practices are guarded against. The ECP is therefore required to ensure 
that  the  election  process  does  not  suffer  from  any  corrupt  or  illegal 
practices and that it is free and fair. In order to achieve this purpose all 
executive authorities of the Federation and the Provinces are to assist 
the  ECP  in  the  discharge  of  its  function.  Consequently  the  ECP  is 
independent,  having  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  conduct  elections  with 
no  interference  by  any  party,  government  or  law  enforcing  agency. 
The august Supreme Court of Pakistan also held that the ECP can be 
directed  to  fulfill  its  constitutional  and  legislative  mandate  by  inter 
alia  bringing  all  political  practices  into  conformity  with 
the 
WP No.126184/2017 
9 
Constitution  and  the  law.  On  the  strength  of  these  findings,  the 
Petitioners  have  urged  that  the  drafting  of  nomination  papers  falls 
exclusively  within  the  purview  of  the  ECP  and  that  Article  218  and 
219  gives  absolute  power  to  the  ECP  to  organize  and  conduct  the 
elections,  which  by  necessary  implication  includes  drafting  the 
nomination papers. I am of the opinion that the argument raised  with 
respect to interpreting the legislative competence of Parliament on the 
basis  of  necessary  implication  is  misconceived.  The  legislative 
competence  of  Parliament  is  clear  from  reading  Article  222  of  the 
Constitution  which  provides  that  Parliament  can  make  all  laws  with 
respect  to  elections  and  includes  laws  related  to  the  conduct  of 
elections,  but  it  cannot  make  law  which  effectively  takes  away  or 
abridges any power of the Commissioner or the ECP. There is nothing 
in the Constitution or the cases cited which specifically provides that 
the  ECP  shall  make  the  nomination  forms.  This  is  being  constructed 
as  being  part  of  the  function  of  organizing  and  conducting  elections. 
No  doubt  historically  nomination  forms  have  been  drafted  by  the 
ECP, however if Parliament has provided for the nomination forms in 
the  Act,  it  cannot  be  declared  to  be  beyond  their  legislative 
competence. Parliament is the supreme law making authority and the 
only  restriction  the  Constitution  places  on  Parliament,  while  framing 
elections  laws  is  that  it  does  not  curtail  or  abridge  any  power  of  the 
ECP.  When  interpreting  legislative  competence,  the  Court  cannot 
assume that Parliament is not competent to draft the nomination forms 
because presumption lies in favour of the constitutionality of the Act 
unless shown specifically that it violates the constitutional mandate. In 
this  case  there  is  no  specific  power  given  to  the  ECP  for  drafting 
nomination  forms  rather  it  is  a  role  attributed  to  the  ECP  in  the 
function  of  organizing  and  conducting  the  elections.  Nomination 
forms are an integral part of the election process, as it is on the basis 
of  the  information  provided in the  forms  that  a  candidate is declared 
WP No.126184/2017 
10 
qualified to compete in the election. Since Parliament is competent to 
legislate  on  all  electoral  laws  including  the  conduct  of  elections  and 
since  the  Act  was  made  to  amend,  consolidate  and  unify  all  laws 
relating  to  the  elections,  Parliament  is  competent  to  draft  the 
nomination forms. In this regard, it is noted that the pith and substance 
of  the  constitutional  mandate  as  provided  in  Article  222  is  that 
Parliament shall make all electoral laws including laws to provide for 
the  conduct  of  elections  which  will  include  making  the  nomination 
forms. Where the law fulfills its mandate and is within the legislative 
competence  of  the  legislature,  then  such  a  law  cannot  be  declared 
ultra vires on the basis of assumptions and implications. Furthermore 
even  if  in  the  past  Parliament  did  not  draft  the  nomination  forms,  it 
does not suggest that it lacks legislative competence. At the same time 
it is important to note that in order to safeguard the rights of the voters 
and  to  ensure  free  and  fair  elections, the  ECP  is  fully  empowered  to 
make  any  additions  to  the  nomination  forms,  if  in  its  opinion  it  is 
necessary  for  a  candidate  to  disclose  information  to  ensure  that 
elections  are  conducted  honestly,  justly  and  fairly  and  in  accordance 
with  law.  In  the  case  cited  as  PLD  2013  SC  406  (supra),  the  august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  held  that  the  ECP  is  fully  authorized  to 
make additions to the nomination forms and that there is no hard and 
fast  rule  to  make  improvement  in  a  proforma  or  nomination  paper, 
particularly  when  the  objective  is  to  enforce  Article  218(3)  of  the 
Constitution. The Court further held that detailed information about a 
candidate  is  essential  as  the  mandate  of  the  Constitution  is  that  the 
people of Pakistan are governed by chosen representatives. Therefore 
a candidate must provide complete credentials to enable a voter to cast 
a  vote  in  favour  of  such  a  person  who  he  believes  is  free  from 
disqualification under Article 63 and qualified under Article 62 of the 
Constitution. Consequently the ECP can improve upon the nomination 
forms  as  per  its  constitutional  mandate.  In  this  regard  Chaudhary 
WP No.126184/2017 
11 
Umer  Hayat,  categorically  stated  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  ECP  the 
Impugned  Forms  do  not  meet  with  the  disclosure  requirements  such 
that basic information of a candidate is missing, which information is 
the  fundamental  right  of  a  voter.  In  support  of  his  contentions  he 
referred to the  disclosure  requirements  in the  2013  forms, being  of  a 
higher standard. To this effect, he stated that if directed by the Court, 
the  ECP  will  amend  Form  A  and  B  and  include  all  the  required 
information,  disclosures  and  declarations.  Under  the  circumstances 
there is no merit in the challenge to the constitutional competence of 
Parliament.  
10. 
 The  second  ground  of  challenge  is  with  respect  to  the  lack  of 
disclosure in the Impugned Forms which prohibit and prevent a voter 
from ascertaining all necessary information about credible candidates 
who are to participate in the election.  There  are  two  basic  objections 
of the Petitioners. The first is that the Impugned Forms do not contain 
vital  information  and  specific  declarations  which  are  required  under 
the  Constitution  and  the  law.  The  other  objection  is  the  challenge  to 
the phrase „dependent children‟ as given in Sections 60, 110 and 137 
of the Act along with Form A and B.  
Challenge to missing information and insufficient declarations 
 
11.  The  specific  objections  of  the  Petitioners  are  demonstrated 
through  a  comparative  chart  annexed  with  the  petition  which  is 
reproduced below:- 
WP No.126184/2017 
12 
WP No.126184/2017 
13 
WP No.126184/2017 
14 
WP No.126184/2017 
15 
WP No.126184/2017 
16 
WP No.126184/2017 
17 
 
12. 
In order to appreciate the arguments made before the Court it is 
necessary to consider the general scheme of the Act with reference to 
nomination  and  the  prescribed  process.  The  Act  was  passed  by  the 
National Assembly on 2.10.2017 and in terms of its preamble the Act 
aims to amend, consolidate and unify laws relating to the conduct of 
elections  and  matters  connected  therewith  or  ancillary  thereto.    In 
terms of Section 241 of the Act, eight electoral laws were repealed so 
as to achieve the purpose of consolidation and unification of election 
laws.  Section  60  of  the  Act  prescribes  for  the  procedure  for 
nomination of a candidate and requires that every nomination shall be 
made  by  separate  nomination  paper  on  Form  A,  signed  by  the 
proposer  and  the  seconder  and  shall  be  on  solemn  affirmation  made 
and  signed by  the candidate.  Section  231 of the  Act provides  for the 
qualification  and  disqualification  of  a  person  elected  or  chosen  as 
member  of  the  Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament)  to  be  as  provided  in 
Article 62 and 63 of the Constitution. Consequently Form A contains 
a  general  declaration  that  the  candidate  fulfills  the  qualifications 
specified in Article 62 and is not subject to any of the disqualifications 
WP No.126184/2017 
18 
specified  in  Article  63.  Section  110  of  the  Act  provides  for  similar 
requirements for nomination for election to the Senate. Section 137 of 
the Act specifically requires  that every member of the Assembly and 
the  Senate  submit  a  copy  of  his  statement  of  assets  and  liabilities, 
which  includes  the  assets  and  liabilities  of  his  spouse  and  dependent 
children in the manner prescribed in  Form B. Section 230 of the Act 
requires  the  Prime  Minister,  Chief  Minister  or  the  Minister  or  any 
other member of a caretaker Government to also submit to the ECP a 
statement of assets and liabilities including the assets and liabilities of 
his  spouse  and  dependent  children  on  Form  B  and  that  is  to  be 
published  in  the  official  gazette.  Section  232  of  the  Act  provides  for 
the disqualification of a candidate on account of offences, however no 
declaration  to  this  effect  is  required  in  the  Impugned  Forms. 
Consequent to the judgment of the august Supreme Court of Pakistan 
cited  as  Zulfiqar  Ahmed  Bhutta  and  15  others  v.  Federation  of 
Pakistan 
through  Secretary  Ministry  of  Law,  Justice  and 
Parliamentary  Affairs  and  others  (PLD  2018  SC  370),  this  section 
has been made subject to Article 62, 63 and 63(a) of the Constitution. 
Importantly Section 62(7) of the Act provides that a Returning Officer 
while scrutinizing the nomination papers of a candidate shall not ask 
any question which has no nexus with the information supplied in the 
nomination paper or does not arise from the objections raised by any 
person or from information received by him under this Section. It also 
provides  that  the  declaration  submitted  under  Section  60(d)  with 
respect to statement of assets and liabilities can only be questioned if 
there is tangible material to the contrary available on the record.  
13.  The working of the Act is such that the nomination process is a 
two-step process. As a first step the nomination forms are filled by the 
candidate and the second  step is that  the information  provided  in the 
Forms is subject to scrutiny. The Returning Officer shall scrutinize the 
Forms  in  terms  of  the  requirements  of  Section  62(7)  of  the  Act 
WP No.126184/2017 
19 
whereby  based  on  the  information  provided  in  the  Forms  he  will 
question  the  candidate.  Form  A  provides  for  a  generalized  statement 
by  the  candidate  that  the  requirements  of  Article  62  and  63  are  met 
with,  without  any  specific  declarations  or  information  from  the 
candidate  with  reference  to  the  provisions  of  Article  63  of  the 
Constitution.  Consequently  relevant  information  will  not  be  made 
available on the nomination forms and the Returning Officer may be 
constrained  to  fulfill  his  statutory  requirement  of  scrutinizing  the 
nomination  forms  due  to  the  restriction  imposed  in  Section  62(7)  of 
the Act. Hence in terms of Article 63 of the Constitution, a person can 
be  disqualified  for  being  elected  or  chosen  as  Member  Parliament 
amongst  others,  if  he  ceases to be  a citizen of  Pakistan  or  acquires a 
citizenship of foreign state is in the service of a statutory body owned 
or  controlled  by  the  government  has  been  convicted  by  a  court  of 
competent 
jurisdiction 
involving  moral 
turpitude.  These 
disqualifications  require 
information  and  disclosure  from 
the 
candidate in order to state with certainty that the disqualification is not 
attracted. Effectively information pertaining to matters covered under 
Article 63 requires detailed information so as to ascertain whether the 
disqualification  is  attracted  or  not.  Furthermore  there  are  five 
declarations in Form A which are solemnly affirmed by the candidate. 
For the purposes of the election to the National Assembly there is no 
information regarding education, degrees or diplomas or professional 
experience  or  present  occupation.  This  information  is  found  in  the 
additional information for the Senate elections but not in Form A for 
the  National  Assembly.  Consequently  for  the  purposes  of  election  to 
the  National  Assembly  the  voter  will  not  have  the  benefit  of  such 
basic  information so as to be  able to  make  an informed  decision  and 
express  his  or  her  true  choice.  For  ease  of  reference  Forms  A  and  B 
are reproduced hereunder:- 
 
WP No.126184/2017 
20 
WP No.126184/2017 
21 
WP No.126184/2017 
22 
WP No.126184/2017 
23 
WP No.126184/2017 
24 
WP No.126184/2017 
25 
WP No.126184/2017 
26 
WP No.126184/2017 
27 
WP No.126184/2017 
28 
WP No.126184/2017 
29 
 
 
 
 
 
WP No.126184/2017 
30 
14. 
In  this  regard,  the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  over  the 
years  has developed  jurisprudence  with  reference to the  qualification 
and  disqualification  of  members  of  Parliament  and  Provincial 
Assemblies.  Issues  with  reference  to  fake  or  bogus  degrees, 
concealment  of  dual  nationality,  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  the 
candidate,  spouse  and  dependents  as  well  as  submission  of  false 
declarations have resulted in the development of law with reference to 
what  is  considered  necessary  and  mandatory  for  the  purposes  of  the 
nomination  forms.  Consequently  the  august  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  has  declared  certain  information  as  mandatory  for  the 
purposes  of  disclosure  and  declarations  in  the  election  nomination 
forms  and  time  and  again  has  emphasized  on  full  and  credible 
disclosure.  In the  cases  “Dr. Shaukat Ilahi v. Ch. Mubashar Hussain 
and  another”  (2008  CLC  341),  “Muhammad  Nasrullah  v.  Election 
Commission  of  Pakistan  and  9  others”  (2009  CLC  1167),  the  Court 
held that declaration of criminal record is necessary. In PLD 2013 SC 
406  (supra),  the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  requires  a 
candidate  to  provide  his  complete  credentials  for  the  benefit  of  the 
voter. In “Muhammad Ahmad Chattha v. Iftikhar Ahmad Cheema and 
others” (2016 SCMR 763), the august Supreme Court of Pakistan has 
held  that  declaration  of  banks  accounts  of  candidates  and  their 
dependents  are  mandatory.  In  the  case  “Muhammad  Ijaz  Ahmad 
Chaudhry v. Mumtaz Ahmad Tarar and others” (2016 SCMR 1) the 
august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  requires  that  correct  educational 
qualification  be  declared.  In  the  case  Ms.  Shamuna  Badshah 
Qaisarani v. Khawaja Muhammad Dawood and others (2016 SCMR 
1420), the Court held that declaration of property, income and assets 
is  necessary  along  with  information  regarding  travel  abroad  and 
foreign  residency  or  “iqama”  which  is  also  necessary.  In  the  case  
“Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, Prime 
Minister  of  Pakistan/Member  National  Assembly,  Prime  Minister’s 
WP No.126184/2017 
31 
House,  Islamabad  and  9  others  (PLD  2017  SC  265),  the  august 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  declared  that  family  business  and 
resources which include assets of a candidate and his family members 
must  be  disclosed  in  the  nomination  forms.  These  requirements  are 
now  part  of  the  law  and  require  compliance  for  the  purposes  of 
inclusion  in  the  nomination  forms.  I  am  cognizant  of  the  fact  that 
these  cases  pertain  to  different  elections  over  the  time,  however  the 
issue is not election specific, rather it relates to necessary information 
and  declaration  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  voter  is  able  to  take  an 
informed  decision  and  chose  the  candidate  that  he  or  she  thinks  is 
most suited for the position.   
15.  Another  aspect  that  requires  attention  is  with  respect  to  the 
declarations  regarding  election  expenses.  In  terms  of  Section  132  of 
the  Act,  election  expenses  of  a  candidate  shall  include  all  expenses 
incurred by any person or a political party on behalf of the candidate 
or  incurred  by  a  political  party  specifically  for  the  candidate.  The 
election  expenses 
includes  expenses  of 
stationary,  postage, 
advertisement,  transport  or  any  other  item  deemed  to  be  the  election 
expenses incurred by the candidate for the election purposes. Section 
132  of  the  Act  limits  election  expenses  up  to  one  million  rupees  for 
the  National  Assembly  and  requires  a  candidate  to  provide  bills, 
receipts and documents for every payment made in respect of election 
expenses.  If  election  expenses  are  disputed,  the  ECP  can  conduct  an 
inquiry to resolve the dispute. A candidate in terms of Section 133 of 
the  Act  must  open  an  exclusive  account  with  the  scheduled  bank 
before the date fixed for scrutiny of nomination papers and maintain a 
register  of  receipts  and  expenditures.  A  candidate  cannot  make  any 
transaction  towards  the  election  from  any  other  account  and  a 
candidate  must  provide  a  return  of  all  election  expenses  on  Form  C 
within  thirty  days  from  the  date  of  publication  of  his  name  as  a 
returned candidate. The co-relating statement is provided for in Form 
WP No.126184/2017 
32 
A  in  the  form  of  a  declaration  that  the  candidate  has  opened  an 
exclusive account for the purpose of election expenses with the name 
of  a  scheduled  bank.  This  declaration  does  not  fulfill  the  mandatory 
requirements  of  Sections  132  and  133  of  the  Act.  A  candidate  must 
make a declaration that he did not exceed the amount given in Section 
132 of  the  Act  with respect  to  election  expenses  and also  that  this is 
the  only  account  from  which  all  election  expenses  have  been  made. 
Without these declarations the purpose of providing the bank account 
information  is  of  no  use  as  it  does  not  bind  the  candidate  to  the 
declarations  specifically  provided  for  in  Section  132  and  133  of  the 
Act.  
16.  The lack of disclosure and information in the Impugned Forms 
essentially  means  that  a  voter  will  not  have  the  required  information 
on the basis of which an informed decision can be made. To make an 
informed  decision  voters  require basic  information  about  a  candidate 
which 
includes 
information  about  educational  qualifications, 
profession  and/or  business/jobs  held,  travel  abroad.  Voters  also 
require information to establish the credibility of a candidate meaning 
thereby 
information  about  dual  nationality, 
income 
tax  paid, 
agriculture  tax  paid,  loan  default,  government  due  defaults,  criminal 
record and information of assets and liabilities. Finally the third set of 
information  required  is  information  which  enables  a  voter  to  assess 
the  track  record  of  the  candidate,  in  terms  of  what  he  has  done, 
especially  if  he  or  she  has  served  as  Member  Parliament  or  Senate. 
Hence  information  such  as  major  contributions  made,  issues  raised, 
and positions taken by the candidate over the years is relevant for the 
voter. There are two important aspects to this issue.  First that a voter 
must be well informed about all the credentials of a candidate   on the 
basis of which he or she can decide how to cast their vote. Decisions 
should not be based on campaign slogans and posters. Second is that 
when  candidates  present  themselves  for  the  National  Assembly  it  is 
WP No.126184/2017 
33 
incumbent upon them to declare vital and relevant information  which 
establishes their credibility and remains the barometer against which it 
can  be  determined  whether  the  candidate  is  honest  and  fulfills  the 
qualification requirements of Article 62 of the Constitution.  
17.  Furthermore  while  drafting  nomination  forms  the  lack  of 
accessible  and  objective  information  in  the  public  domain  must  be 
considered.  In  this regard  it is  also noted that it  is  not necessary  that 
every  member  of  the  public  or  every  voter  is  aware  of  the 
qualifications and disqualifications specifically  enumerated in Article 
62  and  63 of  the  Constitution.  Hence by  generalizing the  declaration 
for  the  purposes  of  Article  62  and  63  of  the  Constitution  a  voter  is 
deprived of essential information and required disclosure on the basis 
of  which  an  informed  decision  can  be  made.  Additionally  for  the 
purposes of raising objections and scrutinizing the nomination forms, 
the  lack  of  information  and  declaration  essentially  erodes  the 
constitutional  mandate  and  the  whole  purpose  of  scrutiny  is  diluted. 
Parliament consists of political actors who have a keen interest in the 
quantity  and  quality  of  information  available  in  the  public  domain. 
They are also interested in the nature of the disclosure and quantity of 
information that is required to be made in the nomination forms. It is 
for  this  reason  that  the  Constitution  protects  the  rights  of  the  voters 
through  the  ECP,  to  ensure  that  at  the  time  of  election  an  informed 
decision  is  made.  The  requirement  of  Article  218,  casting  a  duty  on 
the ECP to organize and conduct honest, just and fair elections as per 
law,  includes  the  duty  to  ensure  that  all  necessary  and  required 
information,  disclosure  and  declarations  are  made  by  a  candidate. 
While  Parliament  can  make  the  laws  to  regulate  the  conduct  of 
elections, the ultimate  authority  and  responsibility  to  ensure  free  and 
fair elections is of the ECP. Hence ECP is responsible to ensure that a 
voter  is  able  to  make  an  informed  decision  and  that  the  nomination 
forms achieve this objective. 
WP No.126184/2017 
34 
18. 
In  the  book  titled  International  Principles  for  Domestic 
Elections, published  in  June 2008,  Chapter 2 by Patrick  Merlone on 
Human  Rights-The 
basis 
for 
inclusiveness, 
transparency, 
accountability  and  public  confidence  in  elections,  the  author  states 
that for elections to be genuinely democratic, the right to freedom of 
political expression, includes the freedom to seek, receive and impart 
information  and  ideas  in  order  to  develop  informed  choices.  In 
support thereof the author explains that transparency is the byword of 
democratic elections and the basis for the requirement of transparency 
is  the  freedom  to  receive  and  impart  information.  The  right  to  vote 
and  to  be  elected  cannot  be  exercised  without  the  right  to  receive 
information.  In  the  electoral  process  where  those  who  seek  to  be 
elected do not impart necessary information to the electoral or where 
the  voters  go  to  the  polls  without  receiving  necessary  information  it 
cannot be called a democratically held free and fair election. The voter 
has the right to know basic information about the candidate along with 
relevant  information  to  establish  the  credibility  and  honesty  of  a 
candidate.  
19.  Therefore  based  on  the  aforesaid  the  Impugned  Forms  do  not 
provide  for  the  following  mandatory  information  and  declarations 
which should be made on integral part of Form A and Form B. In this 
regard,  it  is  noted  that  the  stated  information  and  declarations  were 
available in the 2013 Forms: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Educational qualifications of the candidate  
Current occupation/job/profession/business of the candidate 
(iii) 
Dual nationality, if any 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
National Tax Number/Income tax returns/ and payment of income tax 
Agriculture tax returns and payment of agriculture tax 
Criminal record, if any 
(vii)  Assets and liabilities of dependents 
(viii)  Declaration pertaining to election expenses 
(ix) 
 
Declaration  pertaining  to  any  default  in  loan  or  government  dues  by 
dependents  
WP No.126184/2017 
35 
(x) 
Declaration  that  the  candidate  will  abide  by  the  code  of  conduct  issued 
by the Election Commission 
 
Challenge to the phrase ‘dependent children’  
20.  The basic challenge is that the Constitutional requirement is for 
information to be provided with respect to assets and liabilities of all 
dependents whereas the Act only calls for declarations with respect to 
the assets  and  liabilities of dependent  children.  For  ease of  reference 
the  relevant  constitutional  provisions  and  provisions  of  the  Act  are 
reproduced hereunder: 
Disqualifications 
Article 63 
for  membership  of  Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament).-    (1)  A  person  shall  be  disqualified  from  Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament), if – 
 
he  has  obtained  a  loan  for  an  amount  of  two  million  rupees  or 
more, from any bank, financial institution, cooperative society or 
cooperative body in his own name or in the name of his spouse 
or  any  of  his  dependents,  which  remains  unpaid  for  more  than 
one year from the due date, or has got such loan written off; or 
he  or  his  spouse  or  any  of  his  dependents  has  defaulted  in 
payment  of  government  dues  and  utility  expenses,  including 
telephone,  electricity,  gas  and  water  charges  in  excess  of  ten 
thousand  rupees,  for  over  six  months,  at  the  time  of  filing  his 
nomination papers;   
(n) 
 
(o) 
 
Sections 60, 110 and 137 of the Act are also reproduced below: 
Provided  that  no  voter  shall  subscribe  to  more  than  one  nomination 
Nomination for election (1)   Any  voter  of  a  constituency,  may 
60 
propose or second the name of any qualified person to be a candidate for Member 
for that constituency; 
 
papers either as proposer or seconder. 
 
Every nomination shall be made by a separate nomination paper 
on  Form  A  signed  both  by  the  proposer  and  the  seconder  and  shall,  on  solemn 
affirmation made and signed by the candidate, be accompanied by 
(2) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
a declaration that he has consented to the nomination and that he 
fulfills  the  qualifications  specified  in  Article  62  and  is  not 
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in Article 63 for 
being elected as a Member; 
a  declaration  that  he  has  opened  an  exclusive  account  with  the 
scheduled bank for the purpose of election expenses; 
an attested copy of his National Identity Card; and  
a  statement  of  his  assets  and  liabilities  and  of  his  spouse  and 
dependent  children  as  on  the  preceding  thirtieth  day  of June  on 
Form B. 
 
 
 
 
Nomination for election.---(1) A voter may propose or second the name 
110 
of  any  person  qualified  for  election  to  the  Senate  from  a  Province,  Islamabad 
Capital Territory or the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, as the case may be. 
 
Every nomination shall be made by a separate nomination paper 
on  Form  A  signed  both  by  the  proposer  and  the  seconder  and  shall,  on  solemn 
affirmation, be made and signed by the candidate and shall be accompanied by--- 
(2) 
WP No.126184/2017 
36 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
a declaration that he has consented to the nomination and that he 
fulfills  the  qualifications  specified  in  Article  62  and  is  not 
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in Article 63 for 
being elected as a Member of the Senate; 
a  declaration  that  he  is  a  technocrat  or  aalim,  if  the nomination 
papers are filed for a seat reserved for technocrat or aalim; 
a  declaration  that  he  has  opened  an  exclusive  account  with  a 
scheduled bank for the purpose of election expenses; 
an attested copy of his National Identity Card; and  
a  statement  of  his  assets  and  liabilities  and  of  his  spouse  and 
dependent  children  as  on  the  preceding  thirtieth  day  of June  on 
Form B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submission of statement of assets and liabilities.__(1) Every Member 
137 
of  an  Assembly  and  Senate  shall  submit  to  the  Commission,  on  or  before  31st 
December  each  year,  a  copy  of  his  statement  of  assets  and  liabilities  including 
assets  and  liabilities  of  his  spouse  and  dependent  children  as  on  the  preceding 
thirtieth day of June on Form B. 
 
21.  As per the constitutional mandate a person shall be disqualified 
from  being  elected  or  chosen  as  a  member  of  Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament) if he, his spouse or dependents are in default of a loan of 
an  amount  of  two  million  or  more  from  any  bank  for  more  than  one 
year  or  if  he  has  gotten  that  loan  written  off.  The  Constitution 
provides  that  the  loan  can  be  in  his  own  name  or  in  the  name  of  his 
spouse or any other of his dependents. In the same way if a person or 
his spouse or any of his dependents are in default of government dues, 
utility  expenses,  telephone,  electricity,  gas  and  water  charges  at  the 
time of filing of the nomination papers, he stands disqualified in terms 
of  Article  63(i)(o)  of  the  Constitution.  However  as  pet  the  Act,  a 
candidate  is  to  make  declaration  with  respect  to  his  dependent 
children.  Affectively  the  phrase  „dependent  children‟  has  diminished 
the  scope  of  the  constitutional  requirement  to  make  declaration  with 
regard  to  „dependents‟  be  they  children  or  any  other  relative  which 
can include parents, siblings or any other dependents. A bare reading 
of  the  Constitution  shows  that  the  requirement  for  declaration  is  of 
spouse or any dependent. There can be no cavil with the legal sanctity 
of  the  constitutional  mandate  and  the  fact  that  all  laws  must  be  in 
consonance with the Constitution. By requiring the statement of assets 
and  liabilities  for  dependent  children,  the  legislature  has  in  fact 
WP No.126184/2017 
37 
ignored  the  constitutional  mandate. The  learned  DAG  with  reference 
to  this  omission  argued  that  no  malafide  can  be  imputed  to  the 
legislature while considering the vires of law. However, in this regard, 
I  am  reminded  of  the  findings  of  the  august  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  in  the  case  cited  at  “Contempt  Proceedings  Against  Chief 
Secretary,  Sindh  and  others:  In  the  matter  of    (2014  PLC  (C.S)  82) 
wherein  it  has  fairly  commented  that  while  it  is  true  that  judicial 
precedent available thus far declares that malafide cannot be attributed 
to  the  legislature  but  if  a  legislature  deliberately  and  repeatedly 
embarks  upon  a  venture  to  nullify  considered  judicial  verdict  in  an 
unlawful  manner,  trample  the  constitutional  mandate  and  violate  the 
law in the manner it was done in the present case then it is difficult to 
attribute bonafide to it either. In a recent judgment cited as Messrs Sui 
Southern Gas Company Ltd. and others v. Federation of Pakistan and 
others (2018 SCMR 802), the august Supreme Court of Pakistan held 
that: 
It  is  well  established  by  this  Court,  while  considering  the  vires  of  a  legislative 
enactment  under  its  powers  of  judicial  review,  can  consider  not  only  the 
substance of the law but also the competence of the legislature. Further, though it 
is  an  accepted  principle  that  no  mala  fide  can  be  attributed  to  the  legislature, 
however,  the  bonafides  of  the  legislature  as  also  the  purpose  and  object  of  a 
statute may also be considered in the determination of the vires of a statute. The 
vires  of  a  statue  can  also  be  determined  on  the  ground  that  the  legislation  is 
colourable.  In  the  instant  case,  the  only  issue  involved  in  the  legislative 
competence of the Parliament vis-à-vis the legislative authority of the provincial 
legislature. In this regard it is to be noted that there is always a presumption in 
favour of the constitutionality of a legislative enactment unless ex facie it appears 
to  be  violative  of  any  of  the  constitutional  provisions  and  in  a  case  where  two 
opinion with regard to the constitutionality of an enactment are possible, the one 
in favour of the validity of the enactment is to be adopted. Meaning thereby that 
when a law is enacted by the Parliament, the presumption lies that Parliament has 
competently  enacted  it  (law),  and  if the  vires  of  the same  (law)  are  challenged, 
the burden always lies upon the person making such challenge to show that the 
same (law) is violative of any of the fundamental rights or the provisions of the 
constitution.  It  is  also  a  cardinal  principle  of  interpretation  that  law  should  be 
interpreted  in  such  a  manner  that  it  should  be  saved  rather  than  destroyed.  The 
Courts  should  learn  in  favour  of  upholding  the  constitutionality  of  a  legislation 
and it is thus incumbent upon the Courts to be extremely reluctant to strike down 
laws  as  unconstitutional.  This  power  should  be  exercised  only  when  absolutely 
necessary  for  injudicious  exercise  of  this  power  might  well  result  in  grave  and 
serious consequences. 
 
WP No.126184/2017 
38 
22.  Therefore with respect to the challenge of the use of the phrase 
„dependent  children‟  instead  of  „dependent‟  in  Sections  60,  110  and 
137  of  the  Act,  there  is  merit  as  the  said  Sections  are  in  clear 
derogation of the constitutional mandate. Under the circumstances the 
words dependent children shall be read down such that it will be read 
to  be  in  conformity  with  the  constitutional  requirement  of  Article 
63(1)(n) and (o) of the Constitution.  
23.  One of the objections raised by the learned DAG is with respect 
to  the  disclosure  of  filing  a  similar  petition  before  the  Hon‟ble 
Islamabad  High  Court  by  the  same  Petitioner,  in  which  his  petition 
along  with  connected  petitions  were  decided  through  a  short  order 
passed on 25.5.2018. There appears to be no merit in this objection as 
the  instant  Petition  has  been  pending  since  2017  and  in  fact,  it  took 
more than six months for the Federation to file its reply. Furthermore 
the  counsel  for  the  Petitioner  did  disclose  the  pendency  of  several 
petitions  before  the  Hon‟ble  Islamabad  High  Court  with  similar 
prayers, however at that time there was no order in the said petitions. 
In  terms  of  the  short  order  of the  Hon‟ble  Islamabad  High  Court the 
vires of Form A and Form B were challenged and the Court through a 
short  order,  while  relying  on  the  Workers‟  Party  Case  held  that  the 
ECP was empowered to add any information or improve Form A and 
Form B.  
24. 
In view of the aforesaid, these petitions are partially allowed in 
the following terms: 
(a)  The challenge to the drafting of the Impugned Forms by 
Parliament so as to become a part of the Act, is dismissed 
having no merit; 
(b)  The 
term  „dependent  children‟  used 
in 
the  Act, 
specifically  in  Sections  60,  110  and  137  and  in  Form  A 
and Form B is held to be read down to be construed and 
interpreted  in  terms  of  the  constitutional  requirement 
WP No.126184/2017 
39 
provided  for 
in  Article  63(1)(n)  and  (o)  of 
the 
Constitution;  
(c)  The  Impugned  Forms  do  not  provide  for  mandatory 
information  and  declarations  as 
required  by 
the 
Constitution  and  the  law  and  the  ECP  is  directed  to 
ensure  that  all  mandatory  information  and  declarations 
are included in the Impugned Forms;  
(d)  The  ECP  is  empowered  to  add  or  improve  Form  A  and 
Form  B  of  the  Act  so  as  to  fulfill  its  constitutional 
mandate of ensuring honest, just and fair elections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Allah Bakhsh* 
(AYESHA A.MALIK) 
             JUDGE 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for Reporting  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE 
