 
 
 
Syed Wajahat Ali 
 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
Federation of Pakistan 
through Higher Education 
Commission, etc. 
18.12.2018  M/s  Saad  Rasool,  Ch.  Qamar  uz  Zaman  Tarar,  Aitzaz 
Aslam  and  Shan  Saeed  Ghumman,  Advocates  for  the 
petitioner. 
Malik Asif Ahmad Nissoana, Deputy Attorney Genl. 
Ch.  Muhammad  Umar,  Advocate  on  behalf  of  PMDC/ 
respondent No.2. 
By means of instant constitutional petition filed in 
terms  of  Article  199  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic 
Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  the  petitioner  has  made 
prayer in the following terms:- 
“In  view  of  the  above  submissions,  it  is  most 
respectfully  prayed  that  the  impugned  PM&DC 
letter  dated  12.03.2018  (Annexure-H)  may  kindly 
be  set  aside  and  declared  as  illegal,  unlawful, 
unwarranted  and  without 
the 
interest of justice and equity. 
jurisdiction 
in 
It is further prayed that respondent No.1/PM&DC 
may  kindly  be  directed  for  migration  of  the 
children  of  the  petitioner  namely  Syed  Ali  Irtaza 
and  Wajiha  Fatima  Syeda  from  Ras-Al-Khaimah 
Medical  and  Health  Sciences  University,  UAE  to 
CMH Medical College, Lahore Cantt. to save their 
future in the interest of justice. 
Any other relief which this Hon’ble Court deems fit 
and appropriate may also be awarded”. 
2. 
Facts of the case, succinctly required for disposal 
of  the  constitutional petition in  hand,  are  that petitioner 
was performing duties in Higher Colleges of Technology-
CERT  (UAE),  but  as  per  certificate  (Annexure-A)  his 
services were terminated on 17th March 2016 and he had 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
2 
 
to  leave  UAE  along  with  his  family  due  to  the 
circumstances  beyond  his  control.  Two  children  of  the 
petitioner  namely  Syed  Ali  Irtaza  and  Wajiha  Fatima 
Syeda  were  studying  at  Ras-Al-Khaimah  Medical  and 
Health Sciences University, UAE, who had passed three 
years in Bachelor of Dental Surgery Program over there.  
The  petitioner  filed  an  application  to  the  President, 
Pakistan Medical & Dental Council seeking migration of 
his  children  from    Ras-Al-Khaimah  Medical  and  Health 
Sciences University, UAE, to a recognized dental college 
in  Pakistan,  which  was  allowed  by  the  PM&DC  vide 
Notification  No.22-FM/Council-2016/  295395  dated  6th 
January  2017.  However  subsequently,  vide  notification 
No.PF.65-F-2018-(Student  Registration)/  305309;  dated 
12th March, 2018, the earlier permission extended by the 
competent authority in this regard was withdrawn. 
3. 
 
While  opening  his  arguments, 
learned 
counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner was 
working in Higher Colleges of Technology-CERT (UAE), 
but his services were terminated on 17th March 2016 and 
he  had  to  leave  UAE  along  with  his  family  due  to  the 
circumstances  beyond  his  control.  It  is  argued  that  the 
children  of  the  petitioner  namely  Syed  Ali  Irtaza  and 
Wajiha  Fatima  Syeda  were  studying  at  Ras-Al-Khaimah 
Medical  and  Health Sciences  University, UAE  and have 
successfully completed three years in Bachelor of Dental 
Surgery  Program.  Adds  that  the  petitioner  filed  an 
application to the President, Pakistan Medical & Dental 
Council  seeking  migration  of  his  children  from  the 
aforesaid  University  of  UAE  to  a  recognized  dental 
college  in  Pakistan, which  was allowed  by  the  PM&DC 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
3 
 
vide  its  notification  dated  6th  January  2017,  subject  to 
furnishing of documentary proof from Embassy/ Ministry 
of  Interior  of  Security  concerns  and  unavoidable 
circumstances  which  led  to  forced  migration  as  well  as 
undertaking on an affidavit that the student shall appear 
in  NEB  Examination  after  acquiring  the  degree  to  be 
registered  as  a  practitioner,  which  were  duly  fulfilled. 
Adds  that  subsequent  to  that  NOC  was  also  issued  in 
favour of both the students by the CMH Medical College, 
Lahore,  on  22nd  December,  2017.    Learned  counsel 
submits  that  vide  letter  dated  12th  September,  2017, 
PM&DC  besides  aforesaid  two  conditions  added  one 
condition with reference to procuring IBCC Equivalence 
Certificates  without  basing  the  same  on  any  decision  of 
the Executive Committee in violation of Section 83 (2) of 
Pakistan  Registration 
of  Medical 
and  Dental 
Practitioners Regulations, 2008. It is submitted that vide 
notification  dated  12th  March,  2018, 
the  earlier 
permission  with  reference  to  migration  from  RAK 
College  of  Dental  Sciences  UAE  to  CMH  Lahore 
Medical College was withdrawn. While referring Section 
24-A  of  the  Genl  Clauses  Acts,  learned  counsel  submits 
that  any  order  passed  by  the  authority  should  be  based 
on  justiciable  reasoning,  but  in  the  instant  matter,  the 
earlier  permission  has  been  withdrawn  by  the  PM&DC 
through  a  non-speaking  order.  Learned  counsel  submits 
that it is settled principle of law that once a benefit/right 
has been accrued by an act of the  government in favour 
of any person, the same cannot be withdrawn afterwards.  
It  is  argued  that  both  the  children/students  have  been 
restrained  from  continuing  their  education  from  Mach 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
4 
 
2016. 
  Learned  counsel 
lastly  submits 
that 
the 
proceedings  carried  out  by  the  PM&DC  with  reference 
to withdrawal of permission qua migration being without 
the decision of the Executive Committee as well as being 
passed without assigning any good reasoning, which too 
is  against  the  basic  norms  of  natural  justice,  hence  are 
liable to be set aside. Learned counsel for the petitioner 
has  placed  his  reliance  upon  the  dictums  of  law  laid 
down in the cases of ‘Messrs M.Y. Electronics Industries 
(Pvt).Ltd. 
through  Manager  and  others  Versus 
Government  of  Pakistan  through  Secretary  Finance, 
Islamabad  and  others’  (1998  SCMR  1404),  “Pakistan 
through  Ministry  of  Finance  Economic  Affairs  and 
another  Versus  Fecto  Belarus  Tractors  Limited”  (PLD 
2002  Supreme  Court  208),  “Bashir  Ahmed  Solangi 
Versus  Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  Sindh,  Karachi 
and 2 others  (2007 PLC (C.S.) 824) and “Mst.Basharat 
Jehan  Versus  Director  Genl,  Fedl  Government 
Education,  FGEI  (C/Q)  Rawalpindi  and  others  (2015 
SCMR 1418).  
4. 
On the other hand, learned Law Officer assisted by 
learned  counsel  representing  PM&DC  has  opposed  this 
petition.    It  is  submitted  that  the  earlier  permission 
granted by the PM&DC was granted on wrong premises, 
therefore,  the  same  was  subsequently  withdrawn  vide 
notification  dated  12th  March,  2018.  Learned  counsel 
submits  that  Section  21  of  the  Genl  Clauses  Acts 
empowers  the  competent  authority  to  withdraw  earlier 
order in case the same is based on wrong assumption.  It 
is  argued  that  in  pursuance  of  the  directions  passed  by 
the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  in  its  salutary 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
5 
 
judgment  rendered  in  the  case  “Pakistan  Medical  and 
Dental  Council  through  President  and  3  others  Versus 
Muhammad  Fahad  Malik  and  10  others”  (2018  SCMR 
1956),  ad-hock  committee  was  constituted  and  the  said 
committee  after  perusing  the  record  has  proceeded  to 
withdraw  the  earlier  permission  granted  in  favour  of 
both the students.  
5. 
Arguments  advanced  pro  and  contra  have  been 
heard and record available on file perused. 
6. 
Prior 
to 
touching  upon 
the  merits  of 
the 
constitutional petition in hand, this Court is overwhelmed 
by  a  query  which  has  struck  in  the  mind  of  the  Court 
what  are  the  basic  functions  of  a  State,  either  it  is  a 
welfare or an Islamic State, in existence. A bird eye view 
of  the  aforementioned  systems  of  the  State  governance 
would lead to the conclusion that ‘Right to Education’ is 
and  ought  to  be  a  ‘sine-qua-non’  for  each  and  every 
system irrespective of the fact whether the same has been 
incorporated or not by the State in its manifesto.  
7. 
Bare perusal of “Preamble” of the Constitution of 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan,  1973,  shows  the  intent  of 
legislation.  The  framer  of  the  said  document  has  raised 
the  superstructure  upon  the  teachings  of  “Holy  Quran 
and Sunnah” as ‘grund-norm’. A passage from Preamble 
is reproduced as under:- 
(i).  Wherein  the  Muslims  shall  be  enabled  to 
order  their  lives  in  the  individual  and 
collective  spheres  in  accordance  with  the 
teachings  and  requirements  of  Islam  as  set 
out in the Holy Quran and Sunnah. 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
6 
 
(ii).  “Wherein  shall  be  guaranteed  fundamental 
including  equality  of  status,  of 
rights, 
social, 
opportunity  and  before 
economic and political justice, and freedom 
of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship 
and  association,  subject  to  law  and  public 
morality”.  
law, 
Article  2-A  of  the  Constitution  though  was  inserted  and 
made part of the Constitution at a belated stage through 
an amendment dated 10th March, 1985 enabling objective 
resolution  to  form  part  of  the  substantive  provisions  of 
the  Constitution  in  the  spirit  of  the  aforesaid  teachings. 
Article  37  of  the  Constitution  of  Islamic  Republic  of 
Pakistan  further  lend  support  to  this  concept  while 
providing  a  cover  to  other  branches  of  education  on  a 
broader  spectrum.  Said  provision  of  the  Constitution 
reads as follows:- 
 
 
(a).--- 
(b).--- 
(c).make  technical  and  professional  education 
generally  available  and  higher  education  equally 
accessible to all on the basis of merit; 
8. 
In  the  instant  case  it  is  most  unfortunate  that  the 
petitioner  along  with  his  family  besides  a  number  of 
other  families  was  compelled  to  leave  United  States  of 
Arab Emirates on sectarian basis only due to one reason 
that  he  was  follower  of  a  particular  Islamic  school  of 
thought.  Perusal  of  the  “prayer  clause”  of  the  instant 
petition  reflects  that  at  said  particular  time  son  and 
daughter  of  the  petitioner  namely  Syed  Ali  Irtaza  and 
Wajiha  Fatima  Syeda  were  studying  in  Bachelor  of 
Dental  Surgery  Program  in  a  very  reputed  university  of 
United  States  of  Arab  Emirates,  but  due  to  said 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
7 
 
unfortunate  aspect  which  has  already  been  pointed  out, 
both  of  them  were  forced  to  leave  their  educational 
institution  on  sectarian  basis.  After  being  deserted  from 
United  States  of  Arab  Emirates,  continuity  in  the 
education was erupted and both children of the petitioner 
had no other alternative except to leave United States of 
Arab  Emirates  to  reach  their  own  soil.    Soon-after 
reaching  their  own  destination,  both  of  them  moved  an 
application  seeking  permission  from  PM&DC  to  get 
admission in any professional institution to continue with 
their  professional  education,  which  they  were  forced  to 
leave on a foreign soil due to unavoidable circumstances. 
The  application  of  both  son  and  daughter  of  the 
petitioner  namely  Syed  Ali  Irtaza  and  Wajiha  Fatima 
Syeda  was  taken  into  consideration  by  the  competent 
authority  and  was  allowed  by 
the  PM&DC  vide 
Notification  No.22-FM/Council-2016/  295395  dated  6th 
January  2017  when  they  were  assured  accommodation 
by 
  CMH  Medical  College,  Lahore,  due  to  their 
meritorious  credentials.  However  subsequently,  vide 
notification  No.PF.65-F-2018-(Student  Registration) 
/305309; dated 12th March, 2018, the earlier permission 
in 
this  regard  was  withdrawn.  Although  earlier 
permission  was  granted  by  the  authority  subject  to 
furnishing of documentary proof from Embassy/ Ministry 
of  Interior  of  Security  concerns  and  unavoidable 
circumstances  which  led  to  forced  migration  as  well  as 
undertaking on an affidavit that the student shall appear 
in  NEB  Examination  after  acquiring  the  degree  to  be 
registered  as  a  practitioner,  which  were  duly  fulfilled. 
Even the requisite NOC was also issued in favour of both 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
8 
 
the  students  by  the  CMH  Medical  College,  Lahore,  on 
22nd  December,  2017  while  allowing  to  continue  their 
studies 
in 
the 
final 
year 
over 
there.  The 
authority/PM&DC  vide  letter  dated  12th  September, 
2017,  besides  aforesaid  two  conditions  added  one 
condition with reference to procuring IBCC Equivalence 
Certificate  without  any  legal  justification  because  it  is 
requirement  of  a  student  while  entering 
into  a 
professional  education.  In  the  instant  case,  both  the 
students had already initiated professional education and 
they were at final leg of completion of their professional 
Degree. So the condition of IBCC was not applicable in 
the given circumstances.  It is worth mentioning here that  
vide  impugned  notification  dated  12th  March,  2018,  the 
earlier permission with reference to migration from RAK 
College  of  Dental  Sciences  UAE  to  CMH  Lahore 
Medical  College  was  withdrawn  in  a  slipshod  manner, 
which is reflective from bare reading of the same, which 
reads as follows:- 
“The  Executive  Committee  considered  the  matter 
regarding  migration  from  RAK  College  of  Dental 
Sciences, UAE to CMH Lahore Medical College & 
Institute of Dentistry, Lahore in 4th year BDS class.  
the  applicants 
Regarding  migration  of 
from 
overseas  it  was  unanimously  decided  that  the 
previous decision  of the Executive Committee and 
Council  shall  stand  null  and  void  as  it  is  against 
the  Regulations  and  earlier  communication 
established will be withdrawn. 
The applicant will be regretted accordingly”. 
9. 
Perusal  of  the  notification,  by  which  earlier 
permission  was  withdrawn  by  the  authority,  shows  it  is 
violative of basic principle of natural justice as no notice 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
9 
 
was  issued  for  withdrawal  and  also  an  opportunity  of 
hearing  was  denied  which  is  part  and  parcel  of  every 
statue  irrespective  of  the  fact  whether  the  same  is 
embodied  therein  or  not.  The  same  is  also  hit  by  the 
principles enunciated by the superior courts from time to 
time.  While  dealing  with  a  similar  situation,  the  august 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case titled “PAKISTAN 
AND  OTHERS  Versus  PUBLIC  AT  LARGE  AND  OTHERS 
(PLD  1987  Supreme  Court  304)    has  observed  as 
follows:- 
“---When a public authority is to be exercised for 
resolving  a  controversy  regarding  rights  and 
liabilities,  the  decision  would  not  be  rendered 
without  proceedings  in  which  the  person  affected 
is also afforded an opportunity of hearing. 
is  common  principle  which  governs 
It 
the 
administration  of  justice  in  Islam  that  in  case  of 
liability  with  penal  or  quasi-penal  consequences 
and/deprivation of basic rights a notice as well as 
an  opportunity  of  hearing,  are  of  absolute 
necessity.  This  by  itself  has  to  be  recognized  as  a 
basic right”. 
It  is  further  in  defiance  of  Section  24-A  of  the  General 
Clauses Act. It would be advantageous to go through the 
same, which reads as under:- 
[24-A. Exercise of power under enactments.—(1) 
Where,  by  or  under  any  enactment,  a  power  to 
make any order or give any direction is conferred 
on any authority, office or person such power shall 
be  exercised  reasonably  fairly,  justly  and  for  the 
advancement of the purposes of the enactment. 
(2).  The  authority,  office  or  person  making  any 
order  or  issuing  any  direction  under  the  powers 
conferred by or under any enactment shall, so far 
as  necessary  or  appropriate,  give  reasons  for 
making  the  order  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  for 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
10 
 
issuing  the  direction  and  shall  provide  a  copy  of 
the  order  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  direction  to 
the person affected prejudicially].  
In  the  instant  case  right  of  education  is  being  denied  to 
both  the  children  of  the  petitioner  only  due  to  act  of  a 
forum which has earlier granted permission to them after 
fulfilling  all  legal  requirements  considering  it  special 
circumstances  beyond  the  control  of  the  petitioner  or 
family.  The  denial  in  this  regard  is  in  conflict  to  the 
fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 4, 9, 14, 18 
and  20  read  with  Article  37  (c)  of  the  Constitution. 
Reliance in this regard is placed upon the dictum of law 
laid  down  in  the  case  of  “Imdad  Hussain  Versus 
Province  of  Sindh  through  Secretary  to  Government  of 
Sindh, Karachi and 3 others” (PLD 2007 Karachi 116), 
wherein  it has been held as under :- 
the  Constitution 
“------Arts. 9, 14, 18, 20, 37(c)  & 199---- Validity  
---Right  to  education  was  a  fundamental  right 
covered by Arts. 9, 14, 18 and 20 read with 37(c) 
of 
any 
unreasonable restraint, hindrance or condition on 
its  exercise  would  be  ultra  vires  the  Constitution, 
irrespective  of  whether  the  same  was  imposed  by 
an  administrative  or  executive  act,  by  some 
statutory rule or even by the statue   itself-----“ 
therefore, 
and, 
In  Article  9  of  the  Constitution,  the  word  life  has  been 
given  prominence.  If  the  word  life  is taken  in a  broader 
sense,  the  same  cannot  be  limited  to  life  without 
knowledge especially when the same is referred to spirit 
of the Constitution which is based upon the teachings of 
“Holy  Quran  and  Sunnah”  where  ‘knowledge’  is  given 
preference  as  a  recognition  of  a  human  being.  The 
thought  of  acquiring  knowledge  not  only  has  been 
sanctioned  in  the  teachings  of  Islam,  rather  same  has 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
11 
 
been  made  obligatory  in  any  case,  that  is  why  the  same 
has  been  made  part  of  Article  20  of  the  Constitution. 
From religious point of view pursuit of education is one 
of  the  religious  obligations  of  a  Muslim.  The  first  five 
verses  revealed  to  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.B.U.H.)  were 
that of Surah Alaq, which relate to acquiring knowledge 
and thus that has been banked upon.  Further during the 
famous war ‘Badar’ in history of Islam, the POWs were 
not punished rather they were given the task of teaching, 
which  certainly  was  not  Islamic  teaching.  This  aspect 
further  reflects  the  importance  of  acquiring  education 
and knowledge. 
 
Prophet Muhammad (P.B.U.H.) has expounded the 
importance  of  seeking  knowledge  in  the  following 
words:- 
“It is obligatory for every Muslim, male or female, 
to acquire knowledge”. 
“Attain knowledge from the cradle to the grave”. 
“Acquire  knowledge  even  if  you  have  to  travel  to 
China”. 
Hazrat  Ali  (A.S.)  has  expounded  the  importance  of 
seeking knowledge in the following words:- 
 
“Educate a woman, educate a nation”. 
“Knowledge  and  wisdom  are  really  the  privilege 
of  a  faithful  Muslim.  If  you  have  lost  them,  get 
them back  even  though  you  may  have  to get them 
from the apostates”. 
In the Divine Holy Book, the Qur’an, Allah almighty has 
declared the superiority of Adam over the angles because 
of knowledge and emphasized as under:- 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
12 
 
“And  He  taught  Adam  the  nature  of  all  things; 
then  He  placed  them  Before  the  angels,  and  said: 
“Tell Me The nature of these if your are right”. 
They said; “Glory to Thee: of knowledge We have 
none, save what Thou Hast taught us: in truth it is 
Thou Who art perfect in knowledge and wisdom”. 
Moreover,  education  plays  an  important  role  in  the 
successful 
life  of  an 
individual  and  education 
is 
considered  to  be  the  foundation  of  society  and  further 
progress  of  society  is  stopped  in  case  of  deficit  of 
educated people. While dealing with a similar matter, the 
august Supreme  Court of Pakistan in the case of “Fiaqat 
Hussain  and  others  Versus  Fedtion  of  Pakistan  through 
Secretary,  Planning  and  Development  Division, 
Islamabad and  others”  (PLD  2012  Supreme  Court 224) 
has observed as under :- 
 
to 
in 
life  of  an 
important  role 
education------
“-----Art.  25-A----Right 
the 
Education  plays  an 
successful 
individual-----Generally, 
education  is    considered  to  be  the  foundation  of 
society  which    brings  economic  wealth,  social 
prosperity,  political  stability  and  maintaining 
healthy  population----Further  progress  of  society 
is stopped in case of deficit of educated people----
Educated  people  enjoy  respect  among 
their 
colleagues  and  can  effectively  contribute  to  the 
development  of  their  country  and  society    by 
inventing new devices and discoveries----Islam is a 
scientific  religion  emphasizing  on  the  need  of 
scientific  inquiry----Need,  purpose  and  kinds  of 
education and as under the mandate of Quran and 
Ahadith, elucidated”. 
Though  this  Article  pertains  to  basic  education,  but 
education as a whole without limitation of age or grade 
has its own importance and sanctity as referred above. In 
the case in hand, both the children of the petitioner have 
W.P. No.222029/2018 
13 
 
already successfully completed three years in Bachelor of 
Dental  Surgery  Program.  They  have  been  blocked  to 
continue  with  their  studies  from  March  2016.  They 
cannot be ordered to be reverted back and waste further 
golden 
time  of 
their  age  on 
the  basis  of 
legal 
niceties/technicalities.  They  have  already  suffered  a  lot, 
hence cannot be compensated for the loss due to an act of 
authority  by  any  stretch  of  imagination  in  the  given 
circumstances. 
10.  For the foregoing reasons, this Court is persuaded 
to accept this petition. The impugned notification bearing 
No.PF.65-F-2018-(Student  Registration)/  305309;  dated 
12th March, 2018  having been passed without any legal 
justification  as  well as  being  against the basic norms of 
the Constitution is hereby set-aside. 
11.  Petition Accepted. 
 
Approved for reporting. 
*Asif* 
(Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi) 
Judge 
