Stereo. HCJDA 38 
 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
MULTAN BENCH MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Criminal Revision No. 706 of 2016 
(Muhammad Ayyaz  Vs. The State etc.) 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
DATE OF 
HEARING 
Petitioner by:  Qazi Saddar-ud-Din Alvi, Advocate. 
18.01.2017 
State by: 
 
Mian  Abdul  Qayyum,  Assistant  Prosecutor 
General. 
 
 
 
Tariq  Saleem  Sheikh,  J:-  This  criminal  revision  is 
directed  against  order  dated  12-11-2016  passed  by  the  learned 
Additional Sessions Judge-I, Jampur, District Rajanpur, whereby he 
dismissed  the  application  of  the  Petitioner  for  constitution  of  a 
medical board for determination of his age.       
2. 
 
The  facts  relevant  for  the  adjudication  of  this  petition 
are  that  the  Petitioner  was  booked  in  case  F.I.R.  No.  282/2015 
dated  24-09-2015  registered  at  Police  Station  Muhammad  Pur, 
District Rajanpur, for offences under Sections 302/34/311/114 PPC 
for  the  murder  of  Mst.  Rafia  Mai.  The  said  case  was  investigated 
and  the  Investigation  Officer  submitted  report  under  Section  173 
Cr.P.C. before the learned trial Court. During the pendency of trial, 
on  15-07-2016,  the  Petitioner  made  an  application  before  the 
Crl. Rev. No.706/2016 
Muhammad Ayyaz Vs. The State etc. 
2 
learned  trial  Court  contending  that  he  was  a  juvenile  at  the  time 
when the offence was committed. As such, he was entitled to trial 
under 
the  Juvenile  Justice  System  Ordinance,  2000 
(the 
“Ordinance”). In the support of his application the Petitioner relied 
on  school  certificate  according  to  which  his  date  of  birth  was  
07-05-1998.  He  prayed  that  a  medical  board  be  constituted  to 
conduct his ossification test for the determination of his age.             
3. 
 
The  prosecution  opposed  the  aforesaid  application  of 
the  Petitioner  arguing  that  the  Petitioner  was  not  a  juvenile  at  the 
time  of  occurrence.  It  contended  that  the  Petitioner  was  registered 
as a voter and according to the Form issued by the District Election 
Officer/Registration  Officer,  Rajanpur,  his  age  was  18  years  on  
01-01-2013. The prosecution  also relied on  National  Identity  Card 
No. 32402-1557090-5 and the electoral rolls of Chak Londa which 
also  showed  that  the  age  of  the  Petitioner  was  18  years  on  
01-01-2013.   
4. 
 
The  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  examined  the 
aforementioned  documents  and  held 
that 
the  CNIC,  which 
according  to  him  was  got  prepared  by  the  Petitioner  himself,  and 
the  electoral  roll  were  sufficient  for  determining  whether  the 
Petitioner  was  a  juvenile  on  the  relevant  date  and  his  ossification 
test  was  not  required.  Therefore,  vide  order  dated  12-11-2016,  he 
dismissed  the  above-mentioned  application  of  the  Petitioner.  It  is 
this order which has been impugned in this revision petition.          
5. 
6. 
 
 
Arguments heard. Record perused.        
The  Criminal  Procedure  Code  does  not  prescribe  any 
procedure for determination of age of an accused person. However, 
the  Ordinance,  which  was  enacted  for  protection  of  the  rights  of 
children  involved  in  criminal  litigation,  provides  a  procedure 
therefor  in  matters  falling  within  its  purview.  Section  7  of  the 
Ordinance stipulates: 
 
Crl. Rev. No.706/2016 
Muhammad Ayyaz Vs. The State etc. 
3 
“7.  Determination of age. 
If a question arises as to 
whether a person before it is a child for the purpose 
of this Ordinance, the Juvenile Court shall record a 
finding  after  such  inquiry  which  shall  include  a 
medical  report  for  determination  of  the  age  of 
child.”  
 
7. 
 
At  the  very  outset,  it  is  observed  that  whenever  a 
question  arises  before  a  Court  as  to  whether  the  accused  is  a 
juvenile  offender  and  is  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  a  Juvenile 
Court,  the  Court  is  required  to  hold  an  inquiry  into  the  matter. 
There  is  no  definition  of  the  word  “inquiry”  in  the  Definition 
Clause  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure.  However,  in  Section 
4(1)(k) the Code explains that it “includes every inquiry other than 
a  trial  conducted  under  the  Code  by  a  Magistrate  or  Court.”  An 
inquiry  is  thus  something  different  from  trial.  The  Major  Law 
Lexicon (4th Edition 2010) states: 
“The  word  ‘inquiry’  has  multiple  meanings.  It  can  mean 
asking  for  information  or  it  can  refer  to  a  hearing.  The 
word  ‘inquiries’  includes  singular  word  ‘inquiry’.  [R.  v. 
Secretary  of  State  for  the  Environment,  Food  and  Rural 
Affairs,  (2004)  EWHC  2387:  (2005)  1  All  ER  166,  QBD 
(Admin): (2005) Current Law Year Book, p.80, para 180]” 
   
The following excerpt from Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary of Words 
and Phrases (Eighth Edition) is more instructive:  
“An “inquiry” in an action was not limited to what a man 
could see with his own eyes; it signified a judicial inquiry 
with  witnesses;  therefore  in  a  reference  “for  inquiry  and 
report” under Judicature Act 1873 (c.66) s. 56, the referee 
might,  and  it  was  the  invariable  practice  to,  hear  counsel 
and witnesses (Wenlock V River Dee Co, 19 Q.B.D. 155).”   
 
“A “due inquiry” (Medical Act 1858 (c.90) s. 29, Medical 
Act  1956  (c.  76)  s.  33)  means  to  give  its  subject-matter  a 
fair  hearing  (Allbutt  v  General  Medical  Council,  23 
Q.B.D.  400,  and  Lesson  v  General  Medical  Council,  43 
Ch. D.  366, cited INFAMOUS  CONDUCT)  and there can 
have  been  no  “due  inquiry”  if  the  rules  of  natural  justice 
have  not  been  observed  (General  Medical  Council  v 
Spackman [1943]  A.C. 627.” 
 
 
Crl. Rev. No.706/2016 
Muhammad Ayyaz Vs. The State etc. 
4 
Judicial  Dictionary  by  K.J.  Aiyar  (13th  Edition)  defines  the  term 
‘inquiry’ as follows: 
“Legal  proceedings  in  which  facts  are  found  on  the  basis 
of  which  liability  or  disability  of  person  is  judged.  It 
connotes an act of seeking truth, information or knowledge 
about  something.  Though  synonymous  with  inquisition, 
investigation,  probe  or 
it  acquires  specific 
meaning  by  the  context  in  which  it  is  used.  Jamunabai 
Motilal  v.  State  of  Maharashtra  1978  LJ  93;  AIR  1978 
Bom. 200.” 
inquest, 
 
In  “Real  Value  Appliances  Ltd.  V.  Canara  Bank”[(1998)  5  SCC 
554; AIR 1998 SC 2064], the Supreme Court of India held that the 
word  “inquiry”  occurring  in  Section  16(1)  of  the  Sick  Industrial 
Companies  (Special  Provisions)  Act,  1985,  means  “search  for 
knowledge”.  
Biswas  Encyclopedic  Law  Dictionary  (Legal  &  Commercial) 
(Third Edition 2008) explains: 
“The  word  ‘inquiry’  does  not  always  mean  judicial 
inquiry, whether it does or does not depend on the context 
in which it is used. Mohammad Umar v. I.G. of Police, AIR 
1957 All 767.” 
       
However, Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary supra cautions that: 
“Words  like  ‘proceedings’  or  ‘inquiry’  used  by  a  given 
statute  are  to  be  understood  in  the  context  of  that  statute 
for  the  term  ‘proceedings’  may  have  a  wide  as  well  as 
narrow  connotation.  It  would  take  the  colour  from  the 
context  which  alone  is  determinative  of  its  true  scope. 
‘Proceedings’ by itself may indicate the whole action or a 
mere  step  in  an  action.  That  term  in  the  context  of  law  is 
generally understood as indicating the form and manner of 
conducting  juridical  business  before  Court  or  judicial 
officer,  regular  and  orderly  progress  in  form  of  law 
including  all  possible  steps 
its 
commencement  to  conclusive  by  judgment.  It  is  not  a 
necessary  rule  that  every  proceeding  must  be  an  inquiry 
and  every  inquiry  must  be  a  proceeding.  The  context  may 
indicate  otherwise  in  that  a  proceeding  may  contain 
several  inquiries  and  an  inquiry  may  contain  different 
proceedings.  [B  A  MASODKAR  and  A  A  GINWALA  JJ] 
Jamunabai  Motilal  v.  State  of  Maharashtra,  MLJ:  YD 
in  an  action 
from 
 
Crl. Rev. No.706/2016 
Muhammad Ayyaz Vs. The State etc. 
5 
(1978)  Suppl  C  1660:  (1978)  Mah  LJ  93:  AIR  1978  Bom 
200. [Interpretation of Statutes].”      
 
From the above-mentioned literature, it may be concluded that the 
purpose  of  an  inquiry  is  to  seek  truth  about  a  fact  or  a  particular 
state of affairs.  
8. 
 
Reverting  to  the  case  in  hand,  there  can  be  no  two 
opinions  that  in  Section  7  of  the  Ordinance  there  is  a  statutory 
command  that  the  Court  should  hold  an  inquiry  when  it  is 
confronted  with  a  question  about  the  age  of  an  accused  person. 
Since the purpose of an inquiry, as we have already seen, is to find 
out the truth, it should be spread over a fairly broad spectrum. The 
Court  should  not  only  take  into  consideration  the  documents 
produced by the parties, but where necessary, it should also record 
statements  of  the  witnesses.  It  should  also  requisition  medical 
report,  which  means  clinical  and  radiological  examination  of  the 
accused  or  what  is  called  his  ossification  test.  In  my  opinion,  a 
plain heading of Section 7 shows that this is mandatory unless there 
are strong reasons to dispense with the same. On the conclusion of 
the inquiry, the Court should give its findings after considering all 
the  evidence  brought  before  it  in  accordance  with  the  established 
principles  of  criminal  jurisprudence.  I  am  fortified in  this  view  by 
the  following  dictum  laid  down  by  the  august  Supreme  Court  of 
Pakistan  in  “Sultan  Ahmed  Vs.  Additional  Sessions  Judge-I, 
Mianwali and 2 others” (PLD 2004 SC 758): 
“24.  The  word  ‘INQUIRY’  is  defined  by  clause  (k)  of 
subsection  (1)  of  section  4  of  the  Cr.P.C.  but  the  said 
definition is not exhaustive. Various kinds of inquiries are 
envisaged by the Code of Criminal Procedure e.g. the one 
ordained  by  section  117  thereof.  We  know it  by  now from 
the  judicial  precedents  that  the  purpose  of  holding  an 
inquiry,  amongst  others,  is  to  determine  the  existence  or 
non-existence of a fact or the falsity or correctness thereof 
and  further  that  an  inquiry  is  a  judicial  proceeding  in 
which  evidence  could  be 
taken.  Therefore, 
whenever  a  Court  is  confronted  with  the  question  of  the 
age  of  an  accused  person,  it  is  incumbent  upon  it  to  hold 
an  inquiry  and  the  learned  Presiding  Officers  should 
legally 
 
Crl. Rev. No.706/2016 
Muhammad Ayyaz Vs. The State etc. 
6 
always  feel  free  to  requisition  the  original  record;  to 
summon  and  examine  the  authors  and  the  custodians  of 
such  record  and  documents  to  determine  the  genuineness 
of  the  same;  to,  summon  persons,  if  need  be,  who  on 
account  of  some  special  knowledge,  could  depose  about 
the age of the concerned accused person and to take such 
other  and  further  steps  which  could  help  the  Court  in 
reaching  a  just  conclusion  about  the  said  matter.  As  has 
been  mentioned  above,  the  issue  about  the  age  of  an 
accused  person  at  a  trial  which  could  result  in  a 
punishment of death, was now of vital significance and the 
learned  Presiding  officers  should  never  hasten  to  decide 
the said issue in a slipshod manner.” 
in 
impression 
issue.  The 
“25.  Medical report about the age of an accused person 
was a further aid placed at the disposal of a Court of law 
for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  age  of  an  accused 
person.  The  opinion  of  medical  experts  could  offer  a 
valuable  guide  to  a  learned  Presiding  officer  in  resolving 
the  controversy 
that  an 
ossification test could be ordered only as a last resort, was 
not correct and thus not legally tenable. The reluctance of 
the  Courts  to  benefit  from  such  a  mandated  material  was 
not understandable. Therefore, a question of the age of an 
accused person is raised or arises, he must be subjected to 
a  medical  test  unless  strong  reasons  existed  or  could  be 
offered for not doing so. Such is the only course which is in 
accord with the provisions of section 7 of Ordinance XXII 
of 2000 which command that “...such inquiry shall include 
a Medical Report for determination of the age…”   
 
9. 
 
For the sake of completeness, it may be added that as 
per  “Muhammad  Raheel  alias  Shafique  vs.  The State”  (PLD  2015 
SC  145),  the  onus  to  prove  juvenility  is  on  the  accused  person. 
Furthermore,  where  such  a  claim  is  raised  belatedly,  an  adverse 
inference  can  be  drawn  against  him.  Reliance  in  this  respect  is 
again placed on the cases of Sultan Ahmed and Muhammad Raheel 
supra.  
10. 
 
In  the  instant  case,  the  Petitioner  had  submitted  a 
photocopy  of  his  School  Leaving  Certificate  to  support  his  claim 
for  minority.  The  learned  trial  Court  discarded  the  said  certificate 
on the ground that the original had not been produced. However, in 
order to hold that the Petitioner was not a child on the relevant date, 
he relied upon his CNIC and the electoral roll which he held were 
 
Crl. Rev. No.706/2016 
Muhammad Ayyaz Vs. The State etc. 
7 
conclusive  evidence  for  determination  of  his  age.  In  “Muhammad 
Anwar vs. Muhammad Suffyian and another” (2009 SCMR 1073), 
the  august  Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  held  that  entry  of  date  of 
birth  in  the  register  “Dakhil  Kharij”  and  in  “Provisional  Result 
Certificate” were not independent sources of information about the 
age  of  the  accused  because  both  the  documents  followed  the 
information  volunteered  by  the  student  himself  or  someone 
connected  with  him.  In  my  opinion,  the  same  observation  also 
holds  good  for  School  Leaving  Certificates.  Situation  may, 
however,  be  different  after  some  years  because  of  social 
development and increasing emphasis on documentation. Be that as 
it may, the learned trial Court erred in law in not requisitioning the 
record  of  the  school  concerned  and  examining  its  custodian  to 
verify the genuineness of the certificate in question. 
11. 
 
So  far  as  the  National  Identity  Card  is  concerned,  it 
has  its  probative  value  because  it  is  prepared  under  the  National 
Database  and  Registration  Authority  Ordinance,  2001.  The 
Supreme  Court  of  Pakistan  also  recognized  it  when  in  “Abdul 
Ghani  and  others  vs.  Mst.  Yasmeen  Khan  and  others”  (2011 
SCMR 837), it ruled: 
“It is worth mentioning that National Identity Card has got 
its  probative  value  which  carries  sufficient  weight  to  be 
considered  for  determining  the  age  which  fact  also  finds 
recognition  by  this  Court. In  this  regard reference  can  be 
made  to  the  case  of  Razia  Khatoon  V.  Roshan  H.  Nanji 
(1991 SCMR 840), relevant portion whereof is reproduced 
hereinbelow for ready reference:- 
‘The  probative  value  of  the  National  Identity  Card  has 
been recognized by this Court. The entries therein were 
made,  no  doubt,  at  the  instance  of  the  landlady  herself 
but  at  a  time  when  the  law  granting  any  such  benefits 
was not in existence, was not in anticipation either, and 
when  there  was  no  such  controversy  which  could  have 
prompted her to give an incorrect age. Besides, she was 
under  a  statutory  duty  under  the  National  Registration 
Act, 1973 (Act LVI of 1973) to declare on affidavits her 
date  of  birth  or  age  and  the  Registrar-General  was 
empowered  to  satisfy  himself  about  the  truth  of  the 
information,  under  section  9  of  the  Act.  The  Act  also 
makes  penal  by  clause  (b)  of  section  11  making  of  any 
 
Crl. Rev. No.706/2016 
Muhammad Ayyaz Vs. The State etc. 
8 
statement  or  furnishing  of  any  information  which  is 
known or is  reasonably  believed to be false in material 
particulars.  In  such  background,  the  entries  of  the 
National  Identity  Card  shall  hold  the  field  unless  they 
are  rebutted  by  an  equally  good  or  better  evidence.  In 
this case such evidence was altogether lacking.”   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Emphasis added] 
12. 
 
From  the  above  dictum  it  follows  that  the  National 
Identity  Card  and  the  entries  in  the  NADRA  Database  do  carry 
weight and hold the field unless they are rebutted. Since the entries 
in  the  electoral  rolls  are  nowadays  made  on  the  basis  of  National 
Identity  Card/NADRA  Database, the  above dictum  of  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme Court would apply to them with equal force. The fact that 
Section 7 of the Ordinance obligates the Court to seek the opinion 
of  the  medical  expert  may  be  because the legislature itself  did not 
consider their data as a conclusive evidence of the age of a person. 
In the instant case, the National Identity Card and the electoral rolls 
are  important  documents  which  must  be  taken  into  consideration 
for reaching a just conclusion in the inquiry under Section 7. Since 
I  am  minded  to  remand  the  matter  to  the  learned  trial  Court,  I 
refrain  from  making  any  comments  in  this  regard  lest  it  may 
prejudice the case of any of the parties.  
13. 
 
The  language  of  Section  7  and  the  dictum  laid  down 
by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  in  Sultan  Ahmed’s  case  leaves  no 
room to doubt that medical test is mandatory under the Ordinance. 
Even  otherwise,  it  may  be  observed  that  in  “Salman  Akram  Raja 
and  another  Vs.  Government  of  Punjab  through  Chief  Secretary 
and  others”  (2013  SCMR  203),  the  august  Supreme  Court 
emphasized  the  need  to  adopt  modern  techniques  to  reach  just 
conclusion. Permitting ossification test would be a step in the right 
direction for safe administration of justice. 
14. 
 
Last but not least, it may be reiterated that right to fair 
trial  is  a  fundamental  right  of  every  person  guaranteed  under 
Article 10-A of the Constitution of Pakistan. The learned trial Court 
 
Crl. Rev. No.706/2016 
Muhammad Ayyaz Vs. The State etc. 
9 
has  denied  this  right  to  the  Petitioner  by  refusing  his  request  for 
ossification test.   
15. 
 
In  view  of the  above  discussion, this  revision  petition 
is accepted and the impugned order dated 12-11-2016 is set aside. 
The  case  is  remanded  to  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-I, 
Jampur,  with  a  direction  to  decide  the  application  filed  by  the 
Petitioner afresh after holding an inquiry as required under the law 
after  getting  ossification  test  done  by  a  duly  constituted  medical 
board and taking into consideration all the documents produced by 
the parties in support of their respective contentions.  
 
(TARIQ SALEEM SHEIKH) 
   JUDGE 
 
 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
 
         JUDGE  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Shafqat/* 
 
